Mage: The Ascension 20" Anniversary Edition 


‘Table 


of Contents 


Prelude: No Fear is There 
for the Wide-Awake 


Introduction: Pride, Power, Paradox 


The Art of Change 
An Intimate Epic 
What is a Mage? 
Horror and Hope in a World of Darkness 


The Various Editions of Mage 
Future Fates 
How to Use This Book 
Lexicons 
Common Terminology 
Tradition Terminology 
Technocratic Terminology 


BOOK Il: AWAKEN 


Chapter One: The Mage’s Path 


Of Gods and Men 
Sleepers, Awake 
The “M” Word with that Funny “K” 
Ascension and its War 
The Avatar 
The Will to Power 
Awareness, Conflict, and Resolution 
Awareness 
Conflict 
Resolution 
The Capital “T” Truth 
Chapter Two: Magick - 
The Art of Reality 
Your Art and Science 


The Basics 
The Paradox Effect 


37 
38 


Pride 
Power 
Who We Are, What We Do 
Skating on Thin Ice 
Consensus and Belief 


Coincidental Magick 
Vulgar Magick 
Nine Spheres and the Language of Reality 
Juggling the Spheres 
A Brief Overview of the Spheres and Their Properties 
Do, or Do Not 
Chapter Three: The Shadow World 


A Stroll in the Park 
A Nightmare World 


Poisonous Utopia 
Power and Sanctuary 


Table of Contents 


21 
22 
22 
23 
23 
28 
30 


67 


3 


= I 


| Sce 
uus 


Life-Blood of Reality 78 Midrealm and The Aelder Bole 102 


Quintessence and Tass 79 The Mirror Zone 102 
The Worlds Beyond 81 Paradox Realms 102 
The Gauntlet 82 The Hollow Earth 103 
To Go Beyond 83 The Digital Web 103 
Chapter Four: The Worlds Beyond 85 Where Did This Come From? 104 
. Internal Access 105 
Beyond the Barriers 86 Virgin, Formatted, and Corrupted Web 107 
The Penumbra: Skin of the Realm 89 Sectors: Haunts, Constraints, and Grids 108 
Infinity Given Form 90 The Horizon 109 
Realm of Shadows: The Three Umbrae 91 Horizon Realms 111 
The Astral Umbra, Realm of Ideas 94 S.R.: The Shade Realms 112 
| The Middle Umbra, Reflection of Life 97 The Second Horizon and Etherspace 113 
| Shard Realms: Fragments of Genesis 113 
|. TheL 1 Id of Death 
| 7 gloss mba, Underworld of Desk e Outer Space: The Deep Universe 114 
| ones 
] Return to the I Experi 11 
| Noe Diem one 101 eturn to the Inner Experience 4 
^ 
à Chapter Five: Ascension Warriors IIO Part III: The Technocratic Union 166 
Familiar Enemies 120 Enlightened Potential 166 
] Goals and Ideals: The Precepts of Damian 168 
Part I: An povanened History 121 Organization dud Rank 173 
The Awakening Era 121 Unconventional Operatives 180 
The Classical Era 121 Mutuality and Unmutuality 181 
The High Mythic Ages 123 en 186 
The Sorcerers Crusade 126 
An Age of Conquest 127 The New World Order (a.k.a. the NWO) 188 
Cannons, Chains, and Churches 128 The Praseuitan 190 
The Triumph of Steam and Steel 131 
To Dream Impossible Things 134 The Syndicate 192 
Part II: The Council of Nine Mystick Traditions 136 The Void Engineers 194 
A Legacy of Challenge 136 . 
A Proud Heritage 136 Part IV: The Disparates 196 
Common Goals and Ideals 137 Practiced Subtleties 197 
Organization and Law 140 A Silent Alliance 197 
Certámen: The Wizards’ Duel 143 Organization 199 
A Vibrant Future? 143 The AhLi-Batin 202 
Tradition Descriptions 147 The Bata’a 204 
The Akashic Brotherhood (the Akashayana) 148 
The Children of Knowledge(a.k.a. the True Solificati) 206 
The Celestial Chorus 150 
The Hollow Ones 208 
The Cult of Ecstasy (a.k.a. the Sahajiya) 152 
The Kopa Loei 210 
The Dreamspeakers (a.k.a. the Kha’vadi) 154 
The Ngoma 212 
The Euthanatos (a.k.a. the Chakravanti) 156 
Orphans 214 
The Order of Hermes 158 
The Sisters of Hippolyta (a.k.a. the Hippolytoi) 216 
The Sons (or Society) of Ether 160 
The Taftani 218 
The Verbena 162 
The Templar Knights 220 
The Virtual Adepts (a.k.a. the Mercurial Elite) 164 
The Wu Lung 222 


Ma$e: The Ascension 20^ Anniversary Edition 


Part V: The Fallen 
Overtures of Plague 
Predatory Shadows 
A Diabolic Trinity 
Fallen Sects 
Nephandic Tactics 
Dark Arts 
Part ?*!: The Mad 
Uncertain Principles 
In the Kingdom of the Mad, All Men are Sane 
Fusions, Cabals, Confluxes, and Solitary Madness 
Mad Tactics 
Magick and the Mad 
The Mad Masque? 
Chapter Six: Creating the Character 


The Human Side of Power 
Before We Begin... 
Traits 
Getting Started 
Character Traits and Terms 
Character Creation Process 
Part I: Creating Your Character 
Step One: Concept and Identity 
Step Two: Attributes 
Step Three: Abilities 
Step Four: Advantages 
Step Five: Finishing Touches 
Spark of Life 
Sample Character Creation 
The Prelude 
Part II: Character Traits 
Avatar Essences 
Personality Archetypes: Nature and Demeanor 
Attributes 
Physical 
Social 
Mental 
Core Abilities 
Talents 
Skills 
Knowledges 
Secondary Abilities 
Secondary Talents 


Secondary Skills 
Secondary Knowledges 


224 
224 
224 
227 
228 
230 
232 
234 
234 
235 
237 
238 
242 
243 
245 


246 
246 
246 
247 
248 
250 
254 
254 
255 
255 
256 
256 
257 
260 
262 
266 
266 
267 
273 
273 
273 
274 
275 
275 
279 
283 
289 
289 
295 
298 


Backgrounds 
Pooling Backgrounds 
Membership Has Its Privileges: Technocratic Backgrounds 
Background Traits 
Arete/ Enlightenment 
Game Effects of Arete 
Willpower 
Game Effects of Willpower 
Quintessence and Paradox 
Game Effects of Quintessence 
Game Effects of Paradox 
Health 
Part III: Character Progress 
Experience Points 
Raising and Learning Traits 
Apprenticeship 
Avatar and Genius 
Changing Focus and Allegiance 
Nature and Demeanor 
Resolution 


Chapter Seven: Telling The Story 


At Play in the Fields of the World 
The Game’s the Thing 
Setting the Space 

Building a Mystery 
Brainstorming Your Concept 
Common Ground 
Bringing the Pieces Together 

Telling Your Story 
Story Structure 
Elements of the Story 
Characters 
Setting 
Conflict 
Resolution 
The Deeper Level 

Elements of Mage 
The Path 
Running With Magick 
Paradox: The Hammer of Reality 

Types of Chronicle 
The Traditions Chronicle 
The Technocratic Chronicle 
The Disparate Chronicle 
The Orphan Chronicle 
The Mixed-Faction Chronicle 


Table of Contents 


—— 


2 
302 
303 
328 
329 


ESA 


^ 


Chapter Eight: The Book of Rules 


The Comfort of Rules 
The Golden Rule 
Turns, Scenes, and Stories 
Rolling Dice 
Dice Pools and. Trait Ratings 
Difficulties 
Actions: The Various Types 
Action Complications 
"Teamwork 
Failure 
Trying It Again 
Botching and the Rule of One 
Success 


Chapter Nine: Dramatic Systems 


Selling the Drama 
Part I: Initiative and Movement 
Action Turns 
Movement 
Part II: Dramatic Feats 
Physical Feats 
Art and Science 
Social Occasions and Intrigue 
Part III: Health and Injury 
"Types of Injury 
Psychic Trauma 
Healing Damage 
Part IV: Combat 
Ready to Rumble 
Initiative 
Phase One: Attack 
Phase Two: Defense 
Phase Three: Damage 
Magick and Violence 
Combat Tactics and Circumstances 
Ranged Attacks 
Close Combat 
Martial Arts 
Do 
Magickal Duels 
Old-Form Certámen 
Environmental Hazards 
Harsh Weather and Environments 
Starvation and Thirst 
Fire 
Explosions 
Electrocution 


Falls and Impact 


Mage: The Ascension 20" Anniversary Edition 


383 


384 
384 
384 
385 
385 
386 


388 
388 
391 
392 
392 
393 
394 
397 


398 
399 
399 
400 
401 
402 
402 
402 
406 
406 
407 
408 
409 
409 
410 
410 
411 

412 

413 

416 

418 
420 
423 
426 
430 
432 
435 
435 
435 
436 
437 
438 
439 


BOOK IIl: ASCEND 


Drugs, Poisons, and Disease 
Part V: The Technological World 
Vehicle Systems 


Inventing, Modifying, and Improving Technology 


Part VI: The Digital Web 
Digital Web Systems 
Magick in the Web 
The Digital Web and the Avatar Storm 
Part VII: The Otherworlds 
Means of Access 
Travel Between Layers 
Finding Your Way 
Magick in the Otherworlds 
Part VIII: Umbrood Spirit Entities 
Spirit Types 
Spirit Traits 
Spirit Feats 
Spirit Charms 
Roleplaying and Storytelling Spirit Entities 
Atmospheric Powers 


Chapter Ten: The Book of Magick 


An Extension of the Self 
Part I: Casting Magick 

Here’s How You Do It 
Magickal Reference Charts 
Part II: The Spheres 

Locking an Effect 

Correspondence 

Entropy 

Forces 

Life 

Matter 

Mind 

Prime 

Spirit 

Time 

Data (Correspondence) 

Dimensional Science (Spirit) 

Primal Utility (Prime) 

Optional Rule: Wild Talent 
Part III: Casting Magick, Step By Step 

Step One: Effect 

Step Two: Ability 

Step Three: Roll 

Step Four: Results 
Part IV: The Paradox Effect 

Sources of Paradox 

The Paradox Backlash 

Backlash Forms 


441 
458 
458 
463 
465 
466 
469 
473 
474 
474 
481 
481 
483 
485 
486 
488 
489 
489 
495 
495 
497 


498 
500 
500 
502 


511 
511 

512 
514 
515 
516 
517 
519 
520 
521 

522 
524 
525 
526 
527 
528 
528 
529 
535 
543 
547 
547 
548 
549 


Sa Apa T s dass 
Part V: Quiet 554 Appendix I: Allies and Antagonists 
Effects of Quiet 22 Supporting Cast 618 
Types of Quiet 557 . 
Quiet Manifestations 559 Bestiary 618 
Wisdom From Insanity 561 Among the MEN 620 
Part VI: Examples in Play 561 Exraoninany Kio bl 
and Technocratic Creations 623 
Part VII: Focus and the Arts 565 HIT Marks 624 
Practice, Instruments, and Growing Beyond Them 565 Our Awakened Brethren 626 
Belief: The Core of Focus 567 Awakened Enemies 628 
Common Mage Paradigms 568 Spirits 631 
Practice: The Shape of Focus 572 Appendix Il: Odd Ends 642 
Instruments: The Tools of Focus 586 
Common Instruments 588 Merits and Flaws 642 
Part VIII: Adjustments, Procedures, and Rotes 601 Merits 642 
Enlightened Adjustments 601 Flaws : 646 
Technocratic Procedures 603 Genetic Flaws 648 
Optional Rule: Social Conditioning The Toybox 651 
and Reprogramming 605 Rules for Wonders 651 
Mystic Spells and Traditional Rotes 607 Sample Wonders 653 
Part IX: Reality Zones 611 Mystic Wonders 653 
Reality Zones Technocratic Hardware 655 
Within the Game 611 Biotech . 657 
Shifting the Zone 615 Weird Science 661 
Change the Game and Change Your World 617 Afferwords 664. 
i 
Table of Contents 7 


ex 


No FEAR 1s 
THERE FOR THE 


W/IDE-ANV ARE 


If, with perceptions polluted, one speaks or acts, 
Thence suffering follows 
As a wheel the draught-ox’s foot. 
— The Dhammapada, Chapter I: The Pairs, Verse 1 


JOHNNY 


There’s a boy on a boat in a purple sky, where the air flashes 
like catastrophic dragons and a patch-eyed man lays a heavy 
hand on that boy’s shoulder and tells him This is where the 
world dies, son. 


...but this isn’t the way it happened at all... 


From the edge of the boat, I gaze into the Abyss. I'd like to 
think it gazes back, but all I feel is vast indifference. This, then, 
is the legacy of truth: Everything I have known, was a lie. 


“Johnny!” cries the Patch-Man, his black boots gleaming with 
the ending of our world. I refuse to answer him. If this is where 
it ends, or starts, I want to be alone when it does. 


But the Patch-Man grabs me by the arm so hard I feel things 
break inside. His familiar face ripples in the purple light, contort- 
ed to a waxy sheen where falling stars reflect their dying selves. 


He shakes me and my left arm stretches in some slow-mo- 
tion taffy-pull, then pops off suddenly, leaving floating globes 
of bright red blood behind. I howl butterflies as my jaws stretch 
out toward the corners of the clouds. The ship veers suddenly at 
an impossible pitch, tossing us into the flashing purple skies. 


“Here,” she says, reaching out her hand - a girl with eyes as 
old as time. 


From horizon to horizon, the sky goes dark, closing like the 
eye of God. 


“You're still mine, Johnny!” yells the Patch-Eyed Man My 
Father as he drifts into the dark and is gone. 


EKSTATIKOS 


Fuck, but my head hurts. 

All of me hurts, actually. Lee Ann dearest, perhaps you're finally get- 
ting too old for this shit. 

That's ridiculous, of course. You're only as old as you think you are, 
the saying goes, and I realized a long time ago that that was true. 


Going by the calendar, I look younger than I am, feel older than I am, 
and stopped aging a long time ago. The play of years on human calendars 
is a trick of the light — one of the first tricks I'd learned to turn on its back. 


Like a stranded turtle, Time kicks its legs but goes nowhere 
unless I choose to pick it up and set it on its expected path 
again. 

Every so often, though, that turtle knocks you down and 
tramples you flat with all four feet. I feel like that this morn- 
ing, and I'm not quite sure why. 


It's not the dancing. I'm used to that. Or the hike — that's 
my favorite thing in the world, except maybe dancing. It's not 
the sex, though gods know it was passionate enough. 


The storm is in my bones. Then, now, and always. 
Well, yeah. That would explain a lot. 


Lightning flickers underneath my skin — needles, tongues, 
fingers, fists, a rush of stars exploding into nova to blot out the 
thrusting of my father's cock — but all those eternal Nows are 
distant to the person in my skin today. We shed our skins like 
serpents, washing through the molecules every seven years 
until only memories hold the energy of what we are together 
in a construct I call Me. I can choose which Now I live in, and 
so as much compassion as I hold for the little Me's that I have 
been, I'm not that person anymore. Right here — this now, this 
Me — is the only one I want to be. 


Although I could do without the headache... 
A mental shrug, and it's gone. 
Still... huh. It was there for a reason, so... 


Time to check things out. 


Shutting my eyes, I let the pain ease back into my skull, 
then expand my senses out beyond that pain, beyond my 
skin, beyond Ryk's sleeping body and our tent, out into the 
dirt and trees and coiled power of the forest and the moun- 
taintop. The essence of the breeze and every dancing drop of 
water in the mist. 

Oh. 

Him. 

What's HE doing here? 

I guess I'll go find out. 

Slipping out from under Ryk, I savor the glide of skin 
over skin, the little hairs across his arms and chest, the puff 
of living chemistry in this stranger's morning-breath. The 
tent still smells like sex, like us, so powerfully that for an 
endless instant I fall back into the scratch and push of last 
night's rituals. It'd be nice to hang forever in those moments, 
but I've apparently got shit to do outside. So leaving a little 
bit of dream inside his head, I push Ryk deeper into Maya's 
domains. He's still asleep, so I'll leave him asleep. If I need 
Ryk later, I can wake him from a distance without making a 
sound. 


Right now, though, I think this visit's just about me. 


COURAGE 


She’s Awake. 


smack-addicted wreckage 
ous. 


teacher attest to the ef 
ficiency of his methods 
and to their results. 
had planned to dispose o 
him myself, but I can' 
say I'm sorry to have bee 
saved the trouble. Th 
paperwork, though, wil 
be a pain. 


Initial VDAS scan 
reveal a latticework o 


ple of it too. Rats, a fe 
alley-cats, no sight o 


usual, 


rate. 


No Fear is There for the Wide-Awake 


A miserable scrap of 


3 


but the signs are obvi- 
The smeared remains 
of what used to be her 


I 
f 
t 
n 
E 
at 


s 
f 


minor spells - blood-work, 
mostly, and a petty exam- 


Ww 
T 


the missing children our 
reports had spoken of. As 
popular hysteria 
exaggerates the facts at 
hand. Still, our sources are 
expected to be more accu- 
I make a mental note 
to emphasize reliable re- 


IX 


porting This 


in our future briefings. 
could easily have turned out worse instead 
of better. 


The girl's trembling. I'm not surprised. 
December in New York is no place for frayed 
cutoffs and & cropped Ramones T-shirt. The 
only hest in this manure pile comes from 
inside bottles and bags. The heroin should 
numb her, but this girl is not numb. Despite 
the crop of needle-marks across both arms 
(peginning an abscess, I note, in the crook 
of her left elbow), her eyes register as lucid 
- not drugged, not even in shock, but bright 
with a clarity that comes from Enlightenment, 
not intoxication. The shivering, then, is 
emotional. And with her former friend pro- 
viding decorations for this graffiti-scarred 
hellhole, I can easily see why. After all, 
She's the one who killed him. 


Ohfuckohfuckohfuckohfuck... Her string of 
syllables becomes a single word, plaintive 
of tone, devoid of substance other than 
fear. Glancing over to Agent Briggs (a 
new-generation example of the Parkinson 


X Ma$e: The Ascension 20^ Anniversary Edition 


Strain, with dark skin, cropped hair, and 
& decidedly feminine build that would have 
been unthinkable in our ranks during my 
initial Processing), I scan the occultist 
trash for signs of children or items of 
authentic paranormal value. 


Nothing. All significant risks of Devi- 
ance died with the organic finger-painting 
on the wall. 


Agent Briggs glances back to me, her 
face betraying nothing that an unskilled 
eye could read. My eyes, of course, are 
not unskilled. What should we do with her? 
Briggs asks without making a sound. The 
"her" in question is obvious. 


Reading our silence, the girl goes quiet too. 


A blink of my eyes activates a tempo- 
ral-probabilities scan. Tiny numbers flash 
near the corner of my left eye. Faint green 
traceries skim across the shivering girl. 
The VDAS datacrawl begins: 


NAME: LAURIE ANN MILLER-CHASE 
DOB: 5/6/1974 CE 
AG: 17.127 
HT: 158.242 
WT: 42.63768278 
MISSING - SUSPECTED RUNAWAY 


The datacrawl moves by: Facts, numbers, 
estimations, probabilities, mechanical prog- 
nostications for one scared mess of a girl. 


Finally, the one I'm looking for: 
RD%: 96.045763946352 


Hmmmm. 


There was a time when I would have shot 
this girl on sight. Under hot lights, I took 
her kind apart, synapse by synapse. I beat 
them bloody with skillful fists, sent hot 
projectiles tearing through their organs and 
skeletal structures until their vital pro- 
cesses ceased. This was not simply my duty 
(although it was) or my privilege (which, 
again, it often was) or my last resort on a 
menu of less-attractive options. I must con- 
fess, if only to my private internal jury, 
that I enjoyed it. 


That has changed. 


One simple motion of my chin signals 
Agent Briggs to my intentions. 


Àn almost imperceptible tilt of her head 
questions my decision. 


The merest tightening of my eyebrows 
reminds her who among us holds seniority. 


Silence in the room, broken only by 
hissing candle wax and the dripping of a 
once-human masterpiece. 


Finally, the girl speaks up, her voice 
just above a whisper: "You're not cops, 
are you?" 


I resist the urge to quote a well-known 
film. Instead, I simply tell her No. 


PRESENCE 


Sliding from the tent's warm shelter feels like an act of 
sacrifice. Throughout the clearing, a cold cloak of early morn- 
ing mist shimmers with the light of a distant sun. Thunder 
burns across the break of dark and dawn, the grumpy roll of 
elements in their beds. Stretching out the morning stiffness, 

I zip up the tent door, plant my feet in the dirt, shut my eyes, 
and reach my arms to the hidden sky. 


Off to the side, hidden by the mist, he’s there. A dense 
presence, more solid than the hills. Without turning to look 
at him, I reach tendrils of perception out across the space 
between us. He's alone, as usual. I smile at the thought of the 
mud on his shoes. My own feet, rich with trail-dirt, pad lightly 
on the rain-thick soil. Through my soles, the earth welcomes 
dawn. I'm in my element here. He's not. Still, it’s never smart 
to turn your back on his kind. 


So, of course, I do. 


When people think of "magic," they envision wands and 
circles and all that ritual stuff. And they're not wrong — not 
all the time. To me, though, magick is the pulse of life. Rain 
on skin, dirt underfoot, Nature speaking in a storm. It's not 
his kind of magic, though. His world doesn't have magic... 
until it does... and then, it needs another name. 


Deviance. 
Well, I've certainly been accused of that before. 


The creak across my muscles as I stretch reminds me I am 
mortal. Still, the play of chilled breeze and dew across my skin, 
the earth-pulse, the wash of possibilities contained in every 
molecule of mist, help me reach beyond my human frame. I am 
soil. I am flies. I am water trickling in a stream nearby. I'm the 
trees. I'm even him. He occupies space like a blank block of 
nothing, but we're still bonded in the unity of AII. 


"You can stop pretending you don't see me," he says in 
that bleak monotone of his. "That's insulting to both of us." 


"You can stop looming, John. It's not polite." 


In the dark behind my eyes, I feel him frown. "I see you 
dressed for the occasion." 

"Isn't it fitting?" I say, opening my eyes at last. "You've 
dressed enough for us both." 

He's not behind me now. He's in front of me without 
having walked across the distance, dew sheened on his trench 
coat, mud caked on his shoes. 

"What are you grinning at, Lee Ann?" 

"Me? Just happy to see an old friend." 


His mirrorshades reflect two Me's back at myself. He's 
not smiling anymore. "Spare me." 

"I knew your shoes would get muddy out here. I find that 
funny." 

"Why?" 

"It doesn't fit your image." 

I can't lie — he still scares me. That black solidity with 
the presence of a mountain and the grace of a greased tiger. 
If John Courage wanted me dead, though, I'd have never left 
that loft over 20 years ago. And since then, we've both had 
reasons to be glad I did. 

"Do I have an 'image,' Ms. Milner?" 

I reach out and press my palm against his chest. It's like 
touching leather-wrapped ice. He doesn't move. I get nothing off 


of him at all. Sigh. Typical. "You're so much image, John," I tell 
him, "that I'm not sure that even you know who's really you." 


No Fear is There for the Wide-Awake XI 


SWALLOW 


“Get up, Johnny!” 


There are no patches on my father's eyes. What- 
ever scars he has, he holds inside. I have to quess 
his moods from tiny cues: The dilation of one eye. 
The clutch of fingertips. The chemical combustion 
of his breath. From them, I learn the importance of 
details and the cost of inattention. 


“Get UP, you little pussy. Get out of that bed.” 


The covers feel warm and heavy and safe. It's 
cold enough to snow outside. I remember watching 
flakes of snow drifting past my window in the night, 
lit up by the porch light and the streetlamps by our 
home. 

“Get out of that bed. Now.” 

I slide from beneath the covers, my feet landing 
hard on the rough green carpet. The hallway light 


behind him turns my father to black stone. My eyes 
close in the bright spill from the hallway. 


“Open your eyes and look at me.” 
I do. 


From where I stand, he seems like an endless 
tower. Glaring down at me, my father's face dark- 
ens to a ruddy thundercloud. 


XII Mage: The Ascension 20^ Anniversary Edition 


^Wipe that smirk off your face, little man." 
...this isn't how it happened, either... 


And then the lightning strikes me, slamming me 
back against the bed. 


Stars and fireflies spin across my sight. My head 
seems to swell, a balloon full of blood. 


“That'll teach you,” he growls, “to sneak off to 
bed when you haven't done your chores.” 


I try to speak, but my mouth won't move right. 
“You talking back to me, little man?” 


He picks me up by the hair and holds me at 
arm's length as I go limp. His fingers dig into my 
scalp. My weight pulls against the short hair in his 
fist. I can feel my skin straining against my tiny skull. 
His hands are big enough to crush my head, I think. 
Big enough to crumple me up like a paper ball. 


As I hang there, trying not to kick or cry or fight, 
his fingers seem to thicken and spread across the 
top of my head and then flow down the sides of 
my skull and into my mouth and ears and nose and 
eyes. I am swallowed by his thick and sweaty and 
calloused hands. Into his voice, I disappear. 


...I don’t think that's how it happened, John... 


Of that, I am certain. But if this didn't, then 
what DID? 


ASSESSMENT 


“I'm sorry," he says, "about 
Charlie." 


"A little late now," I reply, "isn't 
it?" Bitter much, Lee Ann? 


"Very late," John agrees. His 
voice holds a hint of sadness. “And I 
should have said something sooner. I 
did what I could when I knew, but..." 


"Let's not." A sharp twist in my 
chest. | keep my palm in place on his 
own chest. He doesn't move it. He 
could if he wanted to. 


"It's old history," I say eventually. 
"Not why you're here now." 


"No. No, it's not." That sense 
of sadness tightens into something 
else, then abruptly disappears. He's 
shielding against me, big-time. 


"So why are you here, John?" 
His stillness inspires a bit of edge in 
my voice. It's disconcerting, and he 
knows it. That's part of his endless 
bag of tricks. I step back and flex a 
crick out of my hip. 


"We need to talk." 


"Well, obviously. The great outdoors is not your style." 


My right knee pops, the sound loud against the quiet 
dawn. 


From across the clearing, I feel Ryk stir in his sleep. 
"You're not alone here," John says. "Is he...?" 


"One of us? No. Just someone I met on the Trail." I sense 
John's disapproval. "Oh, please," I reply. "You're a Black Suit, 
not a Puritan." 

“I don't trust random elements." 

“Trail magic’ isn't always random." 
“That's exactly what concerns me.” 


Well, I can’t argue with that. Paranoia — especially on 
his end — is just an innate part of the game. Closing my eyes, 
I send a brief touch back into the tent. Ryk's still asleep in 
all meanings of that word. Opening my eyes again, I tell John: 
"He won't be bothering us." 


"That sounds certain." A dry hint of humor there. 
"I am,” I tell him. 

"Good." 

"So... why'd you come to me?” 

"Why do you think?" 


"That's not an answer." 


He doesn't offer one. Behind those glasses, his eyes don't blink. 


The elasses... I reach a little further, past the mirrors... 
I thought so: "You turned off your datacrawl." 
"Perceptive, Ms. Milner." 

"You never turn off the datacrawl." 


His lips tighten into the sort of grim smile an inexperi- 
enced sculptor might chip into a granite face. "Do I never? 
Are you sure?" 

"Fine, then." I half-turn away. "Be elusive. I've got other 
company who's more amenable to conversation." 


"Lee Ann." His voice stops me. 

It's not a command. It's... 

Oh. 

Oh crap. 

Mentally, I shrug a little bit more sleep into Ryk. He 


won't wake up now unless I want him to. Through the bond 
we share, I send him nice dreams to keep him occupied. 


"Okay, John." I turn back toward Agent Courage. He's 


over a head taller than I am, but I face him as an equal. "Stop 
fencing with me. Level with me, or go away." 


BREAK 


There’s a cold chair in a white room. 
There’s a man strapped to that chair. 
There are two other men, and a woman, 
standing near that chair. The lights go 
out. The pain begins. 


Good gods, John. What did 
they DO to you? And how many times? 


.this isn't how it happened... 
Are you sure? 
not entirely, no. 


In that loft in 1991, I assessed prob- 
abilities and came to a decision. That 
shaking scrap of human trash would become 
a Deviant - was already one, by all manners 
of assessment. It was my duty to bring her 
in for Processing. 


And I did not. 


Lee Ann Milner, by any other name, would 
never be one of ours. We could break her 
easily, but never own her. Without inter- 
vention, she would become a hazard. Without 
guidance, she would become an atrocity. But 
our path was not her path. It would break 
her and spill out everything worth saving. 
After we had tried, and failed, to Process 
her, Laurie Anne Miller-Chase would join the 
typing pool - another cog, an empty, bland- 
faced shell of the ruins of the Masses. 


So I broke that destiny instead. 


No Fear is There for the Wide-Awake XIII 


I took her to Charlie. An ally. A De- 
viant. Like her. 


It was not something I did lightly, nor 
without consequences. 


But in the years since then, I have not 
regretted that decision. 


Will I do so now? 

My own assessments are inconclusive. The 
data is corrupt. Too many random factors and 
too much forged information skew the results 
of careful probability. 

The conclusions I do have, however, are... 
unthinkable. 


And unthinkable conclusions 
unthinkable solutions. 


require 


To fight madness, ally with madness. "Go 
over the line," as the saying goes. Find 
the key to probabilities in a nude woman in 
the wilderness. To skirt obstacles, choose a 
different road. Or go off the roads entirely, 
find new data, reconfigure the assessments, 
and then build a different road, ex histanai: 
out of place, beyond boundaries. Deranged. 


Madness as an ally against madness. 


Bosp 


"Level with me, John." Mirror his stance. Stand like he 
stands, breathe like he breathes. Forge invisible bonds between us 
through shared physicality. Use art without using the Arts. "You're 
away from cameras, away from crowds, away from the machines 
and everything you can control." I dig my toes into the mud for 
emphasis. "You didn't get your shoes muddy for a social call." 

"True enough." 

I try to read John Courage, but my senses slide off him 
like rain off that black trench coat. He seems alien to the 
woods, as if someone dropped a four-poster bed on top of 
Everest. He's shielding from me, that's obvious... and yet... 

He's too still. Even by his standards. Rigid. 


I look hard at the double-Me's staring back at me from 
John Courage's mirrorshades. I look past them. I look at the 
granite expression on his face. 


Breathe. 


The mist around us thickens to a pearl-shine shell, wall- 
ing out the world. We slip further than usual from the world 
outside, and as he senses my spell weaving the mist into 
protection, the air goes cold. 


"You're making a wall," he says. 
"We need privacy." 


Without moving a muscle, he stiffens. Then those gran- 
ite features slide toward a frown. His presence hardens to 
black-hole density. 


XIV Mage: The Ascension 20^ Anniversary Edition 


"It's okay," I promise him. "You could have killed me 
years ago. I remember that, John. I trust you." I face him 
dead-on, hands at my sides, no secrets, no sudden moves. 
Keep using his name to reinforce our bond. "You're not like 
the others," I say, "and that's the reason I can trust you." 


The tension drops a fraction of a notch. "A fair assess- 
ment, Laurie Ann. Also mutual." 


I smile. He doesn't. "You trusted Charlie," I remind him. "With 
me. I appreciate that, John, and I swear I won't betray that trust." 


"How strong are those walls of yours?" 
"They're water, John. As strong as they need to be." 
"You can stop using my name, Lee Ann. I know that trick." 


"Then let's both stop using tricks," I tell him. "If you're 
going to trust me, then please fucking trust me." 


He nods. 

Takes off his mirrored glasses. 

Lets down his psychic shields. 
Breathe. 

"How much do you trust me?" 
"More than I should," he says. 
Breathe. 

Breathe. 

Holy shit. He's scared. HE'S scared. 
And that scares me. 


INEXORABLE 


It’s snowing human skin turned to ashes in 
the flames. Flashes in the smoke end in screams 
as blasts of energy connect. Some vast coil lifts 
toward the sky, its source hidden yet horribly 
revealed by the sheer size of that appendage. The 
air thickens like a deep-sea scream, oppressed by 
density and lost in dark. 


Stomping through a scorched-bone maze, four 
warriors of dementia heft their instruments. Spiky 
armor blends into writhing skins. LED readouts glow 
green in the umber fallout light. One fires a blast of 
superheated plasma into a clutch of cowering boys. 
Another opens her mouth in a shout of triumph, 
her voice keening like a baby on a grill. The third 
boils like smoke inside its armor, the lines of that 
bent carapace blurring into haze. The fourth one 
unhooks some black shining orb from a webbing 
belt, and lifts the orb for an overhead throw. 


“No. Fucking. Way.” 


The angry girl with long blonde hair shoves 
herself upright. Blood streams in thick ribbons 
across her face. Running her fingers through the 
blood, she draws fierce designs upon her skin, 
licks the blood from her hands, and begins to 


chant. Her words rising into a shrieking mantra of 
ululating force. 


The girl’s skin darkens as she starts to dance. 
Her bare feet stamp the wreckage, ash and bones. 
Blood-mist surrounds her with crimson constella- 
tions, their orbits slowed to infinitesimal clarity. 
Time grinds its wheels. Slows. Then stops. 


The four warriors freeze in place. The air 
around them pulsates with suspended possibili- 
ties. The fourth warrior, arm locked into a frozen 
instant, stands about a foot away from the air- 
borne orb, its flight arrested by landlocked time. 


One word spoken in a flat male voice: “Now.” 


Showers of fire rush toward the warriors. 
Full-metal raindrops burst from chattering guns. 
The bubble of suspended time catches the bar- 
rage, slows it to near-stillness... 


...and then snaps away with a thunderclap that 
sends the girl flying backwards across the debris. 


The four warriors vanish in a storm of physics 
gone berserk. Far off, a flash of bright light, fol- 
lowed by concussion. The dark coil surrenders to 
gravity, shuddering the earth when it falls. 


Long minutes pass as time returns to its inexo- 
rable flow. 


Instruments get corrected. The injured are com- 
forted and the dead are catalogued. Reports beam 
across virtual horizons. A tall man in a black trench 
coat stands watch over a flickering pale form. 

In time, the flickering eases to an occasional 
stutter. The girl stirs - now looking more her true 
age of over 30 years. “Ow,” she says, squinching 
her face tight. “I hate it when that happens.” 

^| was beginning to wonder,” says the man, 
^when you were going to wake up." 

Lee Ann scowls. "I was beginning to wonder 
where I was going to wake up." 


John Courage doesn't move. 
"Am I under arrest, officer?" she says. 
“Not from me,” he replies. 


The traces of Kali have fled from Lee Ann 
Milner’s face. The blood stops flowing. She opens 
her eyes. Behind the lids, her eyes sparkle, sil- 
ver flecks against a deep blue void. She squints. 
Opens her eyes wide again. Sighs. Silver tears 
begin to film across the blue, then spill out and 
streak across her dirty face. “Damn, that hurts,” 
she says, her humor strained by physical, emotion- 
al, and existential pain. 


“Do you need a doctor?” he asks her, finally. 
She shakes her head. “Not one of yours.” 
“Understood.” 


“How many dead?” 


No Fear is There for the Wide-Awake XV 


“A lot. We're compiling reports.” 


Shaking, she stands. Stretches. He never moves, 
but scans the landscape from behind his mirrorshades. 
Lee Ann feels the crackle of electronic ghosts dance 
around the black-hole density of her periodic ally. 


“You've been protecting me," she says. 


“You are a valuable resource, Ms. Milner. As 
you've just demonstrated." 


She starts to say something. Stops. 

Begins to smile. Stops again. 

Closes her silvered eyes. 

^Resources," she whispers. "Human resources." 
"That's not a term I prefer." 


"That's not what I was referring to," Lee Ann 
says. She juts her chin at the crater where cleanup 
teams scan for remains of the four warriors. "They 
were the resources." 


John Courage says nothing. He doesn't move. A 
stray breeze rustles across his trench coat, rippling 
folds of pristine black. 


Her silver gaze meets his silver glasses. Neither 
one of them blinks. 


“They were yours," she says at least. “They orig- 
inally came from you." 


“No,” he replies. "Not from me. Not from my 
people. Never from us." 


Dawn 


I extend my hand up 
toward him again. Hold 
my left hand lightly on my 
chest. Keep my eyes on his 
eyes. Gaze level. Breathe. 


“How deeply do you 
trust me?” 


“Enough to be here.” 


I nod slowly. That's 
deep enough. 


Breathe. 


t" 


"No fear is there'," he murmurs, looking in my eyes, 
for the wide-awake/ Who has mind undampened/ And 
thought unsmitten/ The wholesome and the detrimental 
left behind." 


I blink. "The Dhammapada? From a Technocrat?" 


w 


“Knowledge is knowledge, Ms. Milner,” he says. “And 
technology is more than just machines.” 


“Good point.” Also a good tactic for building trust. Score 
one for John Courage. "Then you know,” I add, “what I'm 
doing now.” 


John nods again. “You're building bridges.” 
“Exactly.” 


Age doesn't give you wisdom — that's a lie. It gives you 
perspective, though. Like the view across the mountaintops, it 
sets you above the forest and trees, to places where horizons 
jump from end to end across the sky. Above us both, beyond 
my walls of mist, the sky lightens with the promises of dawn. 


I place my right hand in the center of his chest — on 
AnDhata, "the Unstruck," the golden triangle center, lustrous 
as ten million bolts of lightning. From the darkness of him, a 
glow of yellow light — unseen by eyes, perceived by spirit. 


Breathe. 


I reach out with my left hand, placing his own left hand 
across his heart, across my hand. Take his right hand and 


4 


| (WG 


^ 


» 


Step toward him on 
the muddy earth. Again, 
slowly. Close the gap be- 
tween us. 


"May I?" I ask him, 
holding my hand an inch 
above his chest. 

A long pause. 

Almost imperceptibly, 
he nods. 


Ace of Prim 


He's still. I'm shaking. 
He could break me just by 
breathing hard. 


XVI Mage: The Ascension 20" Anniversary Edition 


ordial 


slowly place it on the center of my chest. On AnDhata, the Heart-Chakra. 
Cover his right hand with my left. 


Breathe. 

No fear is there... 
Breathe. 

And open... 


A flood of tortures. A blur of pains. Worlds severed. Worlds 
restored. A boy dragged hungry from a screaming bed. A girl 
pinned weeping to her own. A sky lit stark with white-room 
flare. 


A darkness that engulfs the world. 


Shapes in the sky. Live thunderclouds. A tree made of 
blood in the center of the world. Crowds crushed beneath 
inexorable darkness. Two children playing in the dust with a 
skull, their skins burnt raw by incandescent madness. 


A light of dawn across the mist. Silver eyes with bloody 
tears. A loud cough ripped from the heart of the earth. 


...that thunder’s not a memory, is it, John?... 
... DO... 


...Ryk burning, skin blackened, mouth melted shut too 
close to scream... 


“Fuck!” 
They pull apart — a “girl” who's roughly 40, and a Man in 
Black. Mist walls burn with light brighter than the dawn. 


Flames beyond it. Flames and ashes. 


^Oh shit." Tears burn unshed in Ecstatic eyes. Mirrored 
glass slips up to cloak the man's cold gaze. They both look up 
and around at the flames outside the mist. 

"They found us," he says, "more quickly than I had expect- 
ed." 

Ryk's body burns, wrapped in the melted remains of a tent. 

Lee Ann's mouth hardens with deadly resolve. "Okay, 
John," she says. "So how many weapons will we need?" 

“All of them, Lee Ann,” he says. "We're going to need them 
all." 


introduction: 


Pride, Power, 
Paradox 


Surely a god hath set his lions loose 


And laughs to hear them as they rage afar. 


— Charles Leland, Aradia: Gospel of the Witches 


The Art of Change 


Magick lives. 
The Art of Change never went away. Though the age 


of sorcerers has faded to mythology, magick holds a real and 
vibrant role in the world we know. 


Don’tthink so? Look around you. We fly over oceans and look 
across time. The distance between Dallas and Tokyo can fit in your 
pocket. You could craft whole worlds out of numbers on a screen, or 
visit Africa without leaving your chair. If that’s not magickal, what is? 


Magick isn’t witches on brooms or demons conjured in 
the night. It can be, but it isn’t limited to that. Magick is the 
force of possibility... and now, more than perhaps ever before, 
it seems as though all things are possible. 


And yet we're told that the age of miracles is over. We're 
living in the End Times, a hopeless grind where novelty is just 
another pop-up ad. We've been set against one another in a 
round-robin game of trivial pursuits. The best we can hope 
for, we are told, is a big house and a warm bed and a bunch 
of money in the bank. So sit the fuck down, shut the fuck up, 
have your TV and a Big Mac and think you've got it made. 


Bullshit. 
Wake up. 


Your future's on the table. 


18 Mage: The Ascension 20" Anniversary Edition 


There's a war all around you, with Reality itself at stake. 


In the neon shadows of a tech-besotted world, there are 
agents of change fighting to forge your future. Some look like 
Hogwarts refugees or Terminator clones. Some throw fire or 
call down storms. Most of them look just like you or me, but 
looks can be deceiving. Call them mystics. Call them mages. 
Call chem Technocrats or Mad Ones, but don't presume they 
aren't there. 


Because there's a war on. And now you're part of it. 
Welcome to the world of Mage. 


Where Past and Future become Now. 


An Intimate Epic 


Twenty years ago, a game came along that changed gaming. 
It was big and epic and confusing as hell. It dared folks to think 
outside the box - to not simply throw fireballs but to really think 
about how and why we do the things we do. Often considered "the 
thinkinggamer'sgame," Mage: The Ascension subverted everything 
(including itself) while challenging people to make a difference in 
their world. 


And now, more than ever, that challenge stands. 


Against the epic tapestry of an Ascension War, Mage 
features architects of reality locked in a battle to see whose 
future will prevail. But within that sometimes cosmic scope, 


Mage asks an intimate question: If you had the power of a god, 
what would you do with it... and what would IT do with YOU? 


Regardless of whether you're an old Mage fan or a new 
convert, that question is the heart of the game. Every mage - 
from a Verbena witch to a Man in Black - is an agent of change, 
a dynamic hero in a world gone mad. And though that world 
overflows with cosmic horrors and gunfights in the streets, the 
biggest enemy you face is despair. 


Being a mage means you have options. Hope is never truly 
gone. If you're clever enough, brave enough, and imaginative 
enough to change your circumstances, you can. That power 
holds a high price, but it's worth it in the end. 


Mage invites you to play dice with the cosmos. To shape 
Forcesand Lifeand Time. And now, in this Anniversary Edition, 
you've got more options than ever before. 


Thenand now, in Mage, the magick matters... and so do you. 


What is a Mage? 


Put simply, a mage is a person with the 
power to reshape reality through force of will. 
Awakened to their potential, such people 
believe so strongly in what they do that they 
literally change their world. With that power, 
though, comes overwhelming pride, fanaticism, 
and corruption. That same power of belief 
often pits mages against one another, against 
their surroundings, and against themselves as 


well. Their will to power becomes the power 
to destroy. 


Ideally, mages strive toward a lofty goal: Ascension. Problem 
is, they disagree about what Ascension means. Should it be 
personal transcendence or universal peace? Does it look like 
heaven or does it strive against hell? Is magick given by some 
god, or does it come from deep inside? Will it be magic, faith, 
or science that makes the world a better place? Everyone's got 
answers, but no one knows the truth. And so, like religious 
creeds or political factions, mages fight about their ideals. Out 
of good intentions, they drag their world toward an abyss. 


Whoare the bad guys? Whoare the good guys? Although the 
Technocracy - a monumental faction of ruthless technomancers 
- gets stuck with the nickname "black hats and mirrorshades,” 
all mages are heroic monsters. Some have more blood on their 
hands than others, but every one of them holds the seeds of 
corruption. Through their Ascension War, they've forced their 
wills upon one another for roughly a thousand years... and asa 
result, the world has suffered. This paradox - terrible actions 
for lofty goals - is the price of pride and power. 


An Ascension War? 

At the center of Mage, there's a bitter conflict. That 
Ascension War provided the framework for previous editions 
of the game. Four factions - the Traditions, Technocracy, 
Marauders, and Nephandi - tore their world apart in the name 
of their ideals. Though the Technocracy appeared to have the 
upper hand in that struggle... even, in Mage's Revised Edition, 
seemed to win it - this War is far from over. The Ascension War, 
at its heart, is not about whether magick looks like wizards or 
TV sets; it’s about groups of visionaries so dedicated to their 


Truth that they'll risk everything to bring it about... and who 
have, in the process, made a catastrophic mess. 


Who are these factions, anyway? 


* The Traditions, whose devotion to mystic wonder ranges 
from weird science to bloody rituals. 


* The Technocracy, dedicated to an orderly world under 
their command. 


* The Nephandi, to whom light and hopeare the ultimate 
hypocrisy. 


* And the Marauders, who see chaos as the ultimate 
Truth. 


Outside these factions, other mages shape their own paths. 
These Disparates refuse to join a side and work instead toward 
personal power or the welfare of their chosen people. 


Do all mages fight this Ascension War? No... but many 
do, and even those who avoid the War itself feel its effects. 
That conflict shapes the world as mages know it. Reality itself 
is both prize and battlefield. 


Asa mage, then, your challenge is to claim a destiny in this 
world. You might be a cyborg, a wizard, a street shaman, or a 
steampunk scientist - the role is up to you. What's important 
is what you do with it... and again, what it does to you. Even 
though big factions fight a battle for reality, a mage is, by her 
very nature, a force of change. 


The ultimate battlefield is within. 


Your World, Your Choice 


Mage: The Ascension has an epic metaplot, with dramatic 
changes between its previous editions. This 20^ Anniversary 
Edition features elements of all of them, plus more besides. 


Are you stuck with this metaplot? No. 


A mage never has to fight in the Ascension War. She never 
has to visit otherworldly realms. She may never even hear the 
word “Technocracy.” Despite its sweeping mythos, Mage isn't 
about fighting Iteration X in the ruins of Doissetep. It's about 
saving your world, whatever your world looks like to you. 


Introduction: Pride, Power, Paradox 19 


| 
l 
d 


N 


s 


ny P 


vot 


a lx 


Horror and Hope 
in a World of Darkness 


A Mage: The Ascension chronicle features tales of 
heroism and atrocity. In this World of Darkness, hope is in 
short supply. Nights seem darker and more sinister than our 
own. Screams and gunshots echo through the streets. Gothic 
cathedrals tower alongside neon Babylons of glass and steel. 
Nightclubs shake to techno thunder while desperate souls seek 
solace or oblivion. Drug wars and religious violence spill blood 
with awful frequency. Legendary monsters hunt their prey, 
even when such things are supposedly “impossible.” People 
cower in front of TVs and computers, watching events from 
an anesthetized distance. Churches host fanatic congregations 
who pray for celestial deliverance, but such deliverance feels 
very far away. Everything seems possible in this world, but the 
strongest possibility is that everything is shit. 

This setting hovers somewhere in between the end-of-an- 
age decadence of the 1990s and the desperate fury of our new 
millennium; it can be as modern or archaic as you want it to be. 
Its denizens might own iPhones or scrounge crack in burntout 
neighborhoods. They probably do both. This World of Darkness 
is both immediate and timeless - a dark satire of our own times. 

Like other World of Darkness games, Mage has dominant 
themes and moods: 


20 Mage: The Ascension 20" Anniversary Edition 


f 
o 


Theme: Hope and Transformation 

Above all other things, Mage is about giving a damn. While 
other folks are hopeless or content enough to accept what 
they've been given, mages change the picture. They disagree, 
often violently, about what that picture should look like, but 
apathy's not in their nature. The Awakening won't let them sit 
still and accept the world as it is. 


Mages are power incarnate. What they will, will be. That 
power can go to their heads, corruptthem, demolish everything 
they hold dear... but it's there. Mage's dominant theme, then, 
is hope. Things might get bad, even tragic, but the possibility 
of change never goes away. 


That element of transformation becomes a second theme 
in Mage. Nothing is set in stone. Everything changes. So-called 
traditions of mystic art transform, under pressure, into new 
incarnations of themselves. Stasis, in Mage, is an enemy; even 
the ostensibly static Technocracy is far more dynamic than 
anyone outside that group might believe. Especially in the 21* 
century, Mage is all about change. Those folks who can't face 
the future, after all, are bound to disappear. 


Mood: Defiance and Reflection 

Life sucks... so FIX it! That defiance forms another dominant 
mood in Mage. Whether you're playing a desperate street kid, 
an Enlightened CEO, a kung-fu hero, or a classy sorcerer, your 


Reality Zones 


In our world of fast food and television sets, it’s easy to believe that everyone believes a given thing. Fact is, though, 
that's not frue. The world's a big place, and anyone who wants to control a global belief system needs to take all of it 
into account. 


In Mage's original and Revised editions, many things were said about the Technocracy controlling global Reality 
because no one believes in magic and everyone believes in science. That very cosmopolitan idea, however, has little 
connection to the actual world. 


Beyond the vast numbers of people who live in areas without reliable electricity, phone service, or running water (much less 
TV or the Internet), there's also the matter of religious belief. The Middle East, for example, continues to be a flashpoint for 
humanity because large numbers of people from three different religions believe their God gave it to them... and they're 
willing to end life on Earth to prove that point. Whole regions exist in what could be called magical cultures, where mysticism 
is a fundamental part of everyday life. And even throughout the so-called industrialized world, religious fundamentalists 
slash science funding and education while New Age metaphysicians, conspiracy theorists, and followers of Earth-based 


spiritualities (who often belong to those other groups as well) regard science and technology as enemies, not truth. 
Is this a Technocratic victory? Not even close. 


The idea of a single global paradigm, or belief system, is very far from reality as we know it. In the World of Darkness, 
where the forces of faith and the supernatural world are strong, it's even further from reality than in our own. The 
Technocracy may have declared victory, and industrial-world mystics may even believe them. In truth, though, capital-R 
Reality is still very much up for grabs. 


And so, Mage 20 continues the idea of magickal geography and influence given in Mage 2"! Edition and Sorcerers 
Crusade. In certain zones, technology is the dominant force; in others, religion and tradition hold the upper hand. This 
way, Mage remains a world in flux — and in that regard as well, it’s very much like our own. 


Storytellers who prefer the Technocratic victory metaplot, however, can completely disregard these zones and run the 


entire Earth by a single Consensus. 


For details about reality zones, see Chapter Ten. 


world seems intent on fucking you over. Rival cults, hungry 
spirits, street gangs, and global climate change all threaten your 
ideals. In Mage, you have the power to fight back. 


That said, be careful. In fighting back, you could become 
part of the problem you fight to solve. Power is a tricky thing: 
the more you have, the more likely you are to be corrupted by 
it. As a result, Mage often becomes a symbolic hall of mirrors, 
reflecting people and things back upon themselves, often in 
distorted and exaggerated forms. Such reflection permeates the 
mood of Mage: Technocrats reflect Traditions, Nephandi reflect 
their rivals, madness mirrors wisdom back into its own face, 


The Various Editions of Mage \ 


Since its appearance in 1993, Mage: 
The Ascension has undergone many 
transformations of its own: 


e Mage 1* Edition (the 1993 softcover 
book) is a fourcolor reality club sandwich. 
Cosmic factions duke it out in a realm 
of metaphysical weirdness. Eventually 
developing a sense of history and personal 


scope, the early days of Mage concentrate 


and mages mirror the world around them - and that world, 
in turn, mirrors their own deeds. Mages, though human, are 
monsters too... and the Latin roots of “monster” mean warning, 
teach, and omen. 


Beyond the obvious defiance of external enemies, Mage 
also features the internal struggle between power and its abuse. 
There’s a line, after all, between raging against the machine 
and becoming part of that machine. So are you doomed to be 
the new boss, same as the old boss, or can you shape a better 
tomorrow from the ruins of today? 


on arcane superpowers. The Technocracy is an evil, 
soulless entity bent on breaking all Creation to its will, 
with plucky but disorganized Traditions caught between 
Dynamism, Stasis, and Entropy. 


* Mage 2*4 Edition (the 1995 hardcover book) invites 
players to "join the battle for reality!" Narrowing the 
game's epicscope in favor of more intimate perspectives, 
this edition alternates between street-level survival tales 
and otherworldly metaplots. Every faction has a valid 


Introduction: Pride, Power, Paradox 2l 


ü 
/ 


AE ai 


viewpoint, with the Technocracy becoming a ruthless 
but sincere opposition to the mystic point of view. 


Mage: The Sorcerers Crusade (1998) jumpstarts the 
Ascension War in the 15? century. Presenting the 
Traditions and the proto-Technocratic Order of Reason 
as equal options, Sorcerers Crusade favors high fantasy 
and courtly intrigue. 


Mage Revised Edition (1999) presents a melancholy 
survival feel. The Technocracy has triumphed, mystics 
have been slaughtered, and the surviving Tradition 
mages move through an implacable world that prefers 
apathy over imagination. 


Dark Ages Mage (2002) centers on the European 
| medieval era, long before the Ascension War begins. 
Although the improvisational element remains present in 
magic, the setting’s reality is rooted firmly in European 
beliefs of that era. 


Both Ars Magica (1989) and Mage: The Awakening 
(2004) are distant cousins of Mage: The Ascension 
but remain separate games in their own right. Certain 
Ars Magica setting elements were incorporated into 
Ascension, but those ties were severed very early on. 


Mage 20° Anniversary Edition spans all five of the 
Classic Ascension lines, favoring an inclusive flavor 
over edition preference. Individual troupes can employ 
their favorite elements and discard the ones they don’t 
like - a sandbox design concept that remains faithful 
to Mage’s core ideal: Reality is what you make of it. 


Future Fates 


Throughout this book, you'll find references to places, 
characters, and events that impacted Mage’s background history, 
especially through the 1990s and into the new millennium. Many 
of these elements have been grouped into Future Fate sidebars. 


So what does Future Fate mean? It means you have three 
options with regards to your chronicle: 


* These things willhappen: The gods have spoken. History 
is set. In the realm of official history, what’s described 
in these sidebars either has occurred, or will come to 
pass, as described. 


* These things might happen: You can pick and choose 
and perhaps change history. The Storyteller decides what 
has, has not yet, or may not ever occur. The elements 
described have an impact on the world, but you decide 
when and how much impact they have. 


* These things may never happen: Nothing is set. It’s all 
up to you. The people or events in those sidebars could 
be significant, they might happen very differently, or 


Mage: The Ascension 20" Anniversary Edition 


they might never occur at all. Use, change, or ignore 
such things as you see fit. 


Future Fates leave events like the Avatar Storm or the Horizon 
War up to individual Storytellers. This way, your group isn’tshackled 
to an official chronology. You might use Time magick to sense 
impending Future Fates and then change the course of history; 
meet important figures and guide events in different directions; or 
simply ignore the whole metaplot and run your tale on your terms. 
Players may not know which course their Storyteller has chosen, 
but that Storyteller has that choice. Ultimately, the truth is up for 
grabs... which, for Mage, is how things should be. 


How to Use This Book 


For ease and clarity, this monumental tome has been 
divided into three sections: 


Book I: Awaken 
An overview of the mage's world, the opening section 


contains... 


* Chapter One: The Mage's Path, in which the Greater 
Arcana map a mage's journey from Awakening to 
resolution. 


* Chapter Two: Magick: The Art of Reality, which 
explores the shapes, forms, and tools of magick. 


* Chapter Three: The Shadow World, which reveals the 


world of an average mage. 


* Chapter Four: The Worlds Beyond, which offers a 
guided tour through metaphysical Otherworlds. 


Book Il: Believe 
Moving into the meat of the game, the second section 


features... 


¢ Chapter Five: Ascension Warriors, which addresses the 
many factions and metaplots of the Ascension War. 


* Chapter Six: Creating the Character, which reveals the 
stages and Traits involved with character creation. 


¢ Chapter Seven: Telling the Story, in which Mage 
Storytellers get practical advice for staging their intimate 
epics. 


Book Ill: Ascend 


The rules of the game can be found in the final section, 
divided between... 


¢ Chapter Eight: The Book of Rules, which covers the 


essential Storyteller game systems. 


* Chapter Nine: Dramatic Systems, which explores the 
rules for specific circumstances. 


* Chapter Ten: The Book of Magick, in which the Art 
of Change receives a detailed treatment. 


* Appendix I: Allies and Antagonists presents an array 
of templates and characters. 


* Appendix II: Odd Ends features Merits and Flaws, 
Advantages, derangements, and a handful of Wonders 
to enhance your Mage chronicle. 


* And finally, the book's Afterwords conclude the book 
with a collection of testaments to Mage's enduring 
legacy. 


Yeah, it's a big world... but one no larger than your 


imagination. 


A Sandbox of Potential 


The book in your hands is bloody huge. Do you need to 
know it all, cover-to-cover? No. 


Think of Mage 20 Anniversary Edition as a sandbox 
of possibilities for the games you choose to run. These games, 
or chronicles, are your personal creations. Want to challenge 
Reality to a cross-dimensional chess match? You can. Prefer to 
focus on a tangled web of dysfunctional romance? You can do 
that too. Your heroes could help wage a new Ascension War 
or tend their own business in a world gone mad. This book 
is a creative toolbox that spans the 22-year run of Mage: the 
Ascension. You don’t need to use every option here... but if 
you want them, when you want them, here they are. So do what 
you Will in your own chronicle. This book can show you how. 


Lexicons 


Mages are a verbose bunch whose world 
lends itself to complex descriptors and poetic 
imagery. Because certain groups employ specific 
terminology, we've broken this Lexicon down 
into the appropriate sections. Terms that 
are referenced in one place (like Tradition 
Terminology) might also be found under 
another category ( Technocratic Terminology). 


For group-specific ranks and titles, see the 
sidebars throughout Chapter Five. For the 
names of various Otherworldly layers and concepts, see 
Chapter Four. 


And no, you don't need to know all this stuff in order to 
play Mage. But it helps. 


Common Terminology 


Many terms reflect common concepts among the Awakened; 
although most of them have their origins in mystic practices, 
Technocrats often use these phrases too, if only for clarity’s sake. 


apprentice: An aspiring or newly Awakened mage who's in 
the early stages of her training. Capitalized, the word becomes 
a Council title for a low-level Tradition mage. 


Arcane: Capitalized, Arcane refers to a mysterious field 
or effect that obscures the existence and identity of a person, 
place, or thing. 


Arete: Commonly pronounced as either ahreh TAY or 
AlR-ehtay, this word reflects the quality of excellence and 
Enlightened Will that allows a mage to alter reality through his 
Arts. (See Awakening, gnosis, magick.) 


Art, Arts, the: Common term for magick; also used as a 
synonym for Sphere (eg. the Art of Forces). 


Ascension: Transcendence to a higher state of existence. Seen 
as both a personal goal (in which the mage achieves self-Ascension) 


and a global one (in which mages elevate humanity as a whole 
to an Ascended state). Few mages, however, agree about what 
Ascension actually looks like or what that higher state means. 
Ascension, then, is more of an ideal than an accomplishment. 


Ascension War, the: Centurieslong conflict between 
Awakened factions that strive to determine the ultimate form 
of reality on Earth. Supposedly won and lost several times, this 
goal - like Ascension itself - is more of a nebulous concept 
than a measurable goal. 


astral: Dealing with mystic consciousness, usually when 
projecting that consciousness beyond the physical form, shaping 
worlds with consciousness, or both. (See also Three Worlds.) 


Avatar: The "inner god" that guides a mage, an Awakened 
Avatar allows a mage to rework reality. (See Genius, Seeking.) 


Awakened, the: Common name for mages in general; 
also used to refer to Night-Folk who also possess paranormal 
abilities. (See Enlightenment, unAwakened.) 


Awakening: The state of waking up to one's power to 
rework reality and perform True Magick. 


awareness: Sensitivity to supernatural/ paranormal forces, 
often experienced as unusually acute perceptions and feelings 
about things most people cannot see. 


belief: The force of faith and conviction that allows a mage 
to rework reality; even after Awakening, a mage must believe 
powerfully in something. (See focus, paradigm, practice.) 


bodhisattva: A profoundly enlightened person - notalways 
a mage -who has decided to stop short of personal Ascension 
in order to help other beings. (See Oracle.) 

Burn, the: An explosion of Paradox energies. 

Bygone: Supposedly mythic creatures, rarelyseen on Earth but 
common in human legendry (dragons, chimeras, unicorns, etc.). 

cabal: A small gathering of mages who often work together; 
a family or clan of associated willworkers. 


Introduction: Pride, Power, Paradox 23 


IA 7 


7 d 
Yr | 
| 
| 
| 
| 
8.3 
w | 
l 
sn 


DE all a 


Caern: A Node guarded by tribal werewolves. 


Chantry: A place where mages make their homes; a mystic 
stronghold. (See Construct.) 


chaos magic(k): Eclectic, unorthodox, personalized, and often 
improvisational mystic practice; despite common misconception, 
NOT magick based on evil forces or malevolent intentions. 


chi: Life-essence energy, generated and channeled through 
various mystic practices; also spelled ch’i. (See Quintessence.) 


coincidental magick: An act of magick that can be 
passed off or regarded as some perfectly natural coincidence 
if witnessed by someone who does not understand or believe 
in magick. Magick that works within the dominant paradigm. 
(See vulgar magick.) 


consensual reality: Reality as most human beings 
understand it, agree upon it, and experience it. Also called 
Earthly reality. (See dominant paradigm.) 


Consensus, the: Common term for reality as most people 
agree upon reality. Regarded by the Technocracy as the ideal, safe 
state of humanity, though other mages use the term as well. 
(See consensual reality, Masses, paradigm, Sleeper.) 


consor: Old term for a powerful but unAwakened ally. 
Originated by the Order of Hermes, the term has since passed 
into common usage. 


contrary: Crazy wisdom role that reverses expected modes 
of dress and behavior (often, but not always, through cross- 
dressing, androgyny, deliberate confusion, backwards speech, 
saying the opposite of what is meant, etc.) in order to subvert 
expectations about what is. Sometimes used as an instrument 
for mystic focus. (See shaman.) 


Construct, construct: Capitalized, refers to a Technocratic 
base or Horizon Realm; without capitalization, the term refers 
to an artificially constructed person. 


Convention: Capitalized, refers to one or more of the five 
divisions within the Technocratic Union. 


Council of Nine Mystic Traditions, the Council: The 
full title of the Nine Traditions, united into a single group; also 
used to refer to the leadership of that group. 


countermagick: Metaphysical dodge in which a mage tries 
to undo the effects of some other mage's magick before that 
magick takes effect. (This is more a game term than a setting 
term; players may use it, but characters rarely, if ever, do.) 


Craft: Capitalized, refers to a large sect of allied mages 
who refuse to join the Traditions, Technocracy, Marauders, or 
Nephandi. (See Disparates.) 


Creation: When capitalized, the term refers to everything 
that exists - as in "all of Creation." (See Tellurian.) 


crazy wisdom: Overcoming limitations through apparently 
(and/ or dangerously) irrational actions and behavior. By 
confronting so-called common sense and social taboos, a 
practitioner breaks on through boundaries of personal fear 
and normative culture. (See contrary, Left-Hand Path.) 


24 Ma$e: The Ascension 20^ Anniversary Edition 


Deep Umbra: The metaphysical aspect of outer space. 
(See Horizon, Void.) 


demon: À malignant and/or Infernal spirit. 


Descent: Capitalized, the dark mirror of Ascension; an ideal 
of decay, corruption, and oblivion rather than transcendence. 


Device: Capitalized, a hypertech gadget that employs 
independent Enlightened Procedures; in mystic terms, a magical 
item based around technology. (See fetish, Talisman.) 


Digital Web: The metaphysical aspect of the Internet, 
generally considered alive. Also called netspace and Webspace. 


Disconnection: The state of drifting from Earthly existence; 
suffered by people who travel for too long in the Otherworlds. 


Disembodiment: An extreme state of Disconnection, in 
which the traveler loses his physical form and exists only as 
Ephemera. 


Disparate Alliance: A recent and secretive alliance of 
Disparate Crafts. Currently, this Alliance includes the Ahli- 
Batin, Bata'a, Children of Knowledge, Hollow Ones, Kopa 
Loei, Ngoma, Sisters of Hyppolyta, Taftani, Templars, Wu 
Lung, and various unaligned orphans. 


Disparate, Disparates, the: Large sect ofunaligned mages; 
originally an insulting term, reclaimed as a badge of honor. 
(See Craft, orphan.) 


dominant paradigm: What many Sleepers think of as “just 
the way things are.” Mages subvert, transform, and transcend 
dominant paradigms simply by existing, although some work 
to reinforce it. (See coincidental magick, Technocracy.) 


dynamic reality: Reality in flux; the static state of reality 
being radically moved or shifted - in short, magick. (See 
entropic reality, static reality, Metaphysic Trinity, and other 
associated listings.) 


Dynamism: Capitalized, the metaphysical force of change 
within the Metaphysic Trinity. Also known as the Wyld. (See 
Entropy, Stasis.) 


Earth, Earthly: Capitalized, refers to both the planet and 
its human-dominated state of reality. 


Enlightenment, Enlightened: Capitalized, another term 
for Awakening - commonly but not exclusively used by the 
Technocracy. In lower case form, enlightenment simply refers 
to the state of profound understanding. 


EnlightenedScience: Alteration ofapparentreality models 
based upon advanced scientific principles and understanding; 
inother words, technomagick. (See hypertech, Inspired Science, 
reality physics.) 


entropic reality: Reality in corruption and decay, often as 
perceived and/ or created by Entropic magicks or other forces 
from the Underworld. (See Jhor.) 

Entropy: Capitalized, the metaphysical force of decay 
through which things pass before being cycled back into 
Dynamism; also the name ofthe Sphere that deals with such forces. 


Epiphany: The moment of Awakening; an “AHA!” 
experience that opens the mage’s eyes to new potential. 


Essence: The personality of an Avatar, defined as either 
Dynamic, Pattern, Questing, or Primordial; known by 
Technocrats as an Eidolon. 


Fallen, the: Euphemism for the Nephandi or for other 
mages who pursue Descent instead of Ascension. 


familiar: A spirit that has taken on solid form in order to 
become a mage’s companion. 


Fetish: Capitalized, an object imbued with a ritual 
significance and/ or spiritbased powers; in sexual terms, 
a practice or situation of intense fixation and potentially 
magickal focus. 


focus: The combination of belief, practice, and instruments 
through which a mage focuses her magick. (See paradigm.) (Like 
countermagick, this is more of a game term than a setting term.) 


Gate: A temporary magickal bridge between places. (See Portal.) 


Gauntlet, the: Metaphysical barrier between Earthly reality 
and the Penumbra. 


Genius, the: Capitalized, the Technocraticterm for the Avatar. 


gnosis: Intuitive and/ or initiated knowledge and awareness 
of the true nature of reality. (Not to be confused with the spiritual 
awareness Trait in Werewolf: The Apocalypse.) 


Gnosticism: One of various related beliefs about an 
imperfect Creation that can be transcended through enlightened 
knowledge/ awareness (gnosis) of one’s higher state of being. 


hedge magician, hedge wizard: Dismissive term for people 
who use a limited form of magic, as opposed to Sphere-based 
Arts; sometimes also known as a sorcerer. (See Sleepwalker, 
static magic, True Magick.) 


hero: “Someone worth singing about;” a person who steps 
beyond limits and becomes a legend. 


High Ritual Magick: Formalized and elaborate mystic 
practice based upon discipline, accomplishment, scholarship, 
and control; what people typically think of as wizardry or 
magic(k). (See mage, shaman, technomancer, witch.) 


Horizon, the: A thicker form of Gauntlet that surrounds 
Earth’s atmosphere, enclosing the many Otherworlds 
surrounding Earth. According to theory, there may be another 
Horizon out beyond the Moon as well. 


Horizon Realm: An Otherworldly Realm, typically 
constructed through powerful magick. Technocratic Realms 
are called Horizon Constructs. 


hubris: Overwhelming pride that leads people to excess 
and ruin. 

hypertech: To paraphrase Arthur C. Clarke, sufficiently 
advanced technology that’s indistinguishable from magic; in short, 
technomagick. (See Enlightened Science, Inspired Science.) 

Incarna: A spirit entity of godlike power. (See spirit, 
totem, Umbrood.) 


Infernal: From the Underworld; when capitalized, refers 
to malevolent and corrupting metaphysical forces or entities. 
(See demon.) 


Infernalist: Someone (not always a mage) who makes pacts 
with Infernal powers. 


Initiate, initiate: A person who has been introduced 
to the deeper levels of reality and the mystic/ Technocratic 
cultures involved in it. Sometimes capitalized when referring 
to a low-ranking mage. 


initiation: The introduction, through test and ceremony, 
of a person into an occult society. 


instrument: When referring to magick, an instrument 
represents the tools and activities involved in a focus: belief 
inspires practice, which employs instruments to provide focus. 
The Technocracy often calls its instruments apparatuses, and 
many other technomancers use that term as well. 


Jhor: Entropic Resonance; the death-taint affecting mages 
who deal intimately with the Underworld and Entropic reality. 


LeftHand Path (LHP): Mystic practices that employ 
unorthodox and forbidden elements (sex, drugs, violence, 
intoxication, the breaking of taboos, etc.) as tools for 
enlightenment; pursuit of rebellion and sensation as opposed 
to orthodoxy and asceticism. (See Right-Hand Path.) 


Mad, the: Euphemism for the Marauders. 


mage, magus: In Awakened terms, a person who 
understands how to manipulate reality through force of 
Enlightened Will; also True Mage. From the ancient Persian 
and Greek terms for a Zoroastrian priest. 


magic: Impressive but limited acts of illusion or alteration 
that fit into static reality even though they’re apparently 
supernatural. (See hedge magician, static magic, Stasis.) 


magick: The Art and Science of reworking reality through 
force of Awakened/ Enlightened Will and knowledge; also 
called True Magick. Sometimes spelled without the “k,” leading 
to confusion between Static and Dynamic forms of magic(k). 


Marauder, the Marauders: Metaphysical schizophrenics 
whose impressions of reality are so disconnected from the Consensus 
that they effectively exist in their own reality wells. (See Quiet.) 


Masses, the: The majority of human beings; unEnlightened 
people - thatis, Sleepers. Originally used by the Technocracy, the 
term is not exclusive to that group. (See mundane, normative 
culture.) 


meme: An idea, concept, belief, or message that has a life 
of its own and spreads itself through thoughts and cultures. 


Metaphysic Trinity, the: Name for the interplay between 
the forces of change (Dynamism), form (Stasis), and decay 
(Entropy). Known by some primal mages as the Triat of Wyld, 
Weaver, and Wyrm. 

microcosm and macrocosm: The paradigm that says that 


small things mirror larger things and thatall things are connected 
on some level. Epitomized by the saying "As above, so below." 


Introduction: Pride, Power, Paradox 25 


IA 7 


EA | 
A | 
| 
| 
| 

| 
aba 
"[ | 
n 


N 


4 


p 4 Masses. 
d 


mundane, mundanes: Often refers to a Sleeper or the 


mystic: When used to refer to mages, “mystic” describes 
willworkers with a magickal - as opposed to technological - 
approach to reality and the Arts. 


Mythic Threads: Elements of legend, folklore, and mythology 
that resonate deep in human consciousness and thus have strong 
ties to reality even when they seem magical. Tarot cards, astrology, 
vampires, and demonic possession all hold Mythic Threads. (See 
hypernarrative.) 


Nephandus, Nephandi: “Dark reflection” mages 
who pursue the Path of Descent; infamous for corruption, 
temptation, misdirection, and deception. 


neotribalist, neotribalism: Person or philosophy based on 
living outside normative culture, typically in tribes of likeminded 
people; typically embracing postmodernist or modern primitive 
subcultures and activities (body modification, alternative art festivals, 
vagabond lifestyles, techno-tribal fashions and rituals, etc.). 

Night-Folk, the: Catch-all name for vampires, werewolves, 
ghosts, and other supernatural/ paranormal creatures of the Earthly 
plane. (See Reality Deviant.) 


Node: Knots of primal energy, where Quintessence wells up and 
Tass manifests. Nodes often appear in places charged with massive 
emotional discharges and/ or natural harmony or corruption. 


P2 


2 
" 


normative culture: Mainstream, normalsociety within the 
technological/ industrial world. The Masses and the ideas that 


epitomize them. Typically considered derogatory. 


pA 


Oracle: Legendary mages who've either Ascended or else 
stopped just short of Ascension in order to help (or hinder) 
life on Earth. Often considered a myth. (See bodhisattva.) 


Order of Reason, the: Original form of the Technocratic 
Union, active between 1325 and 1897. 


Orphan, orphan: SelfAwakened and/ or unaffiliated 
mages who pursue their own practices and agendas. Considered 
dangerous wild cards by the Traditions and Technocracy. The 
orphan label tends to be capitalized by those factions but not by 
many other mages, who consider that term to be insulting. 


Otherworlds, the: Collective name for the various worlds 
beyond the Gauntlet. (See Three Worlds, Umbra, etc.) 


paradigm: A model of reality that reflects a system of belief. 
(See focus, practice, instrument.) 


Paradox: The force of conflicting realities, created when a 
mage performs magick poorly or overreaches the boundaries of 
the Consensus; also called the Paradox Effect. 


Paradox Realm: Small Realm created by the forces of Paradox 


in order to isolate an offending mage from consensual reality. 


Paradox Spirit, Paradox Entity: Bizarre, personified 
manifestation of Paradox that punishes mages who invoke the 
Paradox Effect; supposedly formed from humanity’s collective 
unconsciousness... or collective nightmares. 


paranormal: Catch-all term for uncanny forces, used 
by people (like Technocrats) who don’t like using terms like 
“magic” or “supernatural.” 


Path, the: Poetic term fora mage’s journey from Awakening 
to Ascension. 


Pattern: Metaphysical form of an object, body, or energy. 
(See Quintessence.) 


Penumbra, the: Spiritual reflection of Earth’s material 
reality, just on the other side of the Gauntlet; perceived and 
experienced in different ways by different people. (See Vidare.) 


Pogrom, the: The Technocracy’s violent, systematic purge 
of Reality Deviants; from Russian, “to bring thunder.” 


Portal: A permanent Gate, typically guarded by puzzles, 
wards, guardian creatures, and/ or other precautions. 


posthuman, posthumanism: The stage beyond natural 
humanity, or the philosophy of transcending humanity, often 
through technological achievement. 


practice: With regards to mages and magick, practice reflects 
the activities and rituals a mage uses to focus her beliefs; also known 
as a magickal style. (See belief, focus, instrument, paradigm.) 


Prime, Primal Force: The essential energy of Creation; also the 
name of the Sphere thatemploys those energies. (See Quintessence.) 


Procedure: Capitalized, a Technocratic focus for 
technomagickal spells. 


Pure Ones, the: Legendary beings said to have been 
angels, splinters of gods, or some other mystic entities. (See 
Avatar, the Wyck.) 


Quiet: A state of metaphysical disconnection and 
insanity, often caused by overuse of magick. Marauders exist 
in permanent Quiet. 


Quintessence: The raw concentrated essence of Creation 
- its Fifth Essence. Also known as Primal Force, Quintessence 
manifests in Patterns through the interplay of Dynamism and 
Stasis. (Entropy breaks those Patterns down.) 


Rashomon Effect, Rashomon Syndrome, the: Term for 
the realization that everyone has different perceptions of reality, 
and that no definitive form of reality exists. From the Japanese 
play and movie of the same name. 


Reality: Capitalized, the word refers to a personified or 
even conscious form of reality - Reality as a being, not a state. 


Reality Deviant, RD, Deviance: Technocratic terms for 
entities, acts, and creatures (including mages) who deviate from 
the Union’s ideal form of reality. Originally used only within 
the Technocracy, the term Reality Deviant has entered wider 
usage when referring to supernatural enemies. 


Realm: Capitalized, refers to a place in the Otherworlds 
that has consistent identity and form. 


Resonance: Metaphysical feedback; traces of past actions 
and magickal spells. Commonly (and often erroneously) known 
as karma, Threefold Return, and “payback is a bitch.” 


Right-Hand Path (RHP): Pursuit of enlightenment and 
magick through righteous action, virtue, and asceticism in 
accordance with mortal, divine, or moral laws. Originally 
referred to one of two different approaches to Tantric Arts, 


now often applied to reputable forms of magick; opposed to 
the so-called disreputable Left-Hand Path. 


ritual: An established series of activities that have a greater 
purpose behind them. Some rituals are simple (knocking on 
wood), whereas others are incredibly complex and restricted 
to certain people (a High Mass). 


rote: A time-honored magickal spell. 


sanctum: A specially prepared safe, ritual, or laboratory 
space; sometimes capitalized, especially when referring to a 
space that has been magickally prepared. 


Scientist: Capitalized, refers to high-status Enlightened 
technomancers, especiallywithin the Technocracy and Society of Ether. 


Seeking: A mage’s Avatar-guided internal quest for further 
enlightenment. 


shallowing: Temporary time or area where the Gauntlet 
thins out, making passage easier between Earth and the 


Otherworlds. 


shaman: Mystic who communicates and intercedes with 
spirits. Originally referring to a specific type of Siberian healer/ 
seer, the word is now a general term for spirit-oriented “vision- 
people” who undergo symbolic or literal death-and-rebirth 
experiences. (See totem.) 


Sleeper: A person who has not yet Awakened to the greater 
scope of reality. (See Masses, normative culture.) 


Sleepwalker: Someone who possesses awareness but has 
not yet fully Awakened; a visionary Sleeper who might possess 
unusual talents but not Sphere-based magick. (See bodhisattva, 
consor, hedge magician.) 


Solificati, the: Sect of alchemists with an extremely 
confused history and identity; currently identified with both 
a Disparate Craft and a House of Hermes. 


Spheres, the: Capitalized, refers to the nine elements of 
reality (or areas of understanding that deal with those elements) 
through which mages work their Arts. Generally considered 
to comprise Correspondence, Entropy, Forces, Life, Matter, 
Mind, Prime, Spirit, and Time, although they are often known 
by other names within the Technocracy. (See Art, Tenth Sphere.) 


spirit: In lower case form, an entity or force from outside 
material reality; sometimes considered the fifth element, soul 
essence, or the immaterial energy behind passion and emotion. 
Capitalized, the Sphere that deals with such energies and entities. 


Stasis: The metaphysical principle of form, set in motion by 
Dynamism and broken down by Entropy. (See Metaphysic Trinity.) 


static reality: The momentum of reality, guided by the 
beliefs of humanity and setting what is possible into the form 
of what exists. True Magick, by definition, disrupts static reality, 
reworking it to fit a mage’s desires. 


Introduction: Pride, Power, Paradox 27 


IASA 


E A | 
^ a 
| 
| 
| 

| 
deo 
" | 
j! 
"s 


=m s 


Talisman: Capitalized, a magickal item that contains its 
own mystic power. (See Device, Fetish.) 


Tapestry, the: A metaphor for reality. 


Tass: Physical form of Quintessence, often coalescing 
around Nodes or in supernatural creatures, taking shapes that 
seem appropriate to the source in question (toadstools in a forest 
glade, water in a fountain, blood in a creature's veins, etc.). 


Technocracy: In lower case form, a government or 
philosophy driven by science and industry; capitalized, the 
short-form name for the Technocratic Union. 


Technocrat: Lower case, a person devoted to scientific/ 
technological solutions in government and society; capitalized, 
a member of the Technocratic Union. 


Technocratic Union, the: Powerful faction of Enlightened 
technomancers dedicated to the benevolent domination of 
humanity. Divided into five Conventions - Iteration X and 
the New World Order, Progenitors, Syndicate, and Void 
Engineers - this faction employs invention, subversion, and 
force in pursuit of global control. 


technomagick: Reality-alteration (that is, magick) through 
a scientific/ technological focus. 


technomancer: À mage who employs technomagick; from 
the Greek, "to envision through knowledge-craft/ skillful work." 
Not capitalized unless it refers to a member of the Technocracy. 


Tellurian, the: The whole of reality; all Creation. 


TenthSphere, the: Theoretical unifying principle behind the 
nine Spheres; heavily debated but not yet conclusively discovered. 


Three Worlds, the: The three layers of the Otherworldly 
Umbrae; regions of consciousness (the Astral, or High, Umbra), 
nature (the Middle Umbra), and death (the Low, or Dark, 
Umbra). Likened to the Metaphysic Trinity (High = Dynamism, 
Middle = Stasis, Low = Entropy), though the Three Worlds are 
composed of all three principles. (See Umbra, Underworld.) 


totem: Spirit entity that takes a special interest in a person 
or group, often conferring favors upon the chosen party. Usually, 
but not always, linked to an animal or natural force. (See shaman.) 


Traditions, the: One or more members of the Council 
of Nine Mystick Traditions. Currently, these Traditions are 
the Akashic Brotherhood (a.k.a. the Akashayana), Celestial 
Chorus (Singers or Choristers), Cult of Ecstasy (Sahajiya), 
Dreamspeakers (Kha’vadi), Euthanatos (Chakravanti), Order 
of Hermes (Hermetics), Sons/ Society of Ether (Etherites), 
Verbena (Verbenae), and Virtual Adepts (VAs). 

Transhumanist, transhumanism: Person or philosophy 
dedicated to moving beyond human physical, and social 
limitations, usually through technology. 

Umbra, Umbrae: One or more of the Three Worlds; from 
the Latin, “Shadow.” 

Umbrood: Any non-human inhabitant or native of the 
Umbra. The term is considered insulting by shamans and spirits, 
but it’s often employed by Hermetics and technomancers. 


Mage: The Ascension 20" Anniversary Edition 


unAwakened, unEnlightened: When using capitalized 
A or E, the phrase refers to people who have not yet fully 
Awakened. Also un-Awakened/ un-Enlightened. 


Uncle Al: Aleister Crowley, (in)famous occultist, 
sarcastically referred to by many mages as “Good ol’ Uncle Al.” 


Underworld, the: Capitalized, the Low Umbral region 
of death and Entropy. 


Vidare: The outlook through which a person views 
the Penumbra; also affects a traveler’s destination within the 


Otherworlds. 


Void, the: Capitalized, the deepest reaches of space; the 
principle of ultimate Oblivion; the utter absence of possibility; 
primal chaos; and the heart of the Underworld - all of which, in 
essence, may be the same thing. Sometimes called the Absolute, 
especially by Nephandi. 

vulgar magick: Drastic, obvious alterations of reality; the 
opposite of coincidental magick. 


whiteout: Paradox backlash in the Digital Web. The Great 
Whiteout refers to a massive crash on Nov. 10, 1997, that 
significantly changed netspace. (See entries below for Ascension 
Warrior, Doissetep, Porthos.) 


wild talent: Reflexive, unconscious, unpredictable, typically 
chaotic expression of unschooled mystic talent; one of the primary 
reasons people fear orphans and Marauders. (See Will.) 


Will: Sometimes capitalized, will or Will refers to the force 
of determination and comprehension that allows a mage to 
alter reality through conscious choice, as opposed to wild talent. 


willworker, will-worker: A person who works her will 


upon Creation... that is, a mage. 


witch: Primal mystic who employs a combination of 
instinct and Old Ways of commoner witchcraft as opposed 
to High Ritual Magick. Among Sleepers, also a common term 
for disreputable (not always female) practitioners of the Arts. 


Wyck, the: Legendary name for the first primordial mages, 
descended from the Pure Ones; often translated as “the Wise (Ones)." 


Tradition Terminology 


For Council titles, see Chapter Five (p. 141). Entries 
featuring the designation (metaplot) describe optional characters 
or events in the published history of Mage that a Storyteller 
can include or ignore. 


Agent Smith: Generic Technocrat, especially a Black Suit 
or MiB. 


Arcanopath: Someone who pursues magick and/ or 
knowledge without concerns about ethics, morality, or 
consequences. (See Faust.) 

Ascension Warrior, the: (metaplot) Mysterious figure who 
claimed to have been a reincarnated member of the First Cabal 
I, the Warrior declared 
vendettas against both the Traditions and Technocracy, leading 


- its Great Betrayer. Having survived Gilgu 


to assaults on several Horizon Realms and Constructs as well 


as Horizon itself. Though eventually declared an imposter, this 
Ascension Warrior caused catastrophic setbacks for the Traditions 
as a whole. (See Doissetep, Fragile Path, Horizon, Porthos.) 


Avatar Storm: (metaplot) Metaphysical storm that made/ 
makes travel beyond the Gauntlet difficult and dangerous. 


bani: Council honorific meaning “of the House of..." 
Example: Spider Chase, bani Verbena. 


Black Hats & Mirrorshades: Derogatory term for 
Technocrats and the Technocracy. 


bongo:Shortfor "bongo-beater" - thatis, a hippie, shaman, 
or neotribalist, particularly of the Ecstatic or Dreamspeaker 
Traditions; derogatory. 


Boom Stick: Wand, staff, or device used to cast spectacularly 
vulgar spells. 


certámen: Formalized wizards’ duel, used for sport or to 
resolve disputes. 


Colony, the: (metaplot) Secret stronghold of the New 
Horizon Council. 


Cray: Old-form name for a Node. 
cyberdork: Old-school computer mage 


Dante that: To “Dante that” is to do something in as cool 
as way as possible. 


Disneyrians: Sarcastic name for a person (Awakened or 
otherwise) obsessed with pop culture fantasy and magick; also 
known as a Princess (not exclusive to female mages) or Prince 
Charming (likewise). 


Doissetep: (metaplot) Legendary Hermeticstronghold: the oldest 
and most powerful of its kind, second only to Horizon in size and 
scale. Selfdestructed when the Ascension Warrior brought internal 
tensions to detonation point, Doissetep has been associated with the 
Tower card in Tarot and is regarded as a symbol of majestic hubris. 


doxed: Fouled by Paradox; also, fuckdoxed, especially when 
referring to persistent Resonance or Paradox effects. 


Dram: A measure of Tass. 
Ecstatic: Capitalized, a member of the Cult of Ecstasy. 


Elite: Capitalized, a Tradition mage who’s been Awakened 
since the 1990s and survived the Week of Nightmares and its 
aftereffects; also a term for respected Virtual Adepts. 


Faust: A proud and/ or careless wizard, especially one 
who deals with bad bargains and/ or Infernal powers; also a 
derogatory term for a Hermetic mage. 


First Cabal, the: A hand-picked group of nine 
representatives for the first official Traditions Council; betrayed 
from within and halfslaughtered, its survivors scattered 
afterward. Considered a bad omen for the budding Council, 
but also considered an inspiration by later mages. 


Fragile Path, the: A metaphor for a mage’s journey to 
Ascension and for the ideal behind the Traditions as a whole; 
from the book of that name by the late Archmaster Porthos Fitz- 
Empress. (See Great Betrayer, First Cabal, Porthos, WWPD?) 


Gandalfian: A Hermetic mage; typically an insult directed 
at selfimportant Hermetics (that is, most of them); also, 
Dumbledore. 


Gilgul: Destruction of a mage’s Avatar, often as a 
punishment; from the Hebrew, “metamorphosis.” 


Grand Convocation, the: Gathering of mages from 
around the world between 1457 and 1466; foundation of the 
Council of Nine. 


Great Betrayer, the: (metaplot) Heylel Teomim Thoabath 
(“The Abomination”), Solificati representative with the First 
Cabal; betrayed the Cabal, supposedly to reveal the Council’s 
innate vulnerability to corruption. The Ascension Warrior claimed 
to be Heylel reincarnated; truth ofthatclaim remains unknown. 


Home Turf: A Horizon Realm sympathetic to Tradition 
mages and their practices. 


Horizon: (metaplot) The original center of the Council; a 
massive Otherworldly stronghold. Symbolizing the Traditions' 
unity, it was attacked and destroyed twice in the late 1990s and 
is now believed to be lost. 


Juice: Slang for Quintessence. 


Meatspace: Old Virtual Adeptterm for the physical world; 
considered laughably dated by many 21* century mages. Also 
plain old meatspace. 


Merlin: Slang for a powerful and/ or self-important old- 
school wizard; more respectful than Gandalfian or Dumbledore. 


MiB: Man in Black. 


netizen: Awakened member of the Digital Web's regular 
community. 


New Horizon Council, the: (metaplot) Attempt at 
rebuilding the Council of Traditions. 


nuke: To blast someone with vulgar destructive magick. 


Path of Thorns, the: Old-form version of the term Fragile 
Path, referring to an individual mage's path only. 


Porthos: (metaplot) Properly known as Archmaster 
Porthos, this Hermetic wizard was supposedly the most 
powerful mage alive. Porthos was more than slightly insane, 
and though he wasn't quite a Marauder, that insanity pained 
him greatly. In spite of it, Porthos spoke up for, and inspired, 
younger Tradition mages. Believed killed on Nov. 10, 1997, by 
the destruction of Doissetep, which he supposedly contained 
through a massive act of self-sacrifice. (See Ascension Warrior, 
Fragile Path.) 


Potter, Potterize: To cheapen something magickal and/ 
or wondrous; to employ pop cultural tools or rituals; or to view 
magick as gee-whiz Pollyanna. Obviously (and unfairly) derogatory. 

Protocols, the: Laws of conduct that theoretically govern 
all Tradition mages. 

Road Warrior hippies: Neotribalists. Derogatory and used 
by outsiders, often when referring to Ecstatics, Dreamspeakers, 
and Verbenae. 


Introduction: Pride, Power, Paradox 


ZA 


an 
/ T 
yy 
e y^. | 
» 4 
w^ -a4 
| 
| 
4 
" 


PS EN ai 


Rogue: When capitalized, refers to a mage who has quit 
her sect, renounced Tradition membership, turned on her 
former allies, or gone mercenary. 


Rogue Council, the: (metaplot) Mysterious group or entity 
thatbegansendingoutclues and messages to apparentlyrandom 
mages around 2002; also known as (or affiliated with) the Sphinx. 


Speaker: Capitalized, a member of the Dreamspeakers, 
especially a political activist or rebel shaman. 


Sphinx, the: (metaplot) Elusive entity that encouraged/ 
encourages unity and Ascension among disillusioned 
Tradition mages; sent out untraceable messages marked with 
a disappearing sphinx, indicating riddles to be solved. (See 
Rogue Council.) 


step(ping) sideways: To mystically slide through the 
Gauntlet and enter the Penumbra. 


Tribunal: Catch-all name for three types of gatherings of 
Council mages, usually to settle legal matters and/ or sit in 
judgment of crimes and determine punishments. 


Twist: Slang for Resonance. 


Week of Nightmares, the: (metaplot) First week of June, 
1999; mass nightmares and visions greet the rise of a horrific, 
mysterious, godlike entity. After that entity rampages across 
India and Bangladesh, the Technocracy nukes it; this, in turn, 
kicks off the Avatar Storm as well as ending several hundred 
thousand lives. 


witch-war: Internal scrap or rivalry between allied mystic 
factions (Tradition or otherwise). 


WWPD?: “What Would Porthos Do?" Half-sarcastic question 
when confronting a daunting challenge or puzzling enigma; 
essentially translates to "You'd have to be insane to figure this 
out.” Tends to piss off older mages, especially Hermetic ones 
who may have known Archmaster Porthos and revere him, 
despise him, or both. 


Technocratic Terminology 


For Technocratic ranks and titles, see Chapter Five, (p. 
172). Note that certain phrases have different meanings for 
Technocrats than they do for Tradition mages, or have been 
repeated here for clarity. 


Adamite: Unmutual Technocrat who feels superior to 
unconventional personnel due to appearing normal. (See biomod, 
clone, cyborg, natural, steelskin, etc.) 


Adjustment: Syndicate term for a subtle inspired Procedure 
(that is, coincidental magick). 


amalgam: Group of Technocraticoperatives; a Technocratcabal. 
apparatus: A Technocratic instrument. 


Avalon: Symbol of the Technocratic ideal; in Arthurian myth, 
the island where King Arthur awaits England’s hour of great need. 


“Be seeing you”: Sarcastic reminder to remain loyal to 
the Technocracy... or else. 


30 Mage: The Ascension 20" Anniversary Edition 


BFG: Big Fucking Gun; any hand-held distance weapon 
capable of unleashing incredible force. 


biomod: Bio-modification, a.k.a. organic enhancement. 


Black Suit: Preferred and gender-neutral name for a field 
agent of the NWO. (See Black Hats & Mirrorshades, Boys 
in Black, MiB.) 


Bottom Line, the: The Syndicate paradigm for reality; 
often phrased as “maximum profit, minimum risk.” 


Boys in Black: Reference to NWO operatives; somewhat 
derogatory. 


burn: To sanitize a person, place, or thing. 


CACS, “Cacks”: Computational Anomalies Corrections 
Specialists, a cross-Convention division dedicated to neutralizing 
computer-based hazards among the Masses. 


Cancelation: Capitalized, a death sentence. 


Cipher: Capitalized, a near-mindless Iteration X worker; 
in general, an unEnlightened grunt servitor. 


citizen: A valued butlowJeveland unEnlightened Technocracy 
employee, usually unaware of who and what she serves; the lowest 
rank aside from ciphers. (See extraordinary citizen.) 


clone: Artificial, lab-grown organism, typically human or animal, 
created from cell samples to replicate the basic biological characteristics 
ofanonartificial original. Sarcastically referred to as carbons or carbon 
copies, afteran obsolete replication technology. (See construct, Victor.) 


Colony: A Horizon Construct in extraterrestrial orbit. 


Construct: Capitalized, a Technocratic stronghold (a.k.a. a 
Chantry); lower case, an artificially created or enhanced operative 
or organism. (See biomod, clone, cyborg, etc.) 


Control: The Technocratic ideal; the embodiment of the 
Technocratic ideal; also an enigmatic figure/ group named 
Control, who embodies and enforces the Technocratic ideal. 


Convention of the White Tower: The foundation of the 
Order of Reason, beginning on Mar. 1, 1325; the Declaration of 
the White Tower, ratified on Mar. 25, 1325, officially founded 


what would eventually become the Technocratic Union. 


Convention: One of the five divisions within the 
Technocratic Union. 


cyborg: Mechanically enhanced organic operative, usually 
human but occasionally animal. 


Daedalean: Old name for a Technocrat of the Order of 
Reason; from Daedalus, the legendary Greek artisan. 


Data: When capitalized, refers to the Technocratic version of 
the Correspondence Sphere. The Data Principle (or Sphere) employs 
information as a bridge between people, locations, and events. 


datacrawl, the: A streaming feed of important data that 
moves slowly across the peripheral vision of an operative’s 
glasses, visor, or viewscreen; officially referred to as the Visual 
Data & Analysis Spectrum (VDAS, pronounced veee-DAS). 


Deep Universe: Technocratic name for the Deep Umbra; 
outer space. 


default: Syndicate euphemism for an assassination. 


Degree Absolute: Termination and erasure from the 
Union's ranks; also called Degree 7 and the seventh degree. 
(See Cancelation, default, Room 101.) 


Deviant: Short for Reality Deviant; also RD. 


Dimensional Anomaly: Technocratic name for the Avatar 
Storm. 


Dimensional Science: Technocratic version of the 
Spirit Sphere, based upon exploring and controlling alternate 
dimensions and their associated energies. 


Dispatch Center: A mundane front for a Technocratic 
operation; occasionally called a safe house. 


drycleaning: Handling a problem without employing 
violence. 


EDE: Extra-Dimensional Entity; an alien; a spirit. 


Eidolon: As noted above, the Technocratic view of an 
Avatar’s Essence. 


Empowerment: Realization ofthe power ofan Enlightened 
mind and Inspired Science; in mystic terms, the Awakening. Also, 
a preferred term for what Reality Deviants call Ascension. 


enhancement: Artificial upgrades to an existing organic 
structure. (See biomod, cyborg.) 


Enlightened Anthropic Principle, the: Technocratic 
theory that human beings create the conditions of a human- 
based reality through conscious and subconscious accord; in 
short, the belief that people - especially Enlightened people 
- create and maintain reality as we know it. 


exo: Scuttalk for an obvious cyborg; also ExoJock. 


extraordinary citizen: Valuable yet unEnlightened Techno- 
cratic operative; also a person who can understand and/ or witness 
Inspired Science without having to be Enlightened or Processed first. 


Frankensteinian: Scuttalk fora scientist (usually a Progenitor 
or Void Engineer) whose theories and/ or practices are extreme 
and disturbing even by Technocracy standards; sometimes an 
adjective: “You were acting pretty Frankensteinian back there...” 
Also called a Star-Eater, Mad Doctor, or Moreauvian. 


Friends of Courage: Clandestine but (in)famous group 
of idealistic Technocratic dissidents dedicated to purging 
corruption within the Union; named for legendary rogue Secret 
Agent John Courage. (See Project Invictus.) 


Front Lines, the: Earthly reality, so named for its RD 
infestation. 


Front: Base of Technocratic operations among the Masses, 
disguised as a mundane business, home, or other location. (See 
Dispatch Center.) 

Genegineering: Advanced genetic engineering, often 
used to biomod operatives, constructs, or other organisms; a 
Progenitor specialty. 


Genius, the: As noted above, the Technocratic view of 
an Avatar. 


Great Deep, the: Slang for the Deep Universe. 


HIT Mark: One ofa series of cybernetic killer robots; also 
scut-talk for a ruthlessly unsubtle killing machine. 


hypermath: Principles of esoteric mathematics, often 
beyond the minds of unEnlightened people. (See hypertech, 
Inspired Science, Primal Utility, reality physics.) 


hypernarrative: Archetypal figures, tropes, or other 
elements that reoccur in human lore and media; deep-rooted 
pieces of humanity's subconscious that can be used to convince 
or seduce a person or society. Also refers to a sense of interacting 
with the hypernarrative, allowing a person to live the story. 


(See Mythic Threads.) 
ice-pack: A cold killer, usually from the NWO. 


influence: Manipulation of one or more of the nine 
essential principles of reality, a.k.a. the Spheres; also a term for 
social clout (for instance, influence within the FBI). 


Inner Circle: The highest level of Technocratic command 
and control, from which all other elements of the Technocratic 
Union descend. (See Ivory Tower.) 


Inspired Science: Theories and practices of advanced reality 
Procedures - a.k.a. technomagick. (See Enlightened Science.) 


Iterator: Short for a member of Iteration X. 


Ivory Tower, the: The predecessor of the NWO; also, the 
apparent citadel of the Inner Circle... and thus, of established 
Technocratic leadership. 


Kamrad: Capitalized, the Socially Conditioned citizens of 
Iteration X; lower case, a common name for low-ranking citizens 
of all Conventions. 


lab rat: Scuttalk for a Technocrat who spends most or 
all of his life in a lab or Horizon Construct, far from the realities 
of the Front Lines. 


LERMU: Living Entity Reality Modulator Unit; Void 
Engineer operative genegineered to perform better in the Deep 
Universe. Considered the origin of Sleeper myths aboutgray aliens. 


Magic Man: Sardonic name for a successful Syndicate 
operative. 


market correction: Syndicate term for Paradox effects, 
based upon the view of reality as an open market of ideas. 


Masspeak: Putting things into terms the Masses would 
understand - that is, using buzzwords and mundane terms, 
not Technocratic jargon. 

Mediation: A Technocratic term for Seeking, wherein the 
Technocrat works through mental puzzles in order to unlock 
deeper understanding from within her subconscious mind. 
(That, at least, is the official view of what’s going on...) 

Methodology: A division within a Technocratic Convention. 

mutual: Cooperative and reciprocal; acting in ways that 
respect one’s fellow Technocrats and the Technocracy in general. 
(See unmutual.) 


Introduction: Pride, Power, Paradox 


A 


natural: An un-enhanced human (as opposed to a construct), 
born and raised in the mundane world before joining the 
Technocracy. (See Adamite.) 


newlife: A Technocrat's existence after she becomes an 
initiated member of the Technocratic Union, typically marked bya 
new identity and the end of her previous unEnlightened existence. 


oldlife: The identity and lifestyle pursued by a Technocrat 
beforesheentered the ranks ofthe Technocratic Union; typically 
discarded upon full membership within those ranks. 


Op: Short for operative. 


Operative: Capitalized, an Enlightened agent of the NWO 
who specializes in espionage; uncapitalized, any Enlightened 
member of the Union’s middle ranks. 


Panopticon, the: (metaplot) A cross-Convention elite force 
of operatives assigned to track down and eradicate the Sphinx 
and its allies, often using extreme force. 


PLE: Post-Life Entity; a ghost. 


Pogrom, the: As noted above, the violent suppression 
and removal of Reality Deviant factions. (In certain metaplot 
options, the Pogrom has been suspended or has ended; in 
others, it's still in full force.) 


polishing: Subconscious Mind-based Procedures, often 
used to Process someone without his conscious realization. 


32 Ma$e: The Ascension 20^ Anniversary Edition 


Precepts of Damian, the: Essential code of ethics and 
operations for the Union as a whole. 


Primal Utility: The psychological hypermath juncture 
between human desire and reality physics; in short, the 
Syndicate's version of the Prime Sphere. 


Primal Force: The core energy within all things; in Reality 
Deviant terms, Quintessence. 


Primium: Secret alloy created for hypertech Devices; also used 
to undo the effects of Reality Deviant metaphysical variations. (In 
game terms, a metal that grants innate countermagick.) 


Process: A common application of Inspired Science (that is, a 
technomagickal spell); also, the act of using Processingon someone. 


Processing, Processed: Social Conditioning employed to 
affirm and ensure loyalty to the Technocratic Union; also, to 
have been so Conditioned. 


Project Invictus: Secret group of Technocratic idealists 
purging Nephandic infection and hubris from within the 
Union. (See Friends of Courage.) 


prole: Dismissive scuttalk referring to alow-ranking citizen. 
reality crime: Violating the laws of established Consensus 
with metaphysical/ paranormal phenomena; in plain English, 


using magick or other supernatural powers. (See Deviance, 
Reality Deviant.) 


reality physics: Esoteric laws of cause and effect; the deep 
principles underlying elementary physics; scientifically applied 
metaphysics; in other words, technomagick. (See Enlightened 
Science, Inspired Science, hypermath, hypertech.) 


Reprogram: To use extreme Social Conditioning in order 
to purge unmutual and disloyal behavior; in short, Technocratic 
brainwashing. 


Room 101: a.k.a. the White Room, Black Room, or 
Red Room; general name for a heavily secured chamber used 
for Social Conditioning, intimidation, interrogation, and 
punishment; your worst nightmare. 


Sanitize: To cleanse paranormal Resonance from a Node or 
RD tendencies from a person (again, see Social Conditioning); 
also, to purge all data, clues, and living things from a raided 
location. (See sweep ‘n’ sack.) 


Scut-talk: Technocratic slang and/ or insults; often 
considered mildly (and sometimes seriously) unmutual. 


Six Degrees of Separation: Scale of trust and loyalty within 
the Technocracy; Degree 1 reflects maximum trust, whereas 
Degree 6 reflects impending dismissal. (See Degree Absolute.) 


sleepteacher: Device used to download information into 
the mind of a sleeping agent. 


Social Conditioning: Method of Mind-based influence, 
employed to ensure loyalty and understanding; also, a system 
of mental triggers and suggestions used to purge disruptive 
individuality, assure conformity, and initiate a newcomer 
into the Technocratic paradigm; also, a form of punishment 
used to modify the behavior of a Reality Deviant or unmutual 
Technocrat, dedicating him to the Technocratic cause. (See 
Processing, Reprogram.) 


steelhead: Insulting name for an obvious cyborg; also, a 
stubborn or fanatical Technocrat. 
steelskin: An obvious cyborg, derogatory. 


Subtle Influence, Subtle Procedure: Inspired Science or 
hypertech employed so as not to seem too advanced for the 
Masses. (In game terms, coincidental technomagick.) 


superstitionist: Obvious insult for mystic mages or their 
devotees. 


Supervisor: Capitalized, an upperranking Technocrat, 
specifically one assigned to direct and monitor teams of 
subordinates. 


sweep ‘n’ sack: Extreme raid in which operatives smash 
into a place, kill everyone, confiscate all property and data, 
and either replace it with false materials, data, and clones, or 
else sanitize the entire location. 


Symposium: Assembly of high-ranking Technocrats, used 
to govern and directoperations within a given region or facility. 


Threat Null: (metaplot) Perhaps the greatest threat the 
world has ever known... and only certain Void Engineers even 
know it exists. (See the Technocratic Unionsection of Chapter 
Five for details.) 


UID: Universal Identification Designation, typically 
consisting either of two letters and a series of numbers (e.g. 
KD61643), a binary code (1001010110), or possibly a fragment 
of genetic code. Often stamped or engraved on badges, skin, 
and personal or assigned property; in short, a Technocrat's 
official name. 


unconventional personnel: Enhanced, biomodded, or 
artificially created operatives. (See clone, construct, cyborg, 


LERMU, etc.) 
Union, the: Short for the Technocratic Union. 


unmutual: Not reciprocating the Union's generosity; 
disloyal; ungrateful; destabilizing morale or optimum efficiency; 
a person or construct presenting a threat within the Union. 


uplift: The process by which a superior party raises another 
group above its previous physical or mental limitations, bringing 
on a new, progressive state of evolution. 


Victor: Genegineered construct, meant to upgrade the 
human condition; noted for extreme good looks, physical 
capability, and unfortunate quirks of personality and mental 
stability. (See clone, unconventional personnel.) 


Void: Capitalized, a historical term for the Deep Universe, 
undiscovered frontiers and uncharted regions; also, scut-talk 
for one or more Void Engineers, suggesting that such operatives 
are devoid of personality or avoiding other Technocrats and 
their concerns. 


Void Adaptation: Technocratic name for Disembodiment. 


Introduction: Pride, Power, Paradox 


H 


33 


ja 


J 


TN Al 


/ Te 
i 

d d 

af A et: m 


k 


BOOK I: 
AWAKEN 


Change uncontrolled is madness. 


Porthos Fitz-Empress. 
The Fragile Path 


1e 79 N a X Loo 7 - 
c— 


- (vs Lt OZ 


c — Pho oc 


NODE CC E. A. ew — 7 22: pm 
= 


TR z 
ee eu. cL. O E up oec A e 


" 
" : = S s S 
r ~ ` —- P a\ DA " : — 
S ^ i ; A i EVA ~ < | 
ptr ur cd Jn Wa io jw x : 
Y < ON u x CL " "m x j $ x | —— w 
à 2 e As. = ry -~ s ie - 
( 42» N i.c v. ~ -S e KS " x 7 
tA x $ -A ; = | 
: č . I: S 7 = : | | 
t v; ~ we ee | | 
( | | Re - — 4 ^ i 
A 4 ww : cw : | 
d / NUN HA; | à S == | | | 
GF NS d > ~ z h | | | 
A / A £L " A“. ~ * à i | ) 
, ` | 
\ i Ø 3 ——À a N | 
Y [. /A mu Y Ce á ù ; A F’ 
g | «wy : B A) i X | N f. 
m? F ] 3 
INX ~ x i 
T | 


2 a ss n 


Chapter One: 


The Mages 
Path 


For Nature, united with Man, has brought forth a wonder of wonders. 


— The Corpus Hermeticum, Book I 


The Sun 


Associations: Clarity; enlightenment; success; joy; energy; 
liberation; a sense you can achieve anything... 

“How do I look, Mom?” 

She looks wonderful. Gods, how did she grow up so fast? 


My daughter stands on tiptoe, whirls around to show me the burgundy 
dress she's wearing underneath her graduation gown. Beside her, a tall crystal 
vase overflows with flowers, their colors a burst of vibrant reds, blues, and 
yellows rising on thin green stalks. Congratulations, Loreena! declare the cards 
beside them, scattered like the petals from those flowers soon will be. I look away 
from that table, from those ghost flowers, not wanting to see the future. That's 
a hard-won habit for me. For eighteen years, it’s had to be that way. Too much 
prophecy or hindsight can destroy the miracle of Now. 

Loreena’s beautiful. I could say that even if I wasn’t Mom. For just a 
moment, I let that moment hang: the sunlight on her hair, caught in an endless 
second, flying before it falls again. The grin that slips so naturally across her 
face. The gleam of mischief in gray-blue eyes. The wonder of her — strong and 
smart. She came from me, but she’s every inch her own woman too. 

For a flash, I'm her age again, my own path stretching out before me, ripe 
with promises and threats. All too fast, I learned to fear that life, let it bow me 
down before I broke free again. I recall my own mother’s face, cut tight with 
melancholy rage. Is this what she saw in me back then — the woman she once 
was, ready for life’s adventures? Did she feel what I feel now, or were her 
wounds too deep for anything but envy even then? Across that moment, the 
Me I was and the Me I am now commune. 


Blurs of impressions flow — skinned knees, long nights, pains that 
ripped so deep I thought they'd never let go. Shouts, slaps, kisses, dreams. 


Chapter One: The Mage's Path 37 


Tears — all too many tears. And sunshine. I choose to remember 
that. It’s the sun that makes everything worthwhile. 

And then I let the moment go. Loreena’s hair falls back with 
gravity. Her lips close into the half-smile she so often wears. That 
mischief in her eyes, though — that stays. She has plenty to look 
forward to. 


And so do I. 


Of Gods 


The biggest problem with men and gods is 
that too many men consider themselves gods 
and too many gods share the vanities of men. 
This is especially true of the Awakened - men 
and women blessed with godlike power and 
cursed with human frailties. If you would join 
these people, you should be aware of what that 
means. The power of such a Path is certain, but 
its ability to destroyyou and everything you hold 
dear is equally assured. 


Archmaster Porthos Fitz-Empress of the esteemed Order 
of Hermes realized this when he coined the term “the Fragile 
Path” to refer to the treacherous road all Awakened people 
walk. The howling madness of the Marauders, the gentler 
dementia of Tradition mages, the implacable certainty of the 


38 


Mage: The Ascension 20" Anniversary Edition 


"You're gorgeous," I tell my girl. The girl I raised and the girl 
Tam inside. “Absolutely beautiful.” 


She narrows her eyes, half-teasing. " You're just saying that." 


"No." I shake my head. "It's true. You've done good. I’m 
proud of you." 


It's true. I am. She knows it, and again she smiles. 


It's gonna be a good day. 


and Men 


Technocracy and its infernal shadow among the Nephandi, the 
wandering quests of Orphans and the Disparate, the doubts each 
mage finds within her or his heart - these are the shadows of 
Ascension. When power, pride, and the paradox of lofty goals 
within all-too-human hands all run wild within your heart, the 
balance between them can seem fragile indeed. 


You want to be a mage? A sacred priest or priestess of 
cosmic mysteries? Then pay attention to what I say. I have 
spent many years on that Fragile Path, and I know it like few 
other souls on earth. 


In the Greater Arcana ofthe infamous Tarot, there'sa journey 
of enlightenment and perils spread out across the faces of those 
cards. Some folks call it a reflection of the human condition; I 
regard it a mage's journey. Perhaps the Tarot itself was shaped 
by Awakened hands as a guide for the rest of us; I like to think, 
personally, that the poseurs Rider and Waite simply provided 
a vehicle for the one truly Awakened person in their company 
- unjustly forgotten Pamela Colman Smith, who actually drew 
and painted those familiar images - to get her point across. The 
Tarot is far older than that, of course, dating back to the age of 
an earlier Sorcerers Crusade; it was Rider, Waite, and Smith, 
though, who popularized its mysteries, leaving us - for better 
and worse - a vision of what we can become. 


It’s avision of devils and fools, judgmentand transcendence. 
Just like the lives of we Awakened Ones. We act out our little 
games against a backdrop of tribulation. The world so often feels 
like it’s out of control that when we do establish some illusion 
of control, we tend to overdo it. We rage so hard against our 
friends over what the world should be that we often lose sight 
of what it could become if we put aside our wars. And that’s 
where we, the Awakened Ones, find ourselves all too often: at 
war with one another over our visions of reality. 


De 


You'll hear a lot of words like “war,” “crusade,” and such 
along this Path. That's part of the paradox I'd mentioned 
earlier. We claim to strive toward higher ends, and yet we do 
so through the blood of anyone in our way. You'll also hear 
that one side or another is the only true Path, the only real Way, 
the only reliable guide along that Fragile Path. 


And I tell you this: 
They're ALL full of shit. 
All of us are right AND wrong. 


The universal Truth is that there is no universal truth. 
Reality is what we make of it. 


Gnosticism 


More of a belief system than a specific practice, Gnosticism refers to an overall view that the Creation we perceive as 
reality is actually the construct of some corrupt or malevolent force. To escape the prison of this fallen reality, a Gnostic 
seeks wisdom and knowledge (gnosis) that will lead to eventual transcendence. 


This concept of an inferior Creation ruled over by malignant “alienforces” ora “lord ofthis world" canbe found everywhere 
from The Matrix or David Icke’s “reptilian” conspiracy theories to many forms of Christianity or the more dour strains of 
pre-Christian Pagan belief. Certain approaches to Buddhism or Hinduism could be considered Gnostic eventhough that 
word rarely gets used in reference to those faiths. Transhumanism is certainly Gnostic in its ideals of post-human existence 
through technology. Even certain atheist creeds have Gnostic undertones; Ayn Rand’s fixation with parasitic masses and 


Nietzsche’s obsession with the Overman cast Gnostic shadows on essentially godless philosophies. 


On several levels, Mage embodies an essentially Gnostic cosmology, one in which “Sleepers” Awaken, transcend 
their humanity through knowledge, and potentially Ascend to a higher state. Still, many mages are not Gnostics, either 
because they do not see their world as innately corrupt; they refuse to believe in higher or lower powers; or they feel that 
everything is miraculous if and when you open your eyes enough to recognize that fact. Although Mage features certain 
Gnostic elements, it's more existential — in the sense that one must find meaning in existence among a meaningless and 
potentially hostile cosmos — than purely Gnostic in its foundations. 


Yet despite the presence of both philosophies, Mage is more hopeful at its core than either one. For in Mage, despite 
that hostile cosmos, those malignant forces, and the horrible consequences of failure, there’s always the potential to rise 
above it all and provide hope in a World of Darkness. 


Formore details about Gnostic paradigms and their postmodern bastard children, see Techgnosis and Transhumanism 
in Chapter Four (p. 105) and Common Mage Paradigms in Chapter Ten (pp.568-572). 


Some magesare better people than others. And some factions 
care more about morals and the world at large than their rivals do. 
All of them, however, suffer from the fault of pride. They all tell 
lies to make themselves look good. And that’s understandable. 
After all, when you really can make reality your bitch, it’s hard 
to look beyond your own truth to see a greater one. 


Our world has lots of high-flown stereotypes about what 
mages are and what we do. Some are even accurate. Beyond 
such poetical pretentions, though, we’re human beings with the 
power of gods. And so our passions, our vices, our excesses, and 


our flaws are deeply human things. The greatest storms we call 
down are the ones within our hearts. We cry and laugh and rage 
and fight, we snuggle and caress and toss restlessly in bed. Even 
while riding cosmic forces, we retain humanity. Never forget that 
we're this world’s holy Fools. A sense of play can keep you sane. 


So when I tell you all the things I’m about to say, remember 
this: I’m lying too. It’s just my truth. Not necessarily yours. 


As the saying goes, your mileage may vary, even when we're 
sharing the same trip. 


Mystics, Technomaneers, and Technocrats - 
Oh, My! 


You'll find two major divisions throughout Mage: mystics, who openly embrace what they're doing as magick or 
faith, and technomancers, who define what they're doing in terms of arcane or advanced science. In game terms, 
they're all doing the same thing; in story terms, though, their beliefs about what they're doing are entirely different 
and often antagonistic. 


The word mystic comes from the Greek root mustés, "to initiate;" technomancer comes from a compound meaning 
roughly ^to see through knowledge of the Art." Those roots reveal the primary differences between mystics and 
technomancers: mystics consider themselves to be members of elite, initiated groups, whereas technomancers see 
themselves as people using skills and devices to achieve great things. 


There's plenty of crossover between those groups. A Wiccan technomancer can still view himself as a mystic using 
technology, anda Catholic scientist regards herself as an elite servant of God usinghuman technology to work miracles. 


The capital-T Technocrats belong to an elite group too: the Technocratic Order, which certainly has its own levels 
of initiation. Not all technomancers, though, are Technocrats. That distinction sounds small, but to folks like the 
Virtual Adepts, it's pretty damned important. 


Chapter One: The Mage's Path 


39 


Sleepers, Awake 


The first card of the Tarot is the Fool - that 
pretty boy or girl about to walk off a cliff. And 
yes, the Fool's androgynous, like many characters 
in Colman’s deck. I like to think she did that 
on purpose, so that folks who knew how to look 
past their preconceptions could see themselves, 
male or female, on that journey. Our Fool’s got 
belongings slung over his or her back, with a 
little dog yapping right at the edge of the drop. 
Meanwhile, the Fool’s staring off into the sky, 
perched on the edge between disaster and flight. 


That’s us. 


We silly humans come into this world with open eyes. 
And then we take our first breaths and begin to close those 
eyes and scream. Most folks never open their eyes again after 
that... or when they do, they see only what they want to see. 
What they’ re told to see. Mama or Papa hold us close, or doctors 
smack our butts to hear us howl, and that’s as far as most 
people get. In Awakened circles, we call those people Sleepers. 
They’re alive, and they dream, but their eyes are closed to the 
world around them. 


And then there are the folks who wander around in a daze. 
They can sense shapes and sounds and have some degree of 
control over their movements, but they're still going through 
the motions like they're still asleep. Some of us call such people 
Sleepwalkers, but they have other names too: hedge wizards, 
geniuses, mad poets, dreamers, and saints. Certain Sleepwalk- 
ers wake up halfway, stuck in nightmares where they imagine 
themselves to be both potent and powerless. We call them the 
Night-Folk: vampires, changelings, the various Changing Breeds 
that rampage through a realm between human, animal, and 
god. There are hunters and hunted and lost souls of every 
description. None of them, though, know the secrets we are 
heir to. They’re mighty in their way, and deadly as hell. But 
they are not us, and they can never be like us. 


Because there are people who take that first breath and 
then wake up. We might feel sleepy for a while, but there always 
comes a point when just dreaming isn’t enough for us. 


That’s the Awakening. 
The thing that makes us what we are. 


This Awakening comes upon us like a lightning bolt, a 
so-called Epiphany in which the sleeping world bursts into clear, 
sharp focus. That which we'd believed before is revealed to be 
untrue. The person we had seen in the mirror until then stands 
before us, both alien and familiar. In that flash of insight, we 
realize just how powerful we truly are inside. 

Some folks refer to the Epiphany as a fourfold embrace - a 
level of comprehension that's perceptual, physical, intellectual, 
and spiritual all at once. An Awakened person sees magick, feels 
magick, grasps magick, and ultimately becomes magick. Whether 


40 Ma$e: The Ascension 20^ Anniversary Edition 


or not that person ever calls what he or she does "magick" is 
beside the point. Magick is not what we use. Once we have 
Awakened, it's what we are. 


And TIl tell you this, unpopular as the truth might be: 
we're all mages, we Awakened Ones. Tradition wizards and 
Technocrats, Mad Ones and Fallen Ones, and all the *ones" 
in between who refuse to choose a side in our demented little 
War. We're ALL fucking mages. Many refuse that title, or deny 
it to others, but that's what we are: priest-kings holding the 
keys to reality. 


The word mage comes from the Persian magus, the Greek 
mágos, and the Latin magus. Supposedly, these were pre- 
Zoroastrian priests charged with shepherding lesser people 
along the perilous road through a divine war. The word and 
its duties came to be associated with people of great power and 
treacherous potential — with mortals sharing the gifts of gods. 
And so, although the word itself had specific connotations 
once, it's a fair representation of what we all do. And let no 
one tell you otherwise: we all do it. Even the Nephandi, in 
their way, are shepherds along a sacred road; they might lead 
their flocks to the edge of a cliff, but they leave that final leap 
for the sheep. We mages, though... we don't fall when we take 
that leap. Not even the so-called Fallen Ones. No, when we 
mages open our eyes and take that step, we fly. 


A centuries-old struggle for the future of reality in the human realm, the Ascension War has divided mages into several 
conflicting factions, each one striving to shape reality to fit its own ideals. 


By the late 1990s, it seems as if that War is over. The Traditions take a beating from both internal divisions and outside assaults. 
The Gauntlet between worlds has thickened, and most archmages are dead. The pervasive nature of technology appears to 
have bred a universal belief that magic and wonder are impossible, and so certain authorities declare the Ascension War won. 


Those authorities understand neither the Ascension War nor the human spirit. 


While the Technocracy gloats and the Traditions despair, religious fundamentalism and magical belief surge. Technology, 
rather than destroying magick, winds up facilitating it instead. Meanwhile, apocalyptic fervor throughout the supposedly 
sleeping world threatens to destroy that world in the name of God. Popular entertainment and religious fundamentalism 
wind up bringing magick into vogue behind the Technocracy’s back. And all the while, a faction that almost everyone 
had considered kaput performs a devastating endgame... 


At the turn of the new millennium, the Ascension War rages on - less obvious than before, but no less intense. That 
apparent ending has, in fact, made the conflict even more intense. These days, the mages aren't fighting over abstract 
goals. They’re all fighting to survive. 


For more details about these Future Fates events, see Chapter Five’s Awakened History. 


Mages who choose sides in the Ascension War fall into several distinct factions: 
fN 


* The Technocratic Union: Forged in the light of science and philosophy, the Technocracy emerged in the Middle 
Ages as a confederation of artisans, priests, bankers, and explorers policed by a secret band of assassins. Then 
called the Order of Reason, the group worked its slow but inexorable will over the mystic world. Fusions of technology 
and ruthlessness eventually pushed the Traditions and other groups into corners. By the late 20^ century, this faction 
dominates everything it touches. 


* The Nephandi: In the shadows of the other groups, the Fallen conspire. Taking their name from the essence of 
shadows, these mages make a conscious choice to embody opposition, corruption, and decay. Oblivion, they feel, 
is the ultimate fate of everything. Nephandi draw their powers from voids that all other mages, even the Mad Ones, 
fear... and, especially these days, fear with very good reason... 


Not all mages choose a side; some change sides, and others stay as far as possible from them all. The Ascension War 
isn't a universal fight. Even so, almost every mage alive has felt its thunder. Whether one chooses to join that War or not, 
it Shapes — and sometimes shakes - the Awakened world. 


Th e m M » Ww or d of magick as “the science and art of causing change to occur 


a "m in conformity to the will." Many people find the word preten- 

wilh that Funny K tious... but then, a certain degree of pretention is inevitable 

when you play games with reality. As far as I’m concerned, it’s 

pretense only if you can’t live up to the power of your claims. 

And since living up to such power is what magick is all about, 
that spelling seems appropriate to me. 


Before I say more about mages, I want to spend a moment 
with magick - that funny thing that all the fuss is about. Some 
folks spell it with a “c,” others with a “k,” and almost everyone 
with a different idea about what it means. Personally, I prefer 
the “k” spelling because it echoes Aleister Crowley's observation Use your own judgment. You Will anyway. 


Chapter One: The Mage's Path 


And yes, I mean "W" with a Crowleyan pretention too. 
Crowley, bless his pointy little head, recognized what it is we do. 
We Will in a very specific sense, we mages. We use will-power to 
make things happen. Unless we have the will, there's no ^way" 
to employ magick. That's why we, of all people, have so much 
willpower: we need it to do what we do. And it’s why certain souls 
call us willworkers, with or without a capitalized W. We work our 
wills to make magick happen. 


As for magick itself, you'll hear endless arguments about 
what it means. Certain mages see it as the touch of their god, 
and others view it as Promethean fire. It could be regarded as 
the keyboard of Reality, to be stroked and hacked and played 
like Beethoven's grand piano. You might view it as the natural 
state of humanity before a fall, or as the grand destiny to which 
we all aspire. Once upon a time, supposedly, all people could do 
magick; I’m not certain I believe that, but some folks do. Often 
referred to as the Art, magick is an essential component of what 
many mages call Ascension: a personal or universal transcendence 
of human limits. That's a whole other subject, which I'll go into 
momentarily. For now, just remember this: magick's what you do 
when you're Awake enough to reshape our world to your desires. 


Ascension and its War 


That kind of power scares people... and with good reason. It’s 
frightening to realize what you can do if you truly set your mind to 
it, and it’s even more terrifying to realize that other people can do it 
whether you want them to or not. That terror drives what we'll call 
the Ascension War - a struggle over the fate of reality as we know it. 


In the Tarot’s grand journey-map, this War is where we 
find our Devils and Chariots, our Wheels and Towers and 
maybe Judgment too. It’s where many of us find Strength and 
Lust and the many trials of Cups and Wands, Pentacles and 
Swords. Waged in many forms since the dawn of humanity, and 
in its present form since the European Renaissance witnessed 
a “sorcerers crusade,” this War (yes, another capitalized term; 
we have lots of those) pits the forces of magick, faith, science, 
and damnation against one another. The history behind it 
is unimportant nov; let’s just say that the factions that rage 
through the shadows of reality took their marching orders from 
an ancient grudge but are truly, at their core, motivated by the 
fear of someone’s else’s magickal truth. 


We cantankerous mystic apes agree on almost nothing. 
Each human being, Awakened or otherwise, has a different 
take on what “reality” means. We agree about certain things, 
of course - water’s wet, things fall when dropped, and we have 
two arms, legs, and eyes unless we’re somehow changed by fate. 
Thing is, when you’re one of us, you realize that those certain 
things are up for grabs; we might breathe under water, fly 
through the air, or change the shapes we were born into. The 
power to do such things is magick. The pride of such power leads 
us toward Ascension... and, paradoxically, away from it as well. 


Ascension is a grand ideal. To some mages, it’s an 
individual’s ability to transcend this mortal carcass and go on 
to Heaven or Nirvana or whatever else waits just out of sight 
for us. The archetypal image of Ascension is on the World 
card - the last stop in the Tarot journey - where a naked soul 


— = PRETO trees WEE 


dances between the elements, halfwrapped in a mantle of 
glorious abandon. It's both surrender and control, childlike 
joy with mature understanding. That's one of many paradoxes 
in our Path: the more you try to explain or capture it, the less 
likely you are to actually reach that goal. 


Because of that particular paradox, many mages reach for 
a lesser goal instead: they want to make the world Ascend. And 
they'll tell you that’s the ultimate benevolence. And they'll be 
lying then, because it's not. Although you might disagree with this 
opinion, as many mages do, in my mind such universal Ascension 
is the ultimate form of slavery. It replaces individual revelation 
with communal unity, getting all sleepers to awaken the way we 
think they should. It's a utopian goal, with the same flaw as all 
Utopias: the insistence that everyone conform to someone else's 
ideals. And though the Technocracy may be the most obvious 
offender in that regard, many other mages are guilty of it too. 


So, we war. 


Hubris, Our Fatal Pride 


We wage our Ascension War for the fate of our world. 
We wage it for our own survival. We wage it out of hubris, the 
fatal pride that leads to destruction. The biggest crater in our 
Fragile Path, hubris insists that because we can do a thing, we 
should do it... because after all, it is our right to do it. Reality is 
in our hands, so it's our duty to make our world a better place 
with it - better, of course, by the standards we decide. 


And that's where the cracks begin. 


It often starts with people healing the sick and bringing 
fire and doing things that cry out desperately to be done. And 
that's good. But when you become convinced that only you 
know what's good or not, that fire ignites a holocaust. Robots 
march, and witches curse, and lightning storms flash down 
Main Street. 


And we, the Awakened Ones, have been doing that kind 


of shit for centuries. 


In the name of Ascension, the grand ideal, we make slaves 
and corpses of those in our way. The Technocracy gets the 
blame, but any so-called Ascension Warrior is guilty. 


We fear, often rightly, and so we fight. And kill. And die. 


Every so often, we Ascend. All too often, though, we burn. 


Magick is our gift, responsibility, and curse. We can use it 
to light lamps or set fire to the world. And we do both those 
things, and more besides. 


And this is why, in the grand scheme of things, we're all 
such Fools, dancing at the edge of transcendence and oblivion. 


The Avatar 


Seethatdog by the Fool's feet? That's the guardian, dancing 
both warnings and enticements. If the Fool isn't listening, he 
or she will tumble off the cliff. But if that Fool is listening, 
those barks and dances encourage vigilance. That dog lets the 
Fool know where to place the next steps. 


And that's the Avatar - that fragment of divinity that 
guides us through Awakening. 


The High Priestess 


“Avatar” is another loan-word that suits who and what we 
are. In Hindu cosmology, an avatar is an embodied aspect of 
a god. And in a way, that's exactly what a mage's Avatar is: an 
embodiment of the god within. 


Now, different mages have different takes on that sort of 
thing. Celestial Choristers and other monotheistic mages will 
tell you that everything is a fragment or creation of the One 
True God, with Avatars being closer to that God than mortal 
flesh. Pagan mystics often claim that we're all little fragments 
of Divinity, just waiting to realize that fact. Atheistic mages 
look at the Avatar as a reflection of one’s Inner Genius, and 
others regard it as a bodhisattva, a past life, a guardian angel, 
or some other manifestation of deeper understanding. Like I 
said, we mages are a diverse lot. We wield similar powers but 
describe them in very different ways. 


An Avatar can look like whatever you'd expect to see. Are 
you searching for a handsome stranger? There he is. Did you 
dream ofa lovely lady? She's right inside you, even ifyou’rea man. 
If you're looking for angels, you'll find one at your shoulder; if 
you fear demons, the Avatar dances that role too. That guiding 
spirit can look like hell on wheels or heaven with a stick-shift. It 
can even look like you - maybe the You you've always dreamed 
you could be, or the You you're afraid to catch sight of in the 
mirror. I’ve known mages who saw their Avatars as puffs of 
smoke, android servants, or voices in the air. Yes, they can even 
look like dogs. The form isn’t important. The function is. 


Chapter One: The Mage's Path 


An Avatar guides its mage through the often painful process of 
Awakening. Sometimes, it'll drag that mage kicking and screaming 
through nightmare streets. An Avatar, it’s been said, can be a 
teacher, a parent, a brute, or a lover. It’s both a master and a slave, 
with cruelty and kindness in its hands. What an Avatar never is, is 
indifferent. Whatever role it takes in your life, you’re important to 
that spirit and that spirit’s important to you. Whether or not an 
Avatar holds the power of Awakening or simply shows a mage the 
way to find it, that Avatar holds the key to mystic understanding. 
The stronger it is to you, the more you understand. 


An Avatar first comes to a mage in the moment of Epiphany, 
at the point where mortal illusions disappear. Sometimes this 
happens gradually - weird little things that begin to make sense 
over time as understanding grows. Most often, at least in this era, 
the Awakening blasts a mage into sudden painful awareness. Maybe 
those little things suddenly add up to a literally awefull truth. Or 
maybe time-tested preconceptions abruptlyshatter, revealing truths 
that were hidden until then. Whatever happens to the mage - and 
regardless of the age at which it happens, which could range from 
childhood to elder status but most often comes on the edge of 
maturity - the Avatar shakes the mage, and that mage wakes up. 


Seekings 

After that Awakening, the Avatar sticks around to guide the 
mage. Using lures, gifts, enticements, and threats, that inner god 
dogs a mage’s steps along the Path. During what we call Seekings, 
the Avatar challenges the mage to reach further, unravel mysteries, 
pass tests, withstand temptations, face her fears, or embrace 
her true potential. Like a teacher, the Avatar presents obstacles 
and problems for the mage to solve; if she succeeds, the Avatar 
grants more understanding of magick’s gifts; if not, that mage 
stays stuck where she’d been until she’s ready to pass the test. 


Seekings usually take place in a deeply symbolic realm 
within the mage’s imagination. Does the Avatar spirit the mage’s 
consciousness off toa distant otherworld, or is the entire experience 
all “in the head” of an entranced mage? No one’s really sure. Like 
so many things along our Path, there are no facts, just suppositions. 


Mages don’t usually disappear from sight during a Seeking; 
their friends find them asleep or meditating, yet unable to 
wake up until the Seeking ends. Occasionally, though, mages 
do disappear during a Seeking... and some never return. Others 
die from mysterious causes or come back insane. The Marauders 
begin this way, Awakening or Seeking in places that drive them 
mad even by magickal standards. Most often, though, a mage 
returns from a Seeking with either a deeper understanding of 
potential or a disappointed look and a promise to do better 
next time. In the Awakened world, a Seeking is the test you 
must pass if you want to get ahead... and until you do, you won’t. 


Arete 


The primary measure of magickal Willand understanding is 
often called Arete. A Greek word translating roughly as a spiritual 
form of courageous excellence, Arete - correctly pronounced as 
ahreh-TAY, usually said as AIR-eh-tay, but never called Arr-REET 
by a knowledgeable mage! - reflects the mixture of knowledge, 
will, imagination, and integrity that true magick demands. 


Mage: The Ascension 20" Anniversary Edition 


Without Arete, a mage cannot work freely with such powers; 
without increasing it, he remains stuck. By whatever name it is 
known (and again, different mages call this quality by different 
names), Arete is the essence of a mage. 


The tests that an Avatar poses to a mage within a Seeking 
provide that mage’s keys to Arete. Before he can attain higher 
levels of excellence, the mage must prove himself to be worthy 
of them. Unlocking doors of ignorance, pride, fear, and 
stagnation, a true willworker faces those challenges and returns 
to his world... assuming he returns at all... having learned some 
vital new lesson about the secrets of his Arts and the secrets 
in his soul. If he doesn’t learn them, or turns away from the 
test, then his Arts are limited. He has power but not control. 


Who's in Charge Here? 


Looking your Avatar in the face, it's easy to see why so many 
people wonder who's commanding whom. That spirit, after 
all, seems like a cross between a teacher, a drill sergeant, and 
your worst nightmare, especially when you're in the middle of 
a Seeking. To certain mages, notably the Technocratic ones, the 
whole "avatar" thing is self-delusion... or worse, manipulation by 
outside forces too horrible to contemplate. Certain Awakened 
folks gravitate toward the Technocracy in order to escape their 
Avatars, submerging those weird spectres in routines of clean, 
efficient science. The Union knows how to wrestle control away 
from superstitious thoughts, and their apparent success in that 
Ascension War shows how effective they can be. But whichever 
side you choose or whatever form your Avatar attains, remember 
this: the Avatar serves you, not the other way around. 


Essence and the Metaphysic Trinity 

Each Avatar, it's been said, has an Essence: a sort of 
metaphysical personality. The nature of that personality is, as 
with most things, open to debate. Is it a reflection of the mage's 
subconscious self? The draw of ancestral spirits? A fragment of 
celestial or demonic force embedded in the mage's soul? A wild 
weaving wyrm conjured up from warring entities? Or is it simply 
the inclinations - spiritual or even genetic - within the mage 
herself? Awakened folk debate such questions endlessly. What's 
certain, though, is that Essence guides the shape and behavior of 
your Avatar. Its tendencies tend to become, or mirror, your own. 

The Council of Traditions recognizes four clear Essences, 
with a fifth one theorized but not yet accepted as official. 
Three of those four gravitate toward what Council mages 
call the Metaphysic Trinity, with the fourth between those 
extremes and the fifth supposedly encompassing them all. 


Also known as the Threefold Path, the Trinity epitomizes: 
Dynamism, the force of unbridled possibility; 
Stasis, the forms and patterns such possibility attains; and... 


Entropy, the inevitable pull of destruction that breaks down 
Stasis and cycles back to Dynamism again. 

Between them, there’s a quest for Balance, avoiding the 
extremes while remaining true to the cycle. 


And beyond them all, there's said to be Infinity, the One-That- 
Is-All. The Ein Soph. Unity. The Absolute. Sometimes even called 


Technocratic Terminology 


Despite the widespread belief that Technocracy personnel are soulless mirrorshades, members of the Union have similar 


experiences under different names: 


Enlightenment: Awakening — not a mystic experience, but the flowering of a full human potential that few humans 
actually achieve. Also a common Technocratic term for Arete, which is considered to be a reflection of that realized 


potential. 
Enlightened Procedures: Magick. 


The Masses: Sleepers. 


Genius: A common name for the Avatar as the Technocracy understands it. 


Eidolon: The Avatar Essence, usually understood in the same Dynamic, Static, Questing, and Primordial fashion. 


Mediation: A common term for the Seeking process, typically considered a subconscious reflection of real-world 
training and experience. 


the Void, this cosmic "dark matter" supposedly exists because theory 
insists that it should. To Nephandi and some other mages, this 
Void is the true nature of reality, an endless nothing onto which 
we impose the other forms before they dissipate into metaphysical 
dust. Not the most cheerful concept, but a potent one anyway. 


You could view the Ascension War in terms ofthis Trinity 
too, with Dynamism being the Marauders, Stasis reflecting 
the Technocracy, Entropy embodied by the Nephandi, and 
the Traditions and Disparates balancing them out. That's 
oversimplified, I think. You can find Avatars and tendencies 
of all those forces in any one of the groups. Still, it's one way 


to look at the Ascension War: as a struggle between cosmic 
forces, with mages the pawns who believe themselves kings. 


Poetry and the Art 


With regards to Avatar Essences, the Council's chosen four 
are: Dynamic, Pattern, Questing, and Primordial. The first reflects 
wild creative potential; thesecond, a tendency to make things firm; 
the third searches new horizons; and the fourth slides beneath 
the surface of the rest, mysterious and ultimately unknowable. 


In the old days, wizards compared these Essences to fire 
(Dynamism), fortresses (Pattern), winds (Questing), and the sea 


» ^ 


WA * 
K | 
ia 


ND 


The Empress 


^ ANI 


The Heirophant 
y 


(Primordial). Certain mystic texts refer to them as entities - the Fire 
Queen, the Earth-Worker, the Lord of Winds, and the Lady of the 
Depths - whose courtships and conflicts are mirrored by mages in 
our world. Some authorities view the Trinity as Fathers or Mothers, 
Sons or Maidens, and Spirits or Crones. The Technocrats call all 
of that nonsense, but even they craft words around these sublime 
subjects. That's inevitable, really. It’s easier to deal with cosmic forces 
when you put a face on them. 


We mages are a poetic lot. Metaphor and symbolism are our 
meat and drink, so to speak. We don’t all speak in high-flown 
imagery, of course, but for such cosmic matters, poetics seem 
appropriate. Language, like magick, takes sublime concepts and 
puts them into forms that help us communicate our thoughts. 
One cannot discuss magick without using metaphors. For many 
good reasons, magick’s often called “the Art.” 


The Will to Power 


There’s a huge step between the realm of the Fool and 
the realm of the Magician and his associated cards: the High 


Priestess, Empress, Emperor, and Hierophant. The first step 
represents wonder, peril, and potential; the following steps 
reflect control. This is where Awakening becomes the Path. 
Wide-eyed acceptance becomes a Will to Power. Standing with 
one hand toward the sky and the second toward the earth, The 
Magician - oh, let's call him what he is: The Mage - embodies 
focus, commitment, and a sense of Self. Where the Fool 
explores, the Mage and his companions decide. Such confidence 
grants them authority, grandeur, and responsibility. And that, 
of course, is where things get interesting. 


A common expression among mystics is Do what you 
will. People misunderstand this as a license for careless self- 
indulgence. It’s anything but that. What the expression means, 
in its several variations, is Manifest your Will into the world, 
with full awareness of what you do. In other words, know what 
you're doing before you do it, do it with commitment, and be 
prepared to deal with the consequences. Although life holds 
few guarantees, the mage who follows that advice can generally 
live longer, and make fewer messes, than one who does not. 


Awareness, Conflict, and Resolution 


The Fragile Path involves three steps: awareness, 
conflict, and resolution. Each mage follows 
some variation on these steps. Some wizards 
live for centuries, and others blow themselves to 
smithereens within a week or so of Awakening. 
Either way, the trajectory off that Fool's cliff 
leads in the following directions. 


Awareness 


Once you've Awakened, you've become 
aware. Your world's bigger, with more possibilities. Sensations 
become more vivid. The Avatar becomes a presence in your life. 
Things no longer seem random but appear to follow a greater 
design. Awareness shows you your place in that design... and 
shows you how to work with it. 


Instruction and Mentorship 

Baby birds still need to be taught how to fly. So do we. 
Instruction is essential for magical folks. Without it, we become 
hazards to ourselves and everyone in sight. This, I suspect, is where 
Marauders come from; their wild talents go haywire in the world. 
Still, even che Marauders reach out often for instruction. It might 
follow an insane design, but it makes sense, if only in their heads. 


Instruction can take many forms: an elder mage, a guiding 
spirit, book-research, a coven, a fellowship, or an indoctrination 
program. In the old days, budding mystics were sent off on 
apprenticeships, given to convents and cloisters, or initiated 
into secretsocieties. There, experienced mages and unAwakened 
mentors gave them training and expertise. These days, that still 
happens, especially in societies that acknowledge the existence 
of magick (if only in religious contexts) and follow the ancestral 
ways. That wizard school in the Harry Potter books? Such 


Ma$e: The Ascension 20^ Anniversary Edition 


places exist on the fringes of this world. When a mage achieves 
awareness, those instructors often come looking for him. 


Magickal instruction isn'talways obvious. The Technocracy, 
in fact, refuses to call what it does "magick." Instead, a 
Technocratic initiate gets invited or strong-armed into a 
“self-improvement program" that indoctrinates her in the 
Technocratic way. Other groups follow cultural lines, with 
vision quests and ordeals and holy orders and so forth. The 
form isn't important. The guidance and instruction is. 


Mentors become the Empresses, Emperors, and 
Hierophants of our world. Occasionally they're our Lovers 
too. Such elders take responsibility for the people in their 
care. In exchange for sharing their experience, they expect a 
certain amount of loyalty. Some mentors demand old-world 
apprenticeship oaths, and others just expect their props - and 
get pissed if such respect's not given. The next inevitable step 
on the Path, conflict, often begins with the mentorstudent 
relationship. Especially in the modern world, folks don't like 
being told what to do. If orders go against their grain, they rebel. 


Ideally, though, a mentorship teaches the new mage to 
use his powers well. A mentor passes on the tools, beliefs, and 
secrets of her trade, and though the student may eventually 
leave them behind, these mystic training wheels provide a focus 
for the mage’s innate potential. Through them, talent becomes 
skill and awareness becomes Art. 


Conflict 


Peace never lasts. We are creatures of conflict, and so 
conflicts are inevitable. Many will be emotional and intellectual. 
A few are philosophical. Quite often, they get physical too. 
That bright spark of awareness eventually becomes a flame... 
and then, as I said earlier, we burn. 


Rival Mages 

Sometimes that conflict starts immediately. A traumatic 
Awakening blasts the mage’s world wide open. This happens 
literally more often than you’d think; a newborn mage sets her 
parents on fire, blows up a school, or goes wild until someone 
brings her down. So-called authorities make excuses about 
poltergeists, abductions, or shooting sprees, but the Awakened 
know what's really going down. 


If a new or potential Awakening goes down that way, mage 
factionssend retrieval agents outto collectthe new recruit - usually 
for training, occasionally for disposal. These teams, if they cross 
paths with one another, often fight as well. Weird turf wars can 
erupt over a single mage, especially if that person seems unusually 
gifted. Disappearances, shootouts, gang wars, and ritual murders are 
facts of life in the Awakened world. As I said earlier, the Ascension 
War is a very real thing. Rival factions can - and will - capture, 
convert, or destroy a new-Awakened mage and everyone around 
her if that keeps another faction from getting to her first. 


Those conflicts don't end when a new mage joins a faction; 
typically, they become more intense. Beyond the obvious fighting 
between large factions - and, more dangerously, the less-than- 
obvious fighting - you've got rivalries within groups. Hermetic 
wizards spat with shamanic Dreamspeakers; Black Suits drag 
mad scientists in for questioning and correction; two covens of 
Verbena witches wage a witch-war over small differences of belief. 
Enlightened as we claim to be, we mages find lots to fight about. 


The Night-Folk 


The deadliest threats often come in the night. Vampires, 
werewolves, furious ghosts, and treacherous faeries present 
serious threats to our kind. Though their forms of *magic" 
are more limited than our own, such creatures tend to be 
bigger, stronger, and tougher than we are. A mage who gets 
in a werewolf's way comes out looking like day-old spaghetti. 
And one who dances with vampires can lose everything that 
makes him magickal. 


Night-Folk can be uncannily seductive too. Their gifts are 
like aphrodisiacs for us. We cherish mysteries and gravitate 
toward power, so it's natural that we'd seek out Lovers and 
Devils in their ranks. And sure, such alliances are possible. 
Magesand Night-Folk work together all the time. Justremember 
to bring Strength and Temperance when dealing with their 
kind. A vampire's kiss, for a mage, can bring about a fate far 
worse than Death. 


Mortal Agencies 


Once uponatime, mages did what they damn well pleased. 
If a wizard wanted to be a king, he summoned a few demons 
and overthrew the local lords. If a witch got pissed, there was 
hell to pay. Certain factions would like to bring those days back 
again, but there's a catch: even if rival mages don't sweep in 
and take down a potential wizard-king, the mortal authorities 
will do it for them. In the old days, angry kings, priests, and 


Chapter One: The Mage's Path 47 


churches brought on what we call the Burning Times - an age 
of persecution that drove our monsters underground. Now, in 
an era filled with cell phone cameras, SWAT teams, and tanks, 
would-be gods don't stand a chance. 


The so-called Sleepers are far from helpless. Mortal 
governments have secret agencies that deal with paranormal 
threats. Cops, priests, special agents, journalists, counselors, 
witch-hunters, and the occasional assassin get dispatched when 
a mage acts too free and obvious with her Arts. For this reason, 
among others, we are careful with what we do. Magick can be 
great and terrible, yes; compared, though, to forces of religion 
or the law, even the most powerful wizards are like roaches in 


a blender. 


Reality Inertia, Consensus, and Humanity 


The mortal world’s most potent weapon against our kind, 
though, and perhaps the greatest challenge to any mage, involves 
the weight and inertia of Reality itself. Because magick, even the 
most potent kind of it, must either flow with that tide or else 
push back against it... often with painful results for the mage. 


Imagine yourself as a swimmer at the beach. If you go with 
the flow, you get further - with less splashing and fatigue - than 
you do if you throw yourself against the waves. Think of Reality 
as that ocean and you'll understand what I mean by reality 
inertia. That's the pushback we get when we go against the flow. 


48 Ma$e: The Ascension 20^ Anniversary Edition 


Who makes that ocean? That debate's been going for ages. 
As best as we can figure, though, the mass of our Earth's reality 
comes from those supposed Sleepers and the combined force 
of their belief. In the old days, things were more fluid because 
you didn't have billions of people believing the same thing; the 
more expansive and connected humanity has become, however, 
the stronger the weight of mass belief has grown. 


Certain mages call this weight consensual reality, or the Consensus. 
It’s the ocean we have to swim through. Now, sometimes you have 
to plow through those waves and splash around to get things done. 
The more you splash around, though, the more tired you get. 
Meanwhile, folks notice that you've stirred things up and - like 
bathers who've gotten splashed by some rude stranger - they tend 
to get hacked off at whoever’s done that splashing. Later on, you'll 
see how unfortunate their displeasure can be for you. For now, 
let’s just say that reality inertia is not your friend unless you get the 
Consensus on your side. On many levels, that’s what the Ascension 
War's all about: guiding the tide so it's easier to go with that flow. 


Alienation and Sanctuaries 

As mages reach further into magick’s realm, it’s harder to 
retain a sense of humanity. We're still people, as I said before, but 
distance creeps in between the Sleepers’ illusions and the things 
we understand. This tends to strain our relationships with co- 
workers, lovers, family, and friends. When you can read another 
person’s mind or control the fall of supposedly random cards, 
after all, a certain impatience with the rest of the world sets in. 


Moving through the Sleepers’ world can be like trying to 
fly while your neighbors clip your wings. Magick doesn’t work 
right when people can’t accept its possibilities. A suffocating 
weight of disbelief handicaps our greatest gifts. And so mages 
often get pissed off at mortal limitations and the Sleepers who 
seem to hold us down. 


For obvious reasons, this cramps our relationships with 
people who haven't Awakened. It’s hard to love - even tolerate 
- people who cannot and will not understand your reality. The 
added strain of secrecy and fear erodes those bonds as well. 
As a result, most mages hit a Hermit stage: a point when they 
need to get away from the life they once knew and spend time 
alone or with our own kind. 


This stage might be temporary, or it could last the rest of a very 
long life. Monasteries, laboratories, camps, castles, getaways, secret 
islands, hidden mountaintops, even otherworldly places carved out 
of reality itself - the legendary Horizon Realms - all provide sanctuary 
for mages who need time and space to figure their shit out. And 
although it’s easy in such places to become too alienated and forget 
who and what you are (a common problem, especially for very old 
Awakened folk), almost every mage needs to spend a little time 
away from the world she once knew, if only for self-reflection’s sake. 


Like the Tarot Hermit, a sel£reflective mage uses solitude to 
deepen herunderstandingand her Arts. Meditation, experiments, 
research, and Seekings help her learn things that would be difficult, 
if not impossible, to explore in the Sleepers’ world. Ideally, 
though, that Hermit still keeps watch over the sleeping village 
down below. To many of us, Awakening is a sacred charge - a 


dutywe owe to Creation 
as a whole. The light of 
our awareness helps us 
through darkness most 
folks cannot penetrate. 


Stagnation 


It’s easy to get hung 
up in such conflicts, 
especiallywhen avoiding 
them. And so, we 
become like the Hanged 
Man, suspended in 
place while things “go 
to our heads.” Mages 
become stagnant with a 
lust for power, stagnant 
in solitude, stagnant 
in self-indulgence or 
hatred or despair. We 
get so wrapped up in our 
conflicts or avoidance 
that we stop growing. It 
happens more often than 
you might think. 


There are places out 
beyond the human world 
where mages disappear up 
their own asses. Intrigue 
and backstabbing are 
the order of the day. Grudges fester for decades or centuries, 
occasionally exploding into self-destructive duels. Fabled 
Doissetep shows what can happen when mages of any kind 
become so set in their ways that stagnation becomes entropy 
and entropy gives way to oblivion. 


Solitary mages stagnate too. Wrapped up in their own pet 
concerns or trapped by fear, greed, or insanity, they wind up 
tangled in stagnation. Some go crazy (again, like the Marauders), 
and others just stay stuck. Outwardly powerful, they’re like 
Scrooge before the ghosts showed up, decaying grandly in 
hopeless waste. 


But the Hanged Man also represents transition. He can 
get unstuck by breaking his old patterns. Mages can get out 
of a rut by being unconventional - changing professions, 
factions, identities, even sexes. A dusty old wizard can become 
a teenage girl; an Ecstatic nymphomaniac can become a 
nun. Radical conversations shake the Hanged Man loose. 
There’s even a practice called antinomian praxis wherein a 
mage breaks taboos just to learn what’s on the other side 
of them. That's a dangerous but accepted solution - one 
that usually beats decay. 


Resolution 


So after we face all the obstacles in our Path, where does 
it lead from there? To resolution, the eventual end of the road. 
Whatever form it takes, we all reach that eventually. Like any 


The Hanged Man 


mythic hero, a mage can expect a stirring climax to her tale. 
From apprentices to archmagi, none of us are immune. 


Corruption 


When you meet the Devil in the woods - and you will, 
because he's out there - beware of his corruption. Now, I’m not 
talking about the Christian Devil, although plenty of mages 
believe in him. I'm referring to the Tarot Devil that symbolizes 
pride, stagnation, temptation, and delusion. Considering our 
unusual powers and abilities and the strange company we keep, 
we mages meet lots of Devils, literal and otherwise. Many mages 
wind up corrupted by their own power, outside influence, or both. 


The Nephandi choose to become Devils, embodying that icon's 
seductive majesty. And they re so skillful in the role that there's even 
a name, barabbi, which refers to mages from other factions who get 
converted to the Nephandic Path. They're not the only corrupters 
outthere, though. Vampiresand demonsand malignantspirits excel 
at turning mages into pawns. Smooth-talking enemies can win us 
to their point of view. Even Sleepers can corrupt Awakened Ones 
by tempting us with money, sex, political power, religious ecstasy, or 
whatever other weakness a mage displays. And, of course, a faction 
or cabal can corrupt its members or be corrupted from the inside 
out. Thatsortofthing's more common than anyone wants to admit. 


But the greatest form of corruption on our Path is the Devil we 
find inside. Hubrisand magick makean awful combination. Drunkon 
ourown power, we often become monsters. Jodi Blake, the Matriarch, 


Chapter One: The Mage's Path 49 


Perhaps the most powerful collection of wizards in all Creation, Doissetep occupies a vast, tempestuous Horizon Realm 


where internal and external storms never end. Dozens of Tradition mages and hundreds, maybe thousands, of their 
companions, maintain a perpetual game of scheme and counter-scheme in that place. 


In the "official" Mage metaplot, the Hermetic stronghold Doissetep winds up destroying itself on November 10, 1997. A 
so-called "Ascension Warrior" knocks the whole field of mystic dominos over. Infiltrating Doissetep, this Great Betrayer — 
supposedly the reincarnation of the Traditions’ greatest failure — tips the balance of power inside the stronghold. Within 
minutes, the entire place implodes from an escalating internal war. Hermetic Archmaster Porthos Fitz-Empress sacrifices 
both his power and his life to contain the damage. Even then; the repercussions echo through various worlds, killing and 
injuring hundreds of people who've never even heard of mages. 


In the aftermath, a “war in the ruins” erupts as various parties fight to claim Doissetep’s treasures. This war spirals into 
greater levels of devastation until the Avatar Storm finally cuts that conflict and its combatants off from the earthly realm. 


Doissetep’s literal and symbolic annihilation is a pivotal eventin Mage history. Even so, it’s an option you could approach 
from one of three different ways: 


Doissetep i story: It ha 


Doissetep survived: Despite extensive damage, the stronghold survived. Perhaps it has been rebuilt in a newer, 
more egalitarian form; or maybe it’s still a retreat for crazy wizards who'd prefer to plot in the Otherworlds than face 
reality back home. If the Avatar Storm struck, then Doissetep may have become an Umbral ghost-realm, haunted by 
the disembodied spirits of its many residents. 


For details about Doissetep and its destruction, see The Book of Chantries, Mage 2"? Edition, the Ascension Warrior 
novel trilogy, The Book of Mirrors, and Tales of Magick: Dark Adventures. 


The most infamous criminal in Tradition history, the Great Betrayer was an alchemist who destroyed the First Cabal. 
Heylel Teomim - a hermaphrodite who had combined two souls into a single body — was supposedly destroyed by 
Gilgul. Over 500 years later, Heylel supposedly returns as the so-called Ascension Warrior. Claiming to be the Great 
Betrayer reborn, the Warrior destroys Doissetep, shatters other realms, and leads a war against the Council of Nine 
before apparently being killed a second time. 


Is the Ascension Warrior really Heylel? No one's sure. There are reasons to believe it and reasons not to. The event 
cripples the Traditions, though, leaving the field wide open for an apparent Technocratic victory. Whatever the truth might 
turn out to be, the Ascension Warrior's claim leaves the permanence of Gilgul in doubt. 


Who was this mysterious figure in your chronicle? 
He made a heroic m it that person's true nature may ha 


vh 1 they mial Yot have re 


* He wasn't what they said he was: Although some lunatic claiming to be the Great Betrayer ran loose a few 
years back, Heylel’s impression upon the world was significantly less than the carnage inflicted in the metaplot. 


arrior: inat stuff never napr ad, Or else If 


For details about the Great Betrayer, see The Fragile Path, Mage: The Sorcerers Crusade, and the Ascension 
Warrior novels. 


the death-mage Voormas... their names echo through our ranks in cleverness - to sidestep this fate. By breaking our old patterns 
infamy because they consider themselves the ultimate authorities of and turning pride inside out, we can instead become The Star: 
life and death. And that, my friend, is a corruption we all face. an inspired and rejuvenated soul. 


Every mage has a Devil in the mirror. The fact that we can 3 

dowhatwe do makes us vulnerable to his seductions. Thankfully, Imprisonment 
we can choose another side of this icon - the Devil's creative You might think that no prison could hold someone with 
our powers... and you'd be wrong. Imprisonment of one kind 


Ma$e: The Ascension 20^ Anniversary Edi 


Cm — 


or another is a terribly common fate - the Tower in our Tarot 
spread. I’m notreferring to the mortal sorts of jail, although they 
can be surprisingly effective too. I mean mystic imprisonment, 
mental snares, and the awful prison of the Self. 


Mages and other entities have ways of dealing with their 
foes. Some craft cages out of impossible materials, and others can 
seal you in a bubble and send you into space. Spirit beings have 
prisons of their own: hells, soul cages, pools from which no one 
can escape. The Paradox spirits - "reality cops" with a nasty sense of 
justice - can imprison us within the effects of our own spells. The 
worst prisons, though, are the ones we make within ourselves... 


Quiet 

Occasionally, we just snap. And when a mage snaps, she 
enters Quiet: a state of metaphysical insanity. Think of it as 
reality overload. A mage's Will flips inside out and traps the 
mage inside. At the lower levels, this Quiet spawns strange 
delusions, the hobgoblins of magickal minds. Certain types of 
Quiet can produce fearsome mania, a potent sense of denial, 
or an obsessive affinity with death. A serious Quiet can even 
trap a wizard in a self-made prison. While her body's catatonic, 
her consciousness goes elsewhere. 


Where does her consciousness go? No one's quite sure. 


Like many aspects of the magickal Path, there's no firm 
definition for a Quiet's destination. Some folks think of Quiet 
as a monumental Seeking, but others see it as an Avatar's 
punishment. It could simply be like a massive mystic acid trip, 
where nothing's actually real and yet it all seems more real than 
reality itself. It's a puzzle. We do know this much, though: some 
mages come back from Quiets quickly, others take their time 
getting back, and some never come back at all. 


In Tarot terms, think of Quiet as The Moon: a state of 
delusion and instability. A mage finds herself swamped by 
conflicting emotions and perceptions, none of which seem to fit 
coherently together. That mage wanders through a mental hall 
of mirrors, hoping to find one that sends her home. Until she 
works through the confusion, she's suspended from her Path. 


It's been said that the Marauders exist in states of walking 
Quiet, little bubbles of portable madness. Like projective 
schizophrenics, they share that madness with everyone nearby. 
Every so often, they become so crazy that Reality opens up and 
swallows them whole. Where they go from there is anybody's 
guess, and I hope to never find out. 


Slavery 

At the foot of the Devil's throne, chains bind captives to 
his presence. And that's slavery, where masters of reality become 
servants instead. Pacts, bargains, obligations, and the vampiric 
Blood Bond can turn us into slaves. That's a disgrace to the 
mystic Path, but it's a sadly common fate. 


Faust - the patron saint of bad ideas - is a perfect symbol 
for this sort of trap. He literally made deals with a devil but 
didn't bother looking at the fine print. You'd be surprised how 
many mages do this sort of thing. Hermetics forging infernal 
pacts, Ecstatics scoring a massive fix, Technocrats convincing 


themselves that the ends justify the means... their name is 
Legion, and their fate is chains. 


Enslaved mages might not ever recognize those chains. They 
trundle around thinking that they’re kings of the world while 
their masters pull the puppet strings. Folks become enslaved to 
ideologies too; the Technocracy provides the obvious example, 
but some Tradition mages are just as bad. We like to think that 
just because we can, we should - and that’s a trap. When you 
blow up half the neighborhood for what you believe to be a 
good cause, you're a slave to that cause even when you can't 
see the chains. 


Doissetep became a house of slaves. The Technocracy 
did too. Buddhism claims that we're all slaves - servants of 
delusions, sensations, and greed. Power, then, is the ultimate 
slavery. When you have it, freedom looks like loss. 


Death 


The obvious termination, death waits for every mage. 
You can cheat it for centuries - many mages have. Eventually, 
though, we are mortal. Whether we meet the Reaper in a storm 
of bullets or just pass away from old age in a comfy bed, he 
comes for all of us in time. 


In Tarot, Death isn't just an ending. It's a transition from 
onestate to another. Stuck in old patterns, a mage mightactually 
be freed by symbolic or even literal death. With magick, after all, 


Chapter One: The Mage's Path 


CH 


flesh and spirit are our toys. We can stretch them out, cut them 
short, change them into some new form. Mages who specialize 
in the Life Sphere know how flexible life and death can be. 


And then there's reincarnation - a fact of life in our world. 
Despite the presence of heavens and hells, there's a cycle 
that cannot be denied. Certain mages, like the Akashics and 
Chakravanti, step on and off of that cycle, charting their lives 
in incarnations, not in years. As Verbena witches know, life, 
death, and rebirth are part of every mage's world. And so, 
inevitable as it is, death's not always the end of the Path. For 
some mages, it's a large yet temporary change. 


Gilgul 

Everyso often, though, that cycle stops. Gilgul, the dreaded 
destruction of one’s soul, ends the magick permanently. 
Supposedly the shredding of an Avatar, “Gilgul” means 
metamorphosis... in this case, the transformation of a mage into 
a Sleeper again. 


Although both the Traditions and Technocracy use Gilgul 
as punishment, they’re not the only ones who can end the 
Path this way. A vampire’s Embrace, for example, is a form of 
Gilgul: the mage becomes a vampire - powerful in his way, but 
no longer a true mage. Some spirits, it's been said, can strip 
away Awakening too. Severe Quiets have been known to leave 
mages powerless, and one theory - thankfully unproven - states 
that ultimate victory in the Ascension War will put every rival 
mage to Sleep forever. 

Gilgul isn't 
physical death... but 
it might as well be. 
Once your magick has 
been stripped away, 
life typically seems 
worthless. Tradition 
justice usually follows 
Gilgul with physical 
execution too, although 
the Technocracy and 
Nephandi have been 
known to enslave ex- 
mages afterward. A form 
of excommunication, 
Gilgul removes a 
willworker's ability to 
use her mystic Will. But 
is it truly permanent? 
It supposedly is, but 
there may be one or two 
exceptions... 


Prosperity 

But not all endings 
are terrible. Some Paths 
climax in prosperity. 
Certain mages achieve 
great wealth and power 


52 Ma$e: The Ascension 20^ Anniversary Edition 


without becoming monsters. Reaching beyond The Moon, 
they find The Sun and use their Arts to become beacons in a 
world of darkness. 


The Tarot Sun is clarity, success, and liberation, a joyful ride 
through the garden of plenty. Its light brings joy and happiness. 
Mages who value wealth can grow quite rich; those who cherish 
influence might remake their corners of the world. Prosperity 
can be selfish, but ideally a prosperous person shares her good 
fortune with the community at large. There are mages who end 
famines, mages who stop wars, mages whose magicks bring new 
technologies or faiths to their people. In the old days, it was 
said, these saints spread God’s benevolence across the world. 


Why should today be any different? 


To give credit to the Technocrats, prosperity has been 
that faction’s greatest gift. They truly have helped humanity 
at large. Electricity, machines, medicines, and even - some 
claim - civil rights have supposedly come from Technocratic 
hands. And so, if other mages want to win hearts and minds 
to their cause, those other factions must offer prosperity in 
return. Expecting folks to be servants in your magick castle is 
not a recipe for success. If you want to be a god of your world, 
you might as well be the best kind of god you can be. 


Sacrifice 

The finest mages sacrifice themselves for the greater good. Like 
Oak Kings and Anointed Ones, they step down from their mystic 
thrones in order to fulfill a pressing need. Archmaster Porthos, one 


of the most powerful mages who ever lived, sacrificed his life and 
magick in order to contain the shock of Doissetep's destruction. 
Other mages have harrowed hells, suffered torture, and literally 
given blood to leave the world better than it had been before. 


Even without death, sacrifice is a traditional mystic 
technique. The Verbena may be the most notorious examples, 
but other groups use blood sacrifice as well. What is the Eucharist, 
after all, but a symbolic shared sacrifice? Just as Odin gouged out 
his eye and hung upon the World Tree, certain mages give up 
precious things, even their lives, in order to achieve a greater end. 


Transformation 


Beyond The Sun, we find Judgment. Also called Aeon, 
this card reflects transformation. Like a greater Death, such 
transformations signal rebirth. In some ways, then, this step 
of the Path resembles a mage’s Awakening. Transformation 
heralds a dramatic shift. From that point on, the mage is no 
longer the person she’d been before. 


In Smith’s Tarot, Judgment sounds a trumpet to call up 
naked souls. A transformed mage, in the same vein, hears the 
call of her spirit. For Awakened Ones with faith, like the Celestial 
Choristers, this stage signifies reunion with the One from whom 
all things flow. Other mages, like Technocratic devotees, regard 
transformation as a merging process in which flawed individuals 
join a perfect whole. You could consider this a bodhisattva state, 
hanging on the cusp of Nirvana yet staying behind to shepherd 
other souls to bliss, or a return to the elements or animals whose 
perfection we forget in our quest to become human. It’s all the 
same thing, really, though neither side would admit as much. 
Regardless of the terminology, this culmination to a mage’s Path 
brings her into some new state. Whether angel, cyborg, animal, 
or saint, that mage has been reborn. 


Transcendence 

Perhaps the highest goal of any mage, transcendence brings 
us beyond all earthly cares or limits. Dancing with The World, 
we hover outside of life and death. This, it’s been said, is the 
realm of the Oracles: mystic figures who had once supposedly 
been mages but nowunderstand the All. Or perhaps it's heaven, 
Nirvana, or a return to the cosmic Void. It might be none or 
all of them at once. If you have to try to understand it, you 
haven’t reached it yet. 


Transcendence could be seen as personal Ascension, too. 
Reaching this stage, the mage lets go of everything that binds 
him to our mortal plane. Power and the need for it are gone; 
pride dissipates like mist in the sun. The paradox of trying 
to be both human and divine reveals itself to be a Zen koan, 
clapping with no hands at all. By being what it is, this stage 
transcends definition. It simply IS. That's all. 


The Capital “T” Truth 


And so here's a Truth for all of us. One with a great big 
capital “T”: 

Truth is an illusion. 

"Reality" belongs in quotes. 


All of us, mage and mortal, create the world we share. 
Whether we want it to or not, for better and for worse, it reflects 
the things we bring to it. 


Some of us wield more power over it than others, but 
none of us are helpless. 


Your will reshapes reality threefold. What you Will, will be. 

Heaven and hell are both in your hands. And so if you 
want a better world, then go out there and make it happen. 

Not with toys or wars or fireballs down Main Street, but 
with an open heart, a ready mind, and the courage to look 


beyond yourself even as you watch your own reflection and 
wonder where your next move waits. 


Chapter One: The Mage's Path 53 


IA 7 


ha da. mea 


Chapter Two: 


Magick 
The Art of Reality 


The laws of Magick are the laws of Nature. 
— Aleister Crowley, Magick in Theory and Practice 


The Fool 


Associations: Impulse; travel; the hereand-now; childlike enthusiasm; 
recklessness; whimsy; freedom from inhibition; being open to experience... 


“BURN IT DOWN!” 


The cry echoes from the stage where a tricky pixie howls her defiance at the 
crowd. That crowd responds, picking up her cry and amplifying it in voices louder 
than the amps. Whirling figures spin brightly colored circles of limbs and clothing, 
some trailing hoops or balls of fire in hypnotic mathematical designs. 

The night cracks with sacred passions. 

Lee Ann Milner feels the cry rise from deep inside her chest. As the words leave 
her lips, she recalls the breaths that birthed them and sees the next steps where her feet 
will fall. Time blurs for aliquid instant, held and blended into pastpresentfuturenow. 

The pixie and her band caper like mad things. Their devotions whip the crowd 
to multicolored froth. Sweat gleams raw in electronic glare. Beyond the seething pit 
of limbs, a galaxy of colors illuminates the night. Children run free of all constraint; 
elders fold close to one another, pages in a book written by spirits and skin. “BURN 
IT DOWN,” they cry as one - calling not for violence but transcendence. 

Burn the past. Burn the fear. Burn the boundaries of potential. 

Burn the cold fire of freedom. 

Burn the stasis down. 

Lee Ann's bones quiver with the press of union. Through closed eyes, she 
sees the crowd. We are Shangri-La, they cry, each wedded to a single whole. No 
divisions here — no blocks, no predation. 


In a lingering instant, the sacred space unfolds. 


And long after it will end, its memory shapes the fires of ever-burning bones. JC — 
Chapter Two: Magick 7 The Art of Reality 55 


f 


DW 7 ft 


Your Art and Science 


According to the esteemed Damiana Silver- 
witch, “Magick is the fine art of getting off 
your ass and doing something.” That blunt 
poetry reveals a simple truth: magick is a verb. 
It’s active, a means of accomplishing an end. 
For all the high-flown metaphysical gibberish 
attached to its concepts, the core of magick can 
be boiled down to one word: action. 


There’s another word you could attach to 
magick, an apparent heresy that’s no less 
true: technology. See, the word technology means, in one sense, 
“skillful knowledge of the Art.” And although logos can also be 
translated as “word” and “speech,” that Greek root word carries 
a connotation of deep spiritual connection and revelation - a 
sense that “I and the Art and the Knowledge are One.” 


As Crowley said, magick is an art and a science. It expresses 
inner truth through refined understanding. And so, when you 
want to wrap your head around the elusive concepts involved 
with magick, just keep this in mind: Magick is the artful science 
of doing things. 

What sorts of things? And how can you do them? Let’s 
take a look at that... 


The Basics 


Can everyone do magick? In one sense, yes. Every conscious 
person - and by “people” I don’t mean only human beings - is an 
agent of intentional change. To rephrase Descartes, “You think, 
therefore you do.” By deciding for yourself what you want and 
then deciding how you'll get it, you commit actions that move 
your world forward. When you make a choice, you alter your 
world. So in that sense, every thinking entity performs magick. 


But not like we do. 


Miracles at Hand 

As I said earlier, mages are agents of change. Our decisions 
reshape reality in a large scale. And because we have Awakened 
to that possibility, our knowledge goes deeper and our changes 
get bigger than the things unAwakened people can do. 


Butthere'sacatch: ourchoices have bigger consequences too. 


Once we learn what we can do and refine enough 
Enlightened Will to do it, we can weave miracles. Awakened 
mages call down lightning, look through time, manipulate 
the elements. At the higher levels of our achievement, we can 
transmute objects, project our consciousness, be in several 
places at once, or sidestep gulfs of time and distance. Yes, we 
can even create life. In that sense, then, we become like gods. 


And if you're familiar with mythology, you realize just how 
much trouble gods can cause. 


56 Ma$e: The Ascension 20^ Anniversary Edition 


No Free Rides 


Nothing happens in a vacuum. The things you do come 
back to you. When you Will a major change, you change other 
things beyond your control. A large part of magick, then, involves 
the wisdom of knowing what to change, how to change it, when 
not to change it, and how to prepare for the consequences when 
you do. Because there are always consequences. There are no 
free rides on the magick train. 


Those consequences can be dark miracles too. We can go 
insane, disappear, alter the world around us with our presence. 
We might attract the attention of uncanny entities, piss off the 
locals, or even explode. The bigger our changes, the bigger the 
risks. When you gamble big, you can lose big. A mage who wants 
to survive her nascent godhood learns how to cast her magick 
in ways that risk the smallest backlash for the biggest gains. 


When you learn to use magick, you dip into the deeper 
levels of your self and your surroundings. You learn how to 
- and how not to - make choices. You learn how to change 
reality to suit your needs. And you learn that, in doing so, you 
can wrap yourself in the paradox of standing in two realities 
at the same time... and one of them, eventually, has to give. 


The Paradox Effect 


Think of magick as Thunderdome: two realities enter, one 
reality leaves. Ideally, the one that triumphs is the one you create. 


If it’s not, then you have a problem. 


We tend to call this problem the Paradox Effect, or simply 
Paradox... yes, with capitalized letters to show howbigand important 
an idea it is. Because this kind of Paradox can kick your ass. There 
area million metaphysical explanations for what it is, why it works, 
and what we can do to get around it, but the simplest explanation 
is this: Paradox is what happens when two visions of reality exist in the 
same place at the same time until one of them gives up. 


And if your reality gives up, you’re in for a world of hurt. 


The Faces of Paradox 


This is where a lot of those consequences I just mentioned 
rear their ugly little heads. For whatever reason - and I tell 
you this truly, mages come up with lots of reasons for such 
things! - Paradox puts a nasty face on Reality’s displeasure. 
Sometimes that face is literal, the so-called Paradox Spirits 
who come along like cops to cart offenders off to reality jail. 
It occasionally wears the face you give it, like the hobgoblins of 
not-so-little minds, which turn your greatest or most hidden 
fears into spiritual manifestations that punish you. It can lash 
metaphysical whip-burns into your skin, wrap your perceptions 
into madness or sel£recursive loops called Quiet, or simply 
blow you up and pop you like some selfimportant balloon. 


Static Magic, Dynamic Magick, and Technomagick 


Plenty of beings, in the World of Darkness, can do magical things. And in game terms, the primary difference between 
the mystical powers of werewolves, vampires, hedge magicians, and other entities, and the reality-warping powers of 
a mage, is the difference between static magic and dynamic magick. Although the difference between them isn’t often 
obvious to the characters themselves, there’s a significant difference between them in terms of game-based effects. 


* Static magic conforms to rigid constraints. The Obfuscate Discipline, for example, has a range of effects that hide 
or disguise the vampire; all of them, however, have specific things they can do within a small variety of level-based 
powers. The same'strue for Garou Gifts, changeling cantrips, and so on. A variety of magic-using humans can use such 
powers too: hunters, psychics, hedge magicians, etc. In all cases, though, their powers operate within tight parameters 
of what is and is not possible with them. As magical as they are, their effects — both within the story world and within 
the game's rules — are static. Whether it’s because Kindred and Garou have awakened their spirits to a predetermined 
path, because centuries of folklore have integrated their powers into reality, or maybe elements of both explanations, 
the effects and limitations remain constant and Paradox-free. 


Dynamic magick is open-ended. Although it usually involves tools and rituals, the effects — or, more properly, 
capital-E Effects — of such magick are incredibly flexible. In various editions of Mage, the "k" referring to such magick 
is either used or discarded; either way, the game systems involved are the same. The character has a wide range of 
options based on the degree of his knowledge and Awakened Will; that way, the player gets to define how her mage 
employs the Arts, rather than be limited to a bunch of narrowly defined spells. The price of those options is Paradox. 
When you rework the essence of reality, you risk getting smacked for your presumption. 


Technomagick (without or without the "k") refers to dynamic magick that requires technological instruments and 
procedures. Cybernetic gear, energy rifles, high-speed calculations, and other science- or pseudoscience-based 
activities and gear focus the intentions of a technomancer, so that mage almost inevitably relies upon her gear in 
order to get things done. Even so, the Effects of her magick remain dynamic. She may need her computer in order to 
get things done, but with it she still has an Awakened mage's range of possibilities. 


Although certain people refer to the Technocracy or other technomancers as "static mages,” there's really no such thing 
in game terms. All mages, as noted earlier, work with dynamic ae even when they don’t define their powers that 


way. In the setting, your characters might never understand the difference between a hedge wizard's spells and the 


powers of an Awakened mage. Your players, however, will. 


In some respects, the Night-Folk have certain advantages when using their powers against a mage; that mage, however, 
has a vast array of potential powers, as opposed to a few limited ones. Although the vampire might be able to dominate 
a person's mind without risking Paradox, the mage = though she risks a backlash — can use the Mind Sphere in ways 


no vampire could ever dream of. 


As a dude named Zerox once said, Paradox is Jiminy Cricket 
with a chainsaw. The more material you give it to work with, 
the larger and scarier its saw. 


Resonance, Karma, and Synergy 

On a subtle but more pervasive level, the echoes of your 
magick can manifest as Resonance. If you think of an act of 
magick as a drumstick hitting a cymbal, then Resonance is 
that fading vibration you still hear after the initial crash dies 
down. Resonance follows a mage in the wake of all she does, 
echoing what she does with her magick... and often echoing 
the intentions and emotions behind that magick, too. 


In yet another level of paradox (small “p” this time), the 
Resonance effects often create their own strange sense of reality 
disruption. A fire-witch, for example, might have uncomfortably 
warm skin, a faint scent of smoke, and a tendency - in 
extreme cases - to accidentally set small fires just by touching 
something. Now, Resonance is often considered to be a minor 
manifestation of the Paradox Effect... and yet, its own effects 
can be noticeably weird in and of themselves. It seems odd 
that a ripple in Reality could be more obvious than the acts of 


magick that cause that ripple in the first place. But there you 
are. It happens. Thankfully, Resonance manifestations do not 
appear to invoke even more Paradox energies in the process of 
being strange. They can, however, make things difficult when 
a mage wants to stay on the down-low and remain hidden, but 
her Resonance echoes stir shit up all around her. 


Some folks consider Resonance to be karma, but that’s 
based on a misunderstanding of what karma means. In Hindu 
and Buddhist metaphysics, Karma is the force and momentum 
of accumulated lifetimes, in which past actions shape present 
and future circumstances. Although the principles of Karma 
and Resonance are related, Karma depends upon the idea of 
reincarnation, whereas Resonance is based in what you do in 
this lifetime. Even so, lots of mages still invoke the “Karma’s a 
real bitch” argument when they talk about Resonance. 


There might be another sort of Resonance-effect, one 
that’s sometimes called Synergy. With Synergy, the echo comes 
off of an external source - a haunted house, for example - and 
bounces off the mage, becoming part of her metaphysical 
vibrations. Some folks consider Resonance and Synergy to 
be the same thing, but others consider them to be different 


Chapter Two: Magick - The Art of Reality 57 


as o 


Whats Synergy? 


Synergy and Resonance are two sides of the same coin. 
Various Mage books define Resonance in different 
ways — sometimes as the echo of a mage's deeds, 


occasionally as a mage's connection to the forces of 
the universe. To reconcile those different definitions, 
Mage 20 introducesthe optional concept of Synergy. 
For more details, see the sections about Resonance in 
Chapters Six and Ten. 


energies or deny that one or both of those energies even exist. 
To simplify matters, just think of things this way: you change 
the world, and the world changes you as well. 


Pride 


Another small-p paradox comes from this magely truth: 
risk nothing, gain nothing. Unless you play chicken with Paradox, 
you cannot unlock your true potential. Being too safe gets you 
nothing in this game. À mage must dare to do as he or she Wills. 


And that daring demands pride. 


"Don't get too proud," folks will tell you. Pride has been called 
the sin that goeth before a fall. The Nephandi, who proudly wear their 


58 Ma$e: The Ascension 20^ Anniversary Edition 


tag "the Fallen," will tell you that pride is the ultimate source of all 
accomplishment. And here'sthe truth: they reright. Withoutacertain 
sense that you are better than the average person, a feeling that the 
things you do should matter, you cannot do magick and create change. 


You must be proud to be a mage. 


The Latin root of pride means "advantageous." By being 
Awakened, you have an advantage. In order to use it, you must 
be willing to use it. You have to see yourself as smart enough, 
brave enough, knowledgeable and wise enough, just plain good 
enough, to be worthy of the advantage life has given you... and 
of the advantages you make in life. Magick is the key to your 
universe; ifand when you believe you're worthy of it, your pride 
can open doors that most folks don't even see. 


As I mentioned earlier, what you Will, will be. 


Will 

That word, Will, is the heart of both pride and magick. It 
signifies intention, goodness, excellence. Capped off with a great 
big “W,” Will reflects your determination to make things happen 
in accord with your desires. And though Crowley was hardly the 
first or last word in magick, he was utterly right on that score. 


We mages are the most determined motherfuckers on the 
planet. We have to be, to do what we do. 


Now, lots of folks will argue with me. They'll say that magick 
comes from spirits, gods, or technology. It's a gift, some claim, and 
they're right - it is. But until and unless we're Willing to use it, 
that gift just sits there in the box, unwrapped, unused, unenjoyed. 


And what fun is being a mage unless you're willing to open 
the box and use what you've received? 


Hubris 


Did you ever have a toy that you ruined by playing too 
hard with it? Or have you ever taken some gift, skill, or talent 
you had and then made a complete mess of things because you 
weren't careful with how you used it? That's what happens, on 
a really big scale, when you get careless with Will, pride, and 
magick - you break things. 


AndlIcallthatcarelessness hubris: destructive, overwhelming 
pride. 

To the Greeks who coined the term, hubris is the shadow- 
side of excellence. It's that moment when Damn, I look good... 
becomes ...so I can do whatever the hell I want. If you've ever met 
one of those arrogant assholes (and face it, we all have) who 
uses his or her looks or charm or money or whatever in order 
to feel better at your expense, you understand why hubris 
sucks. In Greek lore, hubris can suck a person into a vortex of 
self-inflicted ruin, taking everything around him down as well. 


Mages do that shit all the time. Not just the Technocrats 
or Nephandi, but all of us. 


The Ascension War is what happens when a bunch of 
proud Will-workers get so full of themselves that they decide to 
remake the world in their own image. Cyborgs wind up stalking 
through the night. Mad scientists create monstrosities. Witches 
curse their enemies until flesh slides off of bones. Ecstatics try 
to make folks see the pretty colors that they see, and that trip 
drives those folks insane. 


Paradox can be seen as Reality bitch-slapping mages to 


knock that shit off! 


It's a fine line we dance, then, between pride and hubris, 
between the Will to power and the power to destroy - and the 
paradox of doing both for what look like all the right reasons 
in our eyes. 


Who We Are, 


So how do we do it? How does it work? That's 
the mystery - a realm of myth and poetry with 
lots of theories and few hard answers. Every 
faction and philosopher has a pet genesis. 
Ultimately, this is what we know: we do what 
we do because we understand that we can do 
it - not just on an intellectual level but on a 
cosmic one as well. 


Dower 


And yet, power is fun. It should be. Like I said, you've got 
a gift. Enjoy it. 

We'resurrounded bya world thattells us notto be powerful. 
Leave that stuff to the experts, they say... the "experts" being 
themselves. Give up your power. Be a good little drone. Let 
the big people take care of the hard stuff for you. 


Fuck. That. 


If you're a mage, then you are one of the big people. 
Magick is the proof. When you weave your Arts, you make 
things happen. And that's BIG. 


That's power. 
And that power scares people. 


In the old days, folks made bonfires for people like us. It 
didn't matter then if we were witches, heretics, people whose 
science threatened their flat little world, or if we were simply 
too cool, too pretty, too damn good at what we did. These days, 
those bonfires look more like flame wars on the Internet... 
unless, of course, you attract the attention of the people who 
still will burn your ass literally to death because you threaten 
their reality. And in this rotten world, those people are out 
there - and quite often, they are us. 


If you're a mystic mage, you'll have Technocrats coming to 
shut you down. If you're a Technocrat, those damned Reality 
Deviants twist your world up like pretzels. The Mad Ones want 
us all down the rabbit hole with them, and the Fallen want us to 
dance to the world's eventual damnation. Even within our own 
ranks, the people we consider friends or allies might kick our ass 
for being too free, too restrictive, too intuitive, too scholastic, for 
spending too much time online or for running naked through the 
woods. Power threatens power. Pride hates to be proved wrong. 


The paradox of pride and power both exalts us and 
destroys us. 

It's not easy being a mage. 

But y'know what? It's worth the pain. 


Better to burn brightand illuminateyourworld than to forever 
smolder in the darkness, wondering what you could have been. 


What We Do 


All Into Many Into Os 


A popular myth insists that All were originally One. That 
One fractured into Many, and that Many become us. Now, 
whether “us” means the cavemen, the angels, demigods, or 
heroes is open for debate. Myths refer to the Wyck, primordial 
mages whose deeds inspired the tales of Olympians, Aryans, 
Tuatha de Dannan, Nephilim, and so on. Supposedly, these 
“pure ones” (I know, I know - I’m not the one who named them) 


Chapter Two: Magick - The Art of Reality 


ZA 


had powers that made Creation dance to their tune. How true 
or exaggerated are these myths? Who knows? There are folks 
who claim to have been there at the time, but as with so many 
things in a mage's world, the truth is in the eye of the beholder. 


In time, these entities refined their powers into Arts that 
we now call magick. Some drew their Arts from deep inside 
themselves, and others begged their favors from their gods. Still 
others built technologies - language, math, art, and machines 
- that helped them do the things they did with some sense of 
reliability. And then, the tales say, they taughtother people how 
to do those things too. Religions, rituals, technologies, and trade 
helped uplift the human animal into what we'd eventually call 
civilization. Thanks to magick, humanity prospered. 


Conflict and Change 


Butwe humansarea fractious lot. Even atour best, we're angels 
wrapped in monkey-skins. The war of heaven plays out inside every 
human heart, and whether its origins come from some serpentine 
tempter wrapped around the Trees of Life and Knowledge, from 
the whims of gods, from infernal rebels, or from our own selfish 
genes, the conflicts are the same. We fight. We kill. We die. We 
despair. Given all the gifts of heaven, we run wild in hell. Is this a 
cosmic prank, original sin, a grotesque illusion, or simply the drive 
of life and death and rebirth again? That depends on who you ask. 
For whatever reason, a divide grew between the Awakened and the 
Sleepers... and between the Awakened and each other. 


Some people claim thatthese divisions came about because 
magick was abused. According to the Technocratic gospel, 
mad wizards enslaved humanity until brave heroes used their 
Arts and Science to throw down the sorcerers. Mystic mages 
claim that early Technocrats deployed empires to crush their 
neighbors and unite the masses under technological rule. Both 
history and religion show rival nations rising and conquering 
one another in the name of this god or that dynasty. There was 
magick on all sides of such wars, and the hatreds they forged 
have never been undone. 


The history of magick is the history of conflict. Perhaps 
this is the way of our world - to grow, to devour, to live at the 
cost of other lives until death turns us into food for future 


generations. That's how Nature works, with or without our 
help. Magick gives us a say in the direction of our lives, but it 
has yet to change this pattern. Truth be told, magick and mages 
often depend upon upheaval. Conflict, after all, forces us to 
learn and grow, innovate and change. Is it any wonder, then, 
that mages - agents of Change - spend so much time at war? 


Awakened Enlightenment 


In the course ofall these transformations, it became obvious 
that some of us could do what most other folks could not. 
Aware of our power, we learned how to use it. Some mages call 
this Awakening, others Enlightenment, and still others refuse 
to give it a name at all. By any name or none, such awareness 
allows us to do things other people cannot do. 


The questions about whether or not all people could once 
perform magick, or whether or not all people should perform 
magick, get tangled into endless arguments. Such things are not 
important now. The vital fact is that right here, right now, and 
for as long as anyone can honestly remember, we Awakened or 
Enlightened folks can do things that transcend normal human 
capabilities. That much is a given. 


And it does not come easily. 


Maybe once upon a long time ago, Awakened people just 
naturally woke up knowing what they could do. That's not 
how it works anymore. These days, Awakening usually involves 
some heavy-duty clue-bat cracked upside your skull. After it, 
the world no longer looks the way it once did before. This 
can be terrifying; like I said earlier, power is scary. Mentors 
and companions can provide a smoother transition, but most 
mages - at least these days - wake up thrashing around in 
metaphysical panic attacks. The world gets turned inside out 
by such wild talents, and the end of Sleep produces monsters. 


Genius and the Avatar 

Thankfully, mages come with a built-in guidance system, 
that “Holy Guardian Angel” I mentioned earlier: the Avatar. 
This innate Genius provides inspiration for a budding mage. 
Depending on who you ask, this godly co-pilot might be a 
previous incarnation, a helpful spirit, a reflection of your Greater 


A History of Mages and Magick 


For a detailed look atthe complex saga of mages, their societies, and their effect upon the world, checkout An Awakened 


History at the beginning of Chapter Five. 


Wild Talent 


A mage whose magick has not been trained or refined has what's called a wild talent. His Awakened powers function, 
but he has little or no control over what they do. This tends to make that mage a danger to himself and everyone else 
within reach. The various magickal disciplines — even the darkest forms of sorcery — provide ways to channel that raw 
power toward a less-destructive end. Without them, as shown in Chapter Five, an untrained mage may well become 


a Marauder. 


For the game rules surrounding wild talent, see Chapter Ten, (pp. 527-528). 


60 Mage: The Ascension 20" Anniversary Edition 


Self, or even a delusion cooked up by a mind that's trying to 
rationalize what you just realized you can do. Call it what you 
will, this divine shard provides a road map for magick's Path. 
Because of it, we begin to sense the deeper levels of reality... 
and to manipulate them, too. 


Quintessence Energy, Patterns, 
and Doors 

The Avatar helps you look past the illusions of form and 
substance and to realize that everything is composed of the 
energy called Quintessence. This energy settles into Patterns that 
we perceive as solid forms. When you spot the energy and see 
the Patterns and recognize on an instinctive and intellectual 
level that you can change them, you feel those keys to reality start 
to rattle in your hands. The Spheres, which I'll describe shortly, 
are metaphors for the different sorts of energetic Patterns you 
can unlock... the doors, if you will, of Creation itself. 


Skating on Thin Ice 


This all sounds obvious. But like ice skating, it’s a lot 
more challenging than it looks. You’ve got an entire life’s 
worth of conditioning that tells you that fog is not a rock 
is not a bird is not an airplane. The ways in which those 
Patterns interact, and the ways in which Quintessence flows 
and hovers within them, are tricky as hell. Mages spend 
decades, even centuries, learning how to make them dance 
to the desired tunes. Again like an ice skater, a mage trains 
herself to flow and bend like energy does, to master the 
subtle quirks and shifts that allow her to glide instead of 
crash. It takes training, focus, and tons of practice before you 
can juggle the Spheres. Your mind might grasp the concept, 
and your spirit might be willing to turn those keys, but until 
you attain a point of integration where all the right muscles 
work all the right ways, you’re essentially skating on thin 
ice with cinderblocks strapped to your feet. 


Focus, Paradigm, Practice, 
Instruments, and Arete 

To provide blades for her intentions, each mage must find 
a focus that works for her. Drawn from her paradigm - the model 
of belief that reflects her view of the world - this focus shapes 
the tools she employs, the rituals she performs, the things 
she can do when she starts skating across Creation's ice. It'll 
probably decide her choice of friends, definitely influence the 
style of her practice, and often determine the enemies who'll 
try to block her Path. It's belief, you see, that turns the keys 
and oils up the locks for us. 


Like unAwakened folks, mages take our beliefs seriously. 
Those beliefs shape everything we are, everything we do, every 
tool within our grasp. Those tools - another form of focus - 
become symbolic reflections of our beliefs. We use brews to 
distill our plans into actions, graphs to chart our potential for 
success, prayers to call in favors from our gods, swords to cut 
our Will into the air. A mage employs instruments and rituals, 
devices and technologies to shape and direct and forge her 
Path. Without them, she's just out there standing on the ice. 


Mythic Threads and Hypernarratives 
Certain practices and instruments employ Mythic Threads: 
symbols thatcarry lots of metaphysical weight within the Consensus. 
Tarot cards, voodoo dolls, full moons, fog... such symbols command 
respect because of their deep ties to the Collective Unconscious. In 
order to be effective, though, the Threads in question mustfita given 
mage's focus. A cyborg who's trying to use Tarot cards is running 
against his programming, so to speak, and they won’t work nearly as 
well for him as they mightin the hands ofa bewitching fortune teller. 


Information Age mages have their own sort of Mythic 
Threads: hypernarratives composed of common media tropes. 
Car chases, exploding gas tanks, flying through the air with 
both guns blazing - such images have burnt themselves into 
the collective metastory. Essentially, a hypernarrative trope 
makes you a hero in the story of media-age mythology. For all 
practical purposes, then, a hypernarrative is a Mythic Thread 
for our era. The difference between them is simply a matter of 
archetypal traditions versus media consciousness - just a few 
retellings and generations away from being the same thing. 


Growing Beyond Focus 

Of course, the Masters say, both the tools and the ice are 
just illusions. If and when you achieve enough excellence in 
your pursuits - that sublime degree of Arete- you'll realize that 
you can skate without the goddamned skates and that the ice is 
only there because you think it is. This is the greatest kind of 
Awakening, the level where you begin to transcend the illusions 
of our world. Mages who attain this point are among the most 
powerful of our kind... though not always the most wise. 


Belieftoo easily becomes fanaticism. All too often, the man 
who knows, without a doubt, that what he believes is true insists 
that everyone else must believe it too. You don't need to be an 
Islamist Jihadi or Evangelical whackjob to demand that your 
reality must be the only reality. Sometimes you just need to be a 
mage who's let magick go to his head. As a result, Master mages 
often become tyrants, enforcing their Will upon the rest of us. 
That's another magely paradox: transcendent understanding 
often breeds stagnation... and, with fearsome ease, becomes chaos. 


Chapter Two: Magick - The Art of Reality 


TN 4d 


Consensus and Belief 


So why can't we Awakened souls do anything shift that “water” with our belief, the Sleepers outnumber us 
we please? If magick is godlike power, whydon’t millions of times over. Their belief, ultimately, holds more 
we all just go bowling with fireballs down Main water, so to speak, than our own. 


Street, USA? Long ago, it's been said, the Consensus was far more fluid 
Because Reality itself won't let us do that. than it is these days. Because most people had little contact with 
Imagine reality as a large body of water. You can cultures or communities other than their own, localized beliefs 
splasharoundinit,channelit, swim in it, ordrown tended to shape localized Consensus. As technology, trade, and 
in it. You can't just turn it into confetti, though, conquestspread cultures across continents, however, many beliefs 


no matter how hard you wish upon a star because became fixtures across most, if not all, of the world. Since the 
that water was here long before you were and will Age of Conquest in the late Renaissance, magick has been a lot 


be here long after you're gone. That's the reality behind capital-R harder to perform, its effects diminished by the weight of the 
Reality. It’s bigger than any mage, than any group of mages. We Consensus. Did the Technocracy do this to our world, or is it 


Hn e : ; , ? 
can work with it, but it is not, and never will be, our slave. the byproduct of Sleeper empires beyond any mage's control? 


. : Again, that's a subject of heated debate. One thing, though, is 
Reality has rules, and those rules are decided by the Consensus: eas Jec i e : En, 
; certain: mages of various factions have been manipulating the 
the collective power of belief across the world. The term began i : À i . 
i : Consensus for centuries, if not millennia... and doing so remains 
as a Technocratic buzzword, but plenty of other mages use it too. : . 
2 : : f Me a major goal for Awakened factions everywhere. 
Consensual reality is essentially the established baseline reality for 


Zr « 3 
our Earth. It's got a certain amount of give to it, but many laws are As the Baron Harkonnen said in Dune, "he who controls the 
. + » t » t » 
immutable. That which goes up must come down. An object in SPice controls the universe." Replace "spice" with "Consensus" and 


, E 
motion tends to stay in motion. An object at rest tends to stay at — YOU Ve got the truth of the matter. Since the Age of Conquest, 


rest. That sort of thing. People don't morph into petunias unless the Technocracy - and its antecedent, the Order of Reason - has 


acted upon by some powerful force... and if they do, they don't do so controlled the Consensus. From time to time, other factions 


easily. To defy consensual reality is to invite Paradox to kick your ass. have retained control in various regions... and, in some areas, 
theystill hold it. The global Consensus, though, has been in the 


What determines this Consensus? Good question. The 
É Technocratic Union's hands for more or less the last 150 years. 


origin of its laws is just one more subject of debate among 
mages. What we do know is this: human belief plays a strong But control is not command. Their grip has slipped from 
role in the shape of the Consensus. And although mages can time to time. It almost slid away completely during both World 


Focus and Belief 


Your mage’s belief guides the practice he pursues and the instruments he employs as part of that practice. In game terms, 
that means that mage's focus. 


In older editions of Mage, "focus" wasthe term forthe tools a fage used in order to cast magickal Effects. Now, though, 
focus combines the mage's beliefs about magick, the practice he follows, and the instruments he uses to direct that belief 
toward magickal results. All three elements are combined into a single unit: paradigm * practice * instruments 7 focus. 


This focus depends upon the beliefs of the people involved and the practices they pursue as extensions of those beliefs. 
Let's say you have three mages: a Hermetic wizard, a martial artist, and an Enlightened business executive. The wizard 
believes that his High Ritual Magick practice gives him the keys to the universe. The martial artist believes that she's 
channeling her life force by practicing mental and physical discipline. The executive believes that he's an expert in the 


Art of Desire and that his practice helps him manipulate people in uncanny ways. In game terms, they're all doing the 
same thing, but the characters hold differing belief systems, and they pursue different practices. In older versions of 
Mage, these practices were called "styles"; in Mage 20, belief determines style, which in turn determines instruments. 


Those instruments channel that belief and that practice into action. Our wizard enacts elaborate rituals filled with scrolls, 
sigils, incantations, and classical mystic tools (wands, amulets, and all that sort of thing). The martial artist performs intricate 
katas, impressive exercises, deep meditations, and devastating techniques. Meanwhile, the executive wears his power 
suit, dashes on a special cologne, deploys buzzwords like buzzbombs, and charms or crushes everyone he meets with 
the sheer force of his personality. Three different approaches — all of them effective and based in the beliefs of the mage 
who employs them. Each one uses different tools to shape the mage’s intentions and then aim them toward a desired end. 


For details about paradigms, practices, and tools, see Chapters Six (pp. 256 & 259) and Ten (pp. 529-530 & 
565-600). 


62 Mage: The Ascension 20" Anniversary Edition 


Future Fates: The Technocratic Paradigm 


According to Mage Revised, the Technocratic belief system wins the Ascension War by the end of the 20" century. 
Sleepers accept a Consensus in which science defines reality. As mentioned earlier in this book, that conclusion misses 
several vital elements of global belief, both back then and especially now. Nevertheless, it adds a dramatic sense of 


urgency to Mage chronicles. 


Depending on your group’s desires, you can assume that... 


* The Technocracy Won: Sure, plenty of folks believe in the so-called supernatural. The dominant belief in technology, 
however, crushes mystical viewpoints. Anything that looks like magic is therefore vulgar anywhere on Earth. 


* Technocratic Belief Dominates Certain Parts of the World: Technological paradigms rule most of the industrialized 
world, but there’s a lot more flexibility than people realize. Definitions of vulgar and coincidental magick depend upon 
reality zones, which are described in Chapter Ten, (pp. 611- 617). 


Reality’s in Flux: The Technocracy seemed to win, but that perception wasn't accurate. Reality zones determine the 
boundaries of coincidental and vulgar magick, and Earth might even be sliding toward another Mythic Age in which a 
different paradigm dominates the world. This option would give you a much wilder Mage chronicle, with certain forms 
of obvious magick becoming coincidental (in the old form, casual), whereas certain approaches to technology would 
become vulgar. Such a high-magic chronicle would hold a very different reality than the official World of Darkness, 
but it would suit an End Times saga in which the promises of science had been rejected in favor of mystic chaos. 


Wars, as technology reaped millions of souls with mechanized 
precision. People’s faith in technology’s blessings wavered at those 
points, when machines seemed monstrous. And now, some folks 
say, it has slid from their grasp again. Time will tell, I guess... but 
for now at least, a scientific belief system holds the most favorable 
edge in the Consensus. And so, to use magick in its classic sense 
these days invites disaster unless you’re clever, smart, and subtle. 


Coincidental Magick 


The best, if not always easiest, way to avoid the Paradox 
Effect is to make your magick seem like a natural part of 
the landscape. Such coincidental magick appears to be totally 
acceptable to the local belief system. You didn’t conjure an 
apple out of thin air, for example - you pulled it out of your 
backpack... and if there wasn’t an apple in your backpack before 
that point, well then, who would know that except for you? 
The baseline rule of coincidental magick is this: if a mundane 
witness could see you perform a magickal act, and yet accept it 
asa normal part of his surroundings, then it's justa coincidence 
that things went in your favor. 


The Mythic Age 


In the old days, this sort of thing was often known as casual 
magick; it had a clear and believable cause and was therefore 
acceptable by the beliefs of the day. Back then, however, 
believable meant that it fit the prevailing view of reality in that 
area. If folklore said that witches flew on brooms, well then, 
a witch could fly on a broom and be considered believable. A 
priest could call down fire with a prayer, and a sorcerer could 
curse his enemies and watch them die. Such things would never 
be considered coincidental today, but they were part of the belief 
system back then. Because almost all belief systems favored the 
existence of magical phenomena, modern mages often refer 


to this period as the High Mythic Age. And like so many other 
golden ages, it has achieved a certain glowing reverence in 
hindsight that clashes with the grubby truth of that era. 


These days, some mystic mages want to bring back the 
Mythic Age or create a new one that favors their beliefs. The 
fact that such a shift would have radical effects on the world at 
large doesn’t seem to bother them very much. Hey, if you can 
fly through the air on a broom again, who really cares if those 
poor misguided Sleepers remain grounded, right? That’s the 
primary hubris of these mystic mages: the world will be better off 
when we’re back in charge and able to do whatever we want. 


Although the Technocrats seem like monumental killjoys 
in most respects, it’s pretty easy to see why this sort of thing goes 
against their program. Such mythic reality might be cool for 
certain mystics, but it'd be hell on everybody else. According to 
the established gospel (which, likeso many other things in a mage's 
world, might not be as true as it's supposed to be), the Order of 
Reason brought down the Mythic Ages by imposing a global order 
based upon science, not magic or religion. If that's true, however, 
they've done a lousy job of it. There are, after all, at least three 
religions thatappear to thinkthey ve got special dispensations from 
God, and at least two of them insist that science is their enemy 
unless it gives them better ways to make money and kill people. 
And because of such cracks in the Technocratic paradigm, there’s 
more room for mythicstyle magick than is immediately obvious. 


Still, coincidental magick is the safest, most reliable way to 
sidestep the Paradox Effect. By manifesting your Arts in ways 
that don't seem magickal, you avoid getting thrown in Reality 
Jail by manifestations of Paradox. 


The Technomancer’s Edge 


For obvious reasons, technomancers have a monumental 
edge in the Paradox game. Most people in most places 


Chapter Two: Magick 7 The Art of Reality 63 


throughout the modern world accept high technology as an 
essential part of their reality. Again, this isn't true everywhere, 
but it’s a common baseline in the industrial world. 


Because the dominant human belief favors technology, 
you've got a decent chance that sci-fi gadgetry will still be 
considered coincidental. A wizard firing lightning bolts out 
of his hands clearly does not fit into the Consensus view of 
reality; give that wizard a neat uniform and a pulse-rifle, though, 
and suddenly - thanks to decades of science-fiction films - his 
energy blasts seem pretty believable. 


The technomancer - whether or not he belongs to the 
Technocracy - has an additional edge of belief as well: His 
technology doesn't simply fit the Consensus worldview, it also 
fits his own. He's not fooling the world with his technology. He 
himself believes in the power of technology. As I've said, belief is 
a powerful thing... and if your belief fits the Consensus, then 
it's got more power than if you're striving to contradict the 
world around you with your beliefs. 


TIl put it this way: ifyou're raised to believe that people cannot 
fly, you're going against your ingrained beliefs to think that you can 
fly. If your beliefs include jetpacks as a potential scientific reality, 
though, then your own belief helps you to fly with one. So although 
many mystics claim that technomancers disguise their magick with 
technology, that perception isn’t accurate. It’s not a disguise. The 
technomancer truly believes in what he does. 


Vulgar Magick 


And then there’s magick that appears to slap reality in 
the face - stuff that blatantly contradicts the apparent laws 
of the universe: summoning demons, making coaches out of 
pumpkins, turning vampires into lawn furniture - that sort of 
thing. A powerful mage can perform such feats, but it's not wise 
to do so. Such blatant magick is considered rude. Vain. Vulgar. 


“Vulgar” originally meant common and referred to things 
and people who were unrefined. By extension, though, the word 
came to mean obnoxious, and that's how vulgar magick feels. A 
mage invoking vulgar magick is seen as pissing on sacred ground. 
To use it is to go against everything we've been taught to believe. 


Vanity and the Scourge 

The phrase "vulgar magick" probably came about because 
certain wizards... or, more likely, Technocrats... felt that doing 
things like flying through the air or throwing fireballs was for 
common sorcerers, not for refined gentlefolk such as themselves. 
In time, though, the term merged with another, older phrase: 
vain magick. This was magick that strutted its stuff and hawked 
loogies in God's face. A vain mage was considered someone 
who felt that his power trumped the Divine Order... and who 
therefore needed to be punished. 


Backthen, realitylashed backatvain magick with something 
called the Scourge. Like Paradox, this mystic whip beat a mage 
for presuming to be better than everyone else; every so often, 
though, the Scourge actually rewarded. pride. It's almost as if 
the Powers That Be were saying, Hey, kid, good job! You shouldn't 
have done that, but I like a mage with guts. The Scourge could 
hurt you, but it could help you too, and you never quite knew 
which way things would go until the whip came down. 


These days, that punishment comes from Paradox, and it's 
unequivocally harsh. A mage who uses vulgar magick invokes the 
Paradox Effect, and whetheror notitpunishes her immediately, 
she'll suffer for it sooner or later. Does this pain descend from 
moral judgments on high or simply from tears in her energetic 
Pattern that come from straining against reality? As usual, that 
depends on who you ask. Either way, the result's the same. 
Sooner or later, vulgar magick leads to harm... so most mages 
avoid using it unless they absolutely must. 


Which leads to another paradox: to be what we are, we 
must sometimes go against the flow. À mage exists to dare. 
Defying Paradox is what we do; if we never do so, we deny 
our potential for change. And so, using magick is a calculated 
risk. Coincidental magick demands cleverness and skill, 
vulgar magick demands nerve and a willingness to face the 
consequences of your actions, and both approaches are essential 
to doing what we do and being who we are. 


No one ever said that being a mage was easy. But without 
people who are willing to risk everything, nothing worthwhile 
is ever done. 


Nine Spheres and 
the Language of Reality 


Okay - so how do we do this magick thing? By 
learning to use the Spheres -fields of knowledge 
that focus on nine elements of reality and then 
show us how to juggle them. 


Think of each Sphere as a language. If you 
understand Correspondence, then you can 
[11 » . B H . " 

talk" tovarious principles of connection; ifyou 
know Life, then you can “have a conversation" 
with the Patterns and energies that make up 


Ma$e: The Ascension 20^ Anniversary Edition 


organic life. A mage who masters many "languages" can do 
many things. Each Sphere's potential compounds another 
Sphere's potential; the more Spheres you understand, and the 
better you understand them, the more potential you command. 


The Mystic Spheres 

Sphere means "to encompass." That's what the Spheres 
do - they encompass certain elements of reality. By doing so, 
they also present a baseline model for the hundreds, if not 


thousands, of magickal practices on Earth. You could talk to a 
Siberian shaman, an Egyptian alchemist, a Polynesian kahuna, 
anda Brazilian Catholic priest, and you'd getfour very different 
explanations about how they do what they do. They probably 
won't talk about "spheres," and they often won't know what 
you meant by that term. In the end, however, you'd still come 
down to the same nine basic principles they all use in some way: 


* Correspondence - the element of connection between 
apparently separated things. 


* Entropy - the principle of chance, fate, and mortality. 
* Forces - the understanding of elemental energies. 
* Life- keys to the mysteries of life and death. 


* Matter - the principles behind supposedly inanimate 
objects. 


* Mind - exploration of the potentials of consciousness. 


e Prime- an understanding of the Primal Energy within 
all things. 


* Spirit - comprehension of Otherworldly forces and 
inhabitants. 


* Time - the strange workings of chronological forces 
and perceptions. 


The Technocratic Spheres 


As I’ve mentioned earlier, Technocratic mages do not 
believe that what they do is magick. To members of the 
Technocratic Union - and even to members of the Traditions 
who insist that magick is simply science that’s notyet commonly 
understood - the Spheres are not mystic concepts but defined 
paradigms of Enlightened Science. As with the mystics I 
described a moment ago, the various technicians and scientists 
who practice this advanced level of understanding tend to define 
their understanding with mouthfuls of Greek, Latin, acronyms, 
and formulae. When you boil all of that down, however, you’re 
still left with nine spheres of influence (not a capitalized term, 
by the way) that reflect fields of specialized knowledge: 


* Correspondence Principles - the physics of single-point 
space. 


* Dimensional Science Paraphysics - practical applica- 
tions of quantum vibration frequencies. 


* EntropicState Control - manipulation of probabilities 
tending toward entropic results. 


e Force-Based Paraphysics - advanced study of elemental 
physics. 


* LifeSciences - the governing aspects of biological life forms. 


* Material Sciences - unified study of inert material states. 


* Primal Utility Theory - exploration and application of 
unified field energies and the human connection to them. 


e Psychodynamics- analysis and manipulation of sentient 
consciousness. 


TemporalScience - research and application of chrono- 
logical field patterns. 


* Some Information Age technomancers also refer to 
the Data Sphere: the principle of connection through 
quantified information. Whether or not this principle 
is part of the Correspondence Principles or is its own 
field entirely depends upon who you ask. It's worth 
noting, though, that these Datasphere Principles are 
also used by certain technomancers who do not belong 
to the Technocracy. According to the Virtual Adepts, a 
group within the Nine Traditions, they came up with 
the Data Sphere, and the Technocracy adopted it from 
them. 


Many groups don'tever refer to magick in terms of spheres. 
They'll say they draw upon their connection to gods or spirits 
or the earth or their inner selves, not upon some sort of 
generalized principles of Life or Time. Regardless of the names 
they use, however, all mages employ similar principles when 
we manipulate reality. The names aren't nearly as important 
as the effects. 


A Tenth Sphere? 


According to certain authorities, there's a Tenth Sphere 
too. The idea has a certain symmetry to it, after all, and - like 
dark matter in quantum physics - it's thought to exist simply 
because there appears to be a place for it in the space between 
the other elements. 


Some folks call this theoretical Sphere Unity, Balance, 
Unified Field Theory, or even Ascension. By understanding it, they 
say, you can go beyond the limitation of the other nine Spheres 
andopen the door to Ultimate Reality. So far, though, ifanyone 
actually has discovered and mastered this Tenth Sphere, they're 
either not sharing their insights about it or they've transcended 
this Earthly mudball and taken the secret with them. Right 
now, so far as I’m aware, the Tenth Sphere - like Ascension 
itself - is an abstract goal of attainment, not something that 
people achieve and then hang around to talk about afterward. 


The Affinity Sphere 


Regardless ofhowyou define what you do, there's one Sphere 
that inevitably means more to you than any other one: the affinity 
Sphere, your initial field of study and connection. This reflects 
your “first kiss” within the world of possibilities. Maybe, as a 
kid, you felt obsessed about the mysteries of biological life; your 
affinity Sphere would be Life, because life became your original 
link to a greater reality. Perhaps you gambled or otherwise threw 


Chapter Two: Magick - The Art of Reality 


LEZ 


yourself on the mercies of Lady Luck; your affinity Sphere would 
be Entropy, your "first love" among mystic principles. A mage 
whose inquires begin with candles or weather patterns would 
find an affinity for Forces, and one with an innate sense that 
“time keeps on slippin"" would gravitate toward Time. 


The affinity often manifests during the Awakening, perhaps 
through a display of wild talent connected to that Sphere; a girl 
whose Avatar Awakens during a house fire - perhaps by causing 
that fire - would most likely find herself affiliated with Forces, 
whereas one whose Awakening saved her from drowning might 
feel closest to the principles of the Life Sphere. There's no hard- 
and-fast rule about such things, but as the saying goes, “like 
follows like." A person with some strong connection to a certain 
aspect of Creation will often find and nurture an affinity Sphere. 


That same idea holds true for groups as well as individuals. 
Various mystic and Technocratic factions align themselves with 
certain principles based on their affinity for a given Sphere, and 
although those groups do not insist that all of their initiates 
share the same affinity Sphere, each group values certain ideals 
and teachings based around their most cherished principles. 
The Verbenae, for example, explore the carnal Arts of Life, 
and the New World Order delves into the possibilities of one's 
Mind. Ecstatic mages may be the only ones unmoored enough 
to truly understand Time, and Templars marshal the Forces 
at their God's command. If you'd like to understand a group, 
look at the sorts of magick it prefers. By studying someone 
else's affinity Sphere, you can learn plenty about the things 
they revere and respect. 


Juggling the Spheres 


Each Sphere, in itself, features an array of possibilities. The 
real magick, though, comes when you start bringing Spheres 
together. By bringing elements of reality together in creative 


and often unpredictable ways, a mage unleashes remarkable 
effects. A bit of Prime, a bit of Matter, and a fair understanding 
of Life installs cybernetic devices and allows them to function; a 
blend of Forces and Prime conjures fire, wind, and light. With 
Correspondence alone, a skilled mage can step from one place 
to another without passing through the intervening space; add 
Time, and she can see past events in a distant place as well; 
add Forces, and she could project the images she sees upon a 
wall; use Matter and Correspondence instead, and she could 
open a door in one place, open another door in the next, and 
step between two doors that had not existed - and could not 
have existed - until that moment. That's the true power of the 
Spheres. With a nuanced understanding of their principles and 
a broad understanding of different Spheres, you can do almost 
anything Reality will let you get away with doing. 


Such great knowledge, of course, is easier to achieve in 
theory than in practice. Ittakes years, often decades, sometimes 
centuries, to master the variety of Spheres, stretch their 
possibilities, and learn how to use them to their full potential 
without blowing yourself to atoms in the process. Very few 
mages of any faction achieve such proficiency. More often, a 
willworker finds a few fields of expertise, builds her studies and 
experience around them, and eventually masters a limited yet 
impressive range of magicks. There's enough potential within 
each Sphere that a single mage could spend a lifetime or two 
simply learning what that one aspect of reality can do. 


The Cycle of Effect: 

Conception, Form, Perception, and Decay 
All Spheres are, of course, interconnected, their properties 

cycling through a circle of connections that unite the principles 

while keeping each individual field a specialized unit of study 

and effect. In plain English, one thing leads to another, with 

all of them playing a part in the greater scheme of things. 


Technocratic Spheres in Play 


When you're describing the game system Effects of a Technocratic character, the usual nine Sphere names are totally 
appropriate. There's not enough room on a character sheet to list Sphere names like Primal Utility Theory, and using such 
terms to refer to the rules can get confusing in the middle of a game. 


Technocratic characters, however, will never talk about doing "Mind magick.” That concept runs totally counter to their 
belief system. They practice the scientific disciplines of Psychodynamics, and don't you forget it! When yov're playing 
such characters, a stream of reasonable-sounding pseudoscientitic gobbledygook — much like the terminology you might 


use for an Etherite or Virtual Adept — conveys a vibrant sense of setting and mood. 


One ofthe satirical elements of Mage involves the fact thateveryone's doing the same thing but almost no one will admit 
as much. The fact that all mages use some variation on the same nine Spheres is an intentional reflection of that satire. 
Don't get too wrapped up, then, in the differences between Dimensional Science and the Spirit Sphere; those differences 
might mean everything to the characters who use them, but — beyond roleplaying choices and focus-based limitations 
— they make no difference in terms of the game systems that determine what those characters can do. 


For details about the Technocratic Spheres, see the optional rules regarding the Data, Dimensional Science, and 
Primal Utility Spheres in Chapter Ten. And for more about the use of technological explanations for magickal Effects, 


see the sidebar SCIENCE!!! in Chapter Six, (p. 290). 


66 Ma$e: The Ascension 20^ Anniversary Edition 


This cycle creates things outofapparent nothingness - from 
the initial conception of an idea, to its form, to the perception of 
its form, to the decay of that form so that the idea, its materials, 
and its essence can return to the first point of the cycle and 
begin all over again in some new state. 


Each step of that cycle involves a series of Spheres. From 
original conception in the energy field of Prime, an effect gets 
focused through consciousness in the Mind and attains substance 
through the Spirit. Given form in Patterns of Forces, Life, or 
Matter, the substance interacts with other Patterns through 
Correspondence and Time. Finally, it breaks down through 
Entropy, its elements dispersed back to the Prime to start all 
over again. If there is a Tenth Sphere, it probably governs the 
entire process, like a circle that encloses this cycle, keeping it 
all whole and functioning. 


Thankfully, you don't need every single Sphere in order to 
bring things into being. Generally, that just takes Prime and some 
other combination of Forces, Matter, Life, and perhaps Mind. 
Correspondence, Time, and Entropytend to take care of themselves 
unless a mage speeds them along or alters their natural flow. 

As for Spirit - which, of course, certain mages don't even 
believe exists - it's apparently a natural process too. Masters of 
Spirit, however, insist that the soul - the spiritual essence - of 


TIME 


a being or thing depends a great deal upon the energy invested 
in it. If you really believe in something or someone, it tends 
to acquire a certain degree of spiritual energy from that belief. 
That’s how Tinkerbell can rally when children clap their hands 
and cry “I DO believe in fairies!” Their actions, it’s been said, 
generate spiritual energies that invigorate the fairy in question. 
It's not that easy in real life, of course - otherwise, we'd be 
up to our ears in pixies, horses, fishes, and money. Still, the 
principle is supposedly true, if a tad exaggerated for effect. 

What this means, again, is that belief is a very powerful 
thing - far more powerful than most people give it credit for 
being. As a mage, you'll probably find yourself face-to-face 
with the products of other people's beliefs, or your own, quite 
often... and that's not always a happy thing at all. 


A Brief Overview of 
the Spheres and 
Their Properties 


So what are these Spheres, and what can they do? That’s 
another one those things that mages can wax poetic about for 
months on end. The basic principles involved, however, can 
be summed up more or less like this: 


Chapter Two: Magick - The Art of Reality 


Levels of Sphere Progress and Expertise 


When a mage begins working with a particular Sphere, her abilities follow a general progression of expertise. The more 
she understands that Sphere, the more she can do with it. 


The levels of Sphere expertise feature five advancing steps: 


* Perception (in game terms, Sphere Rank 1): An initiate grasps the essential principles and begins to perceive 


the ways in which that Sphere behaves. A Correspondence initiate learns to spot connections and reckon distances; 
a Forces initiate notes elemental phenomena; and a Time initiate achieves an uncanny sense of the ebbs and flows of 
time. The mage can't alter anything just yet, but she can put her observations to good use. 


Manipulation (Sphere Rank 2): The mage begins to use the Sphere to make small alterations in her local reality. 
The Correspondence student can look across distances or pull small objects from "nowhere"; the Forces student can 
make burning candles flare or go out; and the Time student gains limited pre- and postcognition. Although not yet 
able to perform dramatic Effects, the mage gains a small degree of control over the Sphere's principles... but for many 
tasks, a small degree of control is all you need. 


Control (Sphere Rank 3): Achieving a greater level of accomplishment, the mage can make notable changes to 
elements connected with the Sphere. Our Correspondence devotee can step through intervening space; the Forces 
devotee could conjure winds or make fire leap; the Time devotee might speed up or slow down her speed relative to 
her surroundings. Remarkable feats become possible, and the mage approaches the realm of true wizardry. 


Command (Sphere Rank 4): An impressive command ofthe Sphere in question allowsthe mage to perform dramatic 
feats. The Correspondence adept might appear in several places at once, the Forces adept conjures storms, and the 
Time adept can literally stop time in her vicinity. Even when such Effects aren't obviously magick, the mage attains 
significant influence over the principles associated with that Sphere. 


Mastery (Sphere Rank 5): Magnificentfeats become possible with such dominion within the Sphere. Our Correspondence 
master can stack several places into a single location; the Forces master commands vast phenomena - firestorms, blizzards, 
even nuclear blasts; the Time master can step outside of time, achieve limited immortality, or travel back and forth through 
time. Literally godlike miracles greet the master of a Sphere, and Reality literally shapes itself to her whim. 


Rumor has it that levels of Archmastery exist for each Sphere, granting abstract powers that even gods might envy. 
In game terms, these would be the EXTREMELY optional Sphere Ranks 6-10. Such powers are beyond almost every 
mage alive, take centuries to attain, and turn chronicles into blasted wreckage. Groups that want to bring such powers 
into play can find them in the sourcebook Masters of the Art. We cannot, however, overemphasize the destructive 
potential of these, again, OPTIONAL Sphere Ranks. Though technically canon, they should be avoided for all but the 


most outlandish Mage chronicles. 


For more details about the Spheres and their powers, see Chapter Ten, (pp. 511-527). 


e à Correspondence: 
xà The Principle of Connection 


Everything's connected in some way. Despite centuries of 
what's been called discrete phenomenon perception - that is, the 
idea that we're all separate objects and entities that occasionally 
cross paths - both physics and metaphysics remind us that all 
things are intrinsically interconnected. Your actions affect me, 
my actions affect the dog next door, a butterfly flaps his wings 
and stirs up the proverbial hurricane... that basic idea. Those 
connections aren't immediately apparent, of course. If we saw 
all of the connections between us, we'd probably go insane. 
It’s no wonder, then, that masters of Correspondence - the 
Sphere originally called Connection - often seem pretty weird. 
They perceive unity where the rest of us see division. 

Correspondence is the anti-Ayn Rand principle. When you 
understand this Sphere, you start to recognize connections between 
places, people, and things, ultimately realizing that the idea of 
“places, people, and things” is all an illusion anyway. A Master of 


68 Mage: The Ascension 20" Anniversary Edition 


this Sphere can step across distances, reach into one place and 
take something into another, and see into areas that appear to 
be far away unless you understand that all places are actually one 
single place. Like Papa Legba or the trickster god Hermes, a mage 
who deeply understands Correspondence transcends the idea of 
separation. He sees doorways where no one else notices them, 
learns to open them, and eventually becomes them. 


Entropy: 
Fate, Fortune, and Decay 
Change is an innate law of the universe. If things stopped 
changing, everything would freeze into eternal stasis. Even then, 
though, such stasis is an illusion; sooner or later, that frozen state 
begins to decay. The Entropy Sphere, then, works with the forces 
of change and decay, speeding or slowing the effects of mortality. 
Entropy throws open the box that holds Schródinger's 
cat. Its principles guide probability, inevitability, and the 
results of both. Masters of Entropy - who often seem morbid, 


fatalistic, or terribly cheerful - can force the hand of Chance, 
boost or destroy someone's luck, degrade substances, and even 
destroy thoughts. Entropic mages tend to follow either order 
or chaos; devotees of order examine patterns and look for ways 
to reinforce them, whereas students of chaos look for ways to 
break down those same patterns and guide their energies toward 
a new beginning. Like the Fates who are often associated with 
this Sphere, mages pursuing Entropy pick up the threads of 
Creation, work with them, and eventually cut them off. 


pw Forces: 
The Principles of Elemental Might 
Earth. Air. Fire. Water. Long before the Periodic Table of 
elements existed, mages realized that the natural elements held 
power of their own. How could they not? Even now, when we 
live in houses more stable and climate-controlled than anything 
else in history (and for that, incidentally, you can thank the 
Technocracy), the power of a hurricane or firestorm can turn 
security to ruins. And so, of course, when our forebears turned 
their minds and powers toward control, the first place they 
looked for inspiration was probably the elements. 


Forces is the Sphere of elemental energies. Although Matter 
deals primarily in the products of Earth and Water, and Spirit 
and Prime deal with the Fifth Essence (which is either Spirit or 
Quintessence, depending on who you ask), the Forces Sphere 
allows a mage to understand, influence, and eventually command 
the powers of Air and Fire. Beyond that, this Sphere also grants 
power over the invisible Forces that drive all earthly elements: 
gravity, momentum, light, darkness, and even - at its highest levels 
- the titanic power of the atom. And because of all that, masters 
of this Sphere command the most devastating energies on Earth. 


“Forces” is an appropriate name for this Sphere. Its 
masters and manifestations are pretty damned forceful. Given 
the immense powers within their reach, it’s no wonder that 
Hermetic wizards, Taftani weavers, and Technocratic troopers 
seem both arrogant and confident. In the realm of Zeus, you 
live and die by lightning’s hand. To wield this Sphere, you’ve 
got to be proud enough to throw your weight around, yet 
disciplined enough to know where - and where not - to hurl it. 


Life: 
Onderstanding the Living Form 


The frighteningly intimate Sphere of Life is not an Art for 
weak stomachs or squeamish minds. This visceral discipline 
celebrates the messy splendors of organic life. Beneath our skins 
and furs and scales, we're all pulp and bones and vile fluids. The 
mage who understands Life accepts our frailties and learns how to 
heal them, exploit them, and twist them into interesting shapes. 
And to do that, you’ve got to get your hands very, very dirty. 


The rawest and most carnal Art, Life requires both passion 
and compassion. Its masters are simultaneously the most loving 
and the most ruthless mages you're ever likely to meet. These 
folks can change shapes, heal wounds, cure sickness, rend 


limbs, turn people into toads, grow trees with a glance, and turn 
enemies into writhing protoplasm. This is the Sphere of Kali, 
the Dark Mother who celebrates sex and carnage in her dance, 
or Aphrodite, whose favors hold the cruel beauty of Life itself. 


Matter: 
Mastery of Inert Substances 


Whereas Forces deals with ephemeral elements, Matter 
deals with things you can hold in your hands. The elemental 
principles of Earth, Water, and - in the Asian sense - Metal 
are the dominion of this Sphere and its adepts. Things that 
bend, break, hold firm, or give way retain solid Patterns... or 
maintain at least an illusion of solidity... in the Earthly realm, 
so this Art depends upon taking them apart, strengthening 
them, or transmuting them into something else. 


(An important note: certain substances, like wood or 
cotton, are governed by the Life Sphere while they're alive 
and governed by the Matter Sphere when life has fled. Bones, 
flesh, fur, and so on pass from Life into Matter when their 
animating energies are gone. As a result, certain substances 
that are both alive and dead - most notably, the uncanny forms 
of vampires - are governed by both Spheres together. Neither 
Life nor Matter can affect them alone, because they belong to 
the realms of both at once.) 


Matter is, in many respects, an associative Art. Mages 
often combine it with other Spheres to create greater effects. 
Prime combined with Matter weaves objects out of apparent 
nothingness; Time combined with Matter takes objects out of 
the normal time stream; Entropy combined with Matter causes 
things to erode; Spirit and Matter shift those things to spiritual 
ephemera. Although it's a potent Sphere in its own right, Matter 
works best when its properties blend with those of other Spheres. 


Matter specialists tend to be what you might call crafty, 
working with their hands, often gauging, tinkering, or 
deconstructing objects for the sake of further knowledge. 
Most, if not all, of these mages master arts like carpentry and 
stonework, and each one ofthem can hold forth for hours about 
metallic properties or different grains of wood. Like Daedalus, 
the godlike inventor from whom early Technocrats took their 
name, Matter is ingenious yet dependable. Behind apparent 
inflexibility, they'll often surprise you, because experts in this 
field understand how mutable so-called solid materials can be. 


a Mind: 
7—9 Exploration of Consciousness 


"It's all in your head." How often have you heard that 
particular dismissal? And yet, as Mind adepts will tell you, 
everything in existence is "all in our heads." Each thought, each 
sensation, every emotional realization or abstract perception 
manifests through electrical impulses in the brain that 
get processed by consciousness. That consciousness is the 
playground of the Mind Sphere, and its experts can turn 
everything you thought you knew about reality inside out. 


Chapter Two: Magick - The Art of Reality 


Certain Mind-mages see consciousness as an untouchable 
abstraction; others view the brain as a complex computer, to be 
programmed and downloaded at will. Both schools of thought 
appear to hold some vision of the truth. Consciousness clearly 
reaches beyond mere physicality, and yet it's chained - at least 
for most folks - to our physical forms. In time, a Mind master 
learns how to uncouple his mental process from his physical 
state and then project his mind off on astral journeys. Even 
then, however, a hard blow to the head can scramble his brain 
and throw his mental mastery out the nearest window. 


Mind is one of the fuzzier Spheres - more of an art than a 
science. Where Matter, Life, and Forces deal with things you can 
touch and measure, Mind reaches into abstract fields. Thoughts, 
feelings, impressions, identity - these are the tools and toys 
of mental magicks. And so, if Mind adepts seem somewhat... 
heady at times, there are good reasons for their “thought-full” 
state. Like Odin One-Eye, the trickster seer, such mages scan 
the horizon, sending out Thoughtand Memory as their guides. 


Prime: 
Exploration of Quintessential Energies 


As I mentioned earlier, there's a Primal Essence that 
pulses within all things. Whether it's bound up into Patterns 
orflowing through concepts and potential, this Quintessence 
forms the basis for our world. Mages who explore the mysteries 


70 Ma$e: The Ascension 20^ Anniversary Edition 


of Prime understand the ebbs and flows of this sublime 
essence - the "Blood of the Dragon" and the seminal fluid 


of the gods. 


Prime Arts study energies and forms, spotting traces of 
Quintessence in or between each Pattern and then channeling 
them to suit the purpose of a mage. Masters of this Sphere can 
follow Quintessential flows, taste the Resonance of certain 
energies, shift those energies in or out of Patterns, and thus 
bring things into being or drain them of the power to be real. 
Most willworkers know the basics of this Sphere, but very few 
manage to master it. Prime's a slippery Art, easily obscured 
by esoterica. 


As students of the Primal Utility Theory can tell you, 
Prime energies tend to ebb and flow around living things... 
most especially around people. When human beings invest 
themselves, emotionally and intellectually, in something, that 
something tends to gather Prime energies. Your favorite shirt 
has more Prime energy than one just purchased off the rack 
at a store because you have put more of yourself into that 
Pattern and its energies. Thus, certain students of the Prime 
principles view their magick in terms of strange math and 
hypereconomics, calculating the sublime energies involved in 
transactions between living and unliving things. By tracing 
those connections, they believe, you can manipulate those 
energies as well. 


Like the energy for which it's named, the Prime Sphere 
is sublime, transcending firm analysis or concrete definitions. 
Its adepts speak in riddles and metaphors, often blazing with 
charisma and robust health. Yet despite their bright personas, 
they have quicksilver personalities. Prime is the milk of Kuan 
Yin, the spit of Jesus, the blood of Tiamat - an essence both 
rarified and vulgar, whose properties energize all things. 


Spirit: Accord with Spiritual 
Essence and Emanations 
Despite materialistic preconceptions, any mage - even 

a Technocratic one - understands that matter is just part 
of Creation’s Tapestry. Beyond the physical mass of Matter, 
the consciousness of Mind, and the energies of Forces and 
Prime, there’s the ephemeral quality of Spirit: an element 
distilled from - or perhaps the originating source of - those 
other components. In some schools of occult thought, Spirit 
is the fifth element, the rarified soul-stuff of the Universe 
at large. To other outlooks, Spirit is the core of every living 
thing, the Resonance of life, or the alternate dimensions to 
the Earthly plane. All perspectives agree on this much: Spirit 
transcends the physical elements, yet it has a consciousness 
all its own. 


One of the earliest magickal pursuits, the Spirit Sphere 
encompasses the Otherworlds, Umbral entities, and the principles 
of the human soul. Like Mind, it’s impossible to quantify with 
precise measurements. The word spirit comes from the Latin term for 
breathing, so certain mages call this Art “the Breath of the World.” 
This is the primal Art of the shaman and the priest, the bridge 
between whatwe feel with our hands and whatwe feel with our souls. 


(Dimensional Science specialists have a somewhat more 
scientific approach to this weird Sphere. Even then, though, 
they often admit that many things remain beyond the reach 
of science... for the moment, anyway.) 


Spiritual mages have an otherworldly air about them - 
sometimes spacey, often serene, frequently capricious, and 
occasionallycruel. They tend to get impatientwith the importance 
that folks place upon material things. Spirit magicks echo with 
the cackle of Coyote and the throaty laugh of Baron Samedi - a 
mockery of the so-called real world and its denial of infinity. 


Time: The Perception 

of Chronological Flow 

The mostconfoundingArtofall, Timeskirts the strange domain 
of Chronos, titan of eternity. The Ecstatic Tradition once named 
itself after that legendary titan, and few other mages understand 
Time’s principles as well as the Ecstatics do. More abstract than 
Mind, more ephemeral than Spirit, this Art dizzies anyone who tries 
to understand it. Mages who manage to unravel Time’s mysteries 
can look forward or backward, slow or speed time’s momentum, or 
even step outside the passing minutes, hours, and years of our lives. 


Like Correspondence, the Time Sphere confounds rational 
analysis. Its principles go against everything you've been taught 
to believe. Perhaps the human mind needs drugs in order to 
accommodate such levels of temporal dislocation. We all get those 
feelings that “this has happened before” or “this seems to take 
foreverrrr...” Only a Time mage, though, can truly comprehend 
the fluid nature of time and turn it to her advantage. 


Like running water, time has currents, tides, and undertows. 
Going with its flow is far easier than going against it. Mages 
who work with time understand that turning back the clock 
is incredibly difficult, even for masters of this Sphere. If you 
think of time like a strong tide - pushing against you with 
unfathomable force, splashing you when you struggle to push 
back - then you'll understand why certain feats, like time-travel, 
are vulgar as far as the Consensus is concerned. 


Time masters tend to be either dreamily distracted or 
fanatically precise. They can be punctual within a split second, 
answer questions you haven’t asked yet, and speak in an eternal 
present tense. There’s no past, present, or future to the masters 
of Time. In the words of Janis Joplin, “It’s all the same fucking 
day, man”... a day they can stretch or compress at will. 


Whether you view the Spheres with a Tradition’s respect, a 
Technocratic analysis, or some other cultural outlook, these nine 
principles giveyoua metaphysical toolkit. Combined with Awakened 
awareness, focused belief, and dedicated willpower, the Spheres turn 
the keys in Reality’s doorway and invite you in to have a look around. 
For those of us who understand their ways, there is no truer form 
of magick. Lesser sorcerers and Night-Folk have their own powers, 
true enough. None of them, though, can do the things we do. 


Do, or Do Not 


Which brings me back to my opening again. 
Magick is averb. You do it, you will it, you make 
things happen. Despite the old view of mages 
as doddering mystic weirdoes, we are dynamic 
forces in our world. Whichever tools she uses, 
whichever beliefs he accepts, whichever ends 
they pursue with the forces at their command, 
mages DO things. Our Arts are our actions, 


whatever role we play. 


And so, when you get beyond the esoterica, magick’s core 
is simple: Learn. Know. Will. And do. Be proud but not careless, 
creative but not undisciplined. Understand that actions have 
consequences, and be ready to risk everything for what you 
know to be a greater goal. Whatever you do, bring such pride 
and artistry to your accomplishments that the gods themselves 
will sing your praises when the game is done. 


“Get off thy ass shall be the whole of the Law.” 


Chapter Two: Magick - The Art of Reality 


~~ eo 


TN E 


Chapter Three: 


The Shadow 


Meanwhile, behind the facade of this innocent-looking bookstore... 
— Batman TV series, “Zelda the Great” 


The Tower 


Associations: Broken defenses; shattering; disruption; a bolt of 
insight; freedom from ignorance; futility in the face of nature; 
housecleaning... 


They're at it again. 

It's3:14am, andour upstairs neighbors are having another round of Brawl 
in the Family — a fun game everyone in the building can share... or at least the 
ones unfortunate enough to live right underneath your bedroom. Some boomy- 
doom music has been rattling through the floor for hours, but I could at least 
manage to sort of sleep through that. Now that the screams and curses and 
smashing-furniture crap has started up again, though, there’s no way aperson 
with a conscience... or a pair of functioning eardrums... could sleep through it. 

And so, after a few minutes of “GODDAMMIT!” this and “FUCKING 
HELL!” that muffling through what's left of my ceiling, I takea deep breath, 
sit up, and weigh my options. 

Cops might not arrive for ages, if at all, which means I get to listen to 
this shit for an hour or more. Again. And I have to work in the morning, 
even if no one else in this goddamned building does. 

I could roll up some toilet paper earplugs, jam ‘em in my ears, and 
ride it out until maybe I fall back asleep. That could take a while. 

Or I could go upstairs, confront those assholes, remind them that 
not everyone in the building wants to listen to their domestic carnage, 
and hope they're not so drunk and violent that they decide to include me 
in the game. 


Chapter Three: The Shadow World 73 


| Hd 
| 


I could do something... drastic, too. My altar shines in the 
half-light through my window blinds. The battered top hat and 
gnarled crutch catch my eye. What'cha gonna do? they ask me. 
For the life of me, I don't have a good answer. 

Wow. All those options suck. 

And then I see the stain. 

It starts out as a shadow across the crack in the ceiling. 
Then it spreads. 


Then a drop of it falls. 


Lands on my more-or-less-clean sheets. 
I don't have to see the color to know what it is. 
A second drop falls. 

Then a third. 

Another deep sigh. 

Reach for my top hat. 

Grab the cane. 

So much for work. 


By morning, I'll have to move again... 


A Stroll in the Park 


Let's take a walk. It won't be far - just the 
length and breadth of infinity. 


Perhaps the hardest thing to wrap your head 
around in this crazy world of ours is the sheer 
scope of it. In the comfort of the average 
American living room, there's no real hint of 
the strangeness outside your windows. So let's 
take astroll in the park, where familiarity meets 
potential and then heads off in directions you 
might never have considered before. Some 
parts of this journey may feel strange, others oddly familiar. I 
won't belabor the obvious Shakespeare quote, but let's allow 
our philosophies to dream a little bigger than they might have 
otherwise. 


A fact to keep in mind along this tour: what you see is 
not necessarily what I see, and neither one of us might see 
things as another person would. Certain things are more stable 
and reliable than others, but here's a term to keep in mind: 
subjective reality. What this means is that we all experience 
reality differently. Many elements remain constant, but the 
details shift from person to person... sometimes with radically 
different results. 


The Rashomon Effect 


How can that happen? I call it the Rashomon effect, after the 
famous Japanese film and stage play of that name. Rashomon 
tells the story of a crime; the audience witnesses it from several 
different perspectives. All those stories seem equally true... which 
is the point. For each different person telling the story, the facts 
appear differently. And that’s the way reality works. You and 
I might share a walk in the park, but the way we experience it 
will depend a lot on what we expect to see while we do. 


Any mage, regardless of faction, soon realizes that what 
mundane people refer to as “reality” is flexible. A few constants, 
but lots of wiggle room. That wiggle room is where we live most 
of our lives after the Awakening... and the more enlightened or 
powerful we become, the more flexible our world reveals itself 
to be. A newly-Awakened person realizes that she can see the 
structure of a stone; a mage with training and experience learns 
to perceive and alter energies within the stone; the master can 
turn thatstone to fog; and beyond mastery she realizes thatstone 
and fog are both illusions to be transformed or ignored at will. 


And so, yes - the tour we're about to take has different 
names, sensations, and levels of reality. For now, we'll focus on 
the basics, but in time you'll realize - assuming you live that 
long - that all of this is just an illusion... what's often called 
maya, the Earthly dream from which most folks never Awaken. 


A Nightmare World 


For many people in our darkened world, that 
dream is a nightmare. Rats breed while children 
starve. The rich have more money than God, 
and the poor pray to get through another day 
with food on the table and a roof over their 
heads. Lots of people don't have even that 
much. Cruel laws and social indifference have 
packed the streets with lost and homeless souls. 
Ayn Rand's philosophy of parasitic prosperity 
reached its full poisonous bloom in this world. 
Pundits and politicians tear nations apart for monetary gain. 


Ma$e: The Ascension 20^ Anniversary Edition 


Sure, we have our saints as well as our sinners, but all too often 
they become martyrs, monsters, or both. The kindly priest 
gropes boys in the silence of a rectory; girls sell virginity on the 
Internet, disappearing in the night as predators take their fill. 
There is wonder here, but it's a shadow-sort of wonder - the 
gleam of raindrops on a spider's web. 


Here's our park - a patch of grass and trees stuck between 
steel-glass towers whose lights dim the stars. Handfuls of gargoyles 
and dead-hero statues rise up here and there, desecrated with 
bird shit and graffiti. Furtive people dart between the shadows, 


seeking drugs and forbidden encounters. The grass gleams with 
discarded needles and broken glass. Gang tags blaze across 
the old stone walls. Here and there, occult designs hint at 
more sinister things. Carved names glow against the tree bark; 
cigarette embers shine against the dark. Lumpy shapes scatter 
across the field; sleeping people? Corpses? Probably both. A 
full moon shines through smoggy clouds. Stars struggle to 
be seen. The closer light, however, comes from the wash of 
windows and car headlights cutting through the dark. Broken 
streetlamps leave patches of gloom. Odd figures loiter on the 
edge of sight. Someone’s crying in that alley, but it's best not 
to find out why. Every morning, the city's clean-up crews sort 
the living from the dead. 


On the fringes of those cities, suburbia sprawls. Peppered 
with strip malls, strip clubs, McMansions, McTown Halls, fast food 
franchises, mini-screened multiplexes, housing developments, 
gated communities, and more gun shops, pawn shops, and sex- 
toy shops than you’d ever think were possible, this clapboard 
wasteland is as slick and rotten as the American Dream. By the 
light of reality TV, parents beat their kids, cheat on their spouses, 
and drink or drug themselves insensible. Gangs creep through 
the streets at night, rendering every park and playground into 
a bad joke. Schools, decades old, crumble due to lack of funds. 
Church marquees broadcast pious slogans to the endless cars 
and empty cul-de-sacs. 


It goes on like this across the continents: cities that are 
too big, too old, or both; suburbs that promise everything and 
give almost nothing; wilderness where the borders of so-called 
civilization collapse and ancient secrets defy man’s dominion. 
Empty ghost towns; factories staffed with child labor; war zones 
and polluted smears. Is it any wonder, then, that folks spend 
more time with TVs than with the world around them? When 
you step outside your ring of safety, it’s a pretty scary world. 


Poisonous Ofopia 


Although the foretold Apocalypse has yet to show its face, 
that’s not for lack of trying on our part. The last decade or so 
has seen perpetual upheaval, innovation, and revolt. Surging 
through the second decade of this brave new millennium, 
we seem more poised than ever before on a precipice of our 
own design. Not long ago, people expected divine revelation 
- waking gods, rains of fire, that sort of thing. Now, though, 
it appears that revelation comes through the mirrors we hold 
up to our faces... and that reflection is both fascinating and 
awful beyond words. 


Slapped in the face on September 11, 2001, the American 
giant became a Frankenstein monster. We rained Armageddon 
on the guilty and innocent alike. Riding high on a swell of 
nationalistic fear, we embraced things that should never have 
been allowed. Torture camps opened. Holy books were burnt. 
In the name of ancient scriptures, our leaders aimed the 
greatest military machine in history at our enemies... and then 
found ourselves hamstrung by our own cultural presumptions. 


Promises of prosperity got torn down by the realities behind 
them. Roughly 15 years later, our economy staggers. À few folks 
eat cake while the rest of us scrabble over crumbs. 


Our counterpart fanatics turned industry's toys against 
us, crafting a global network in which geographic boundaries 
disappeared. Power tools ripped skin and bone in Allah's name, 
and the Internet - proud tool of Hermes unbound - became 
a hall of mirrors that all show a different face. Across four 
continents, a generation has grown up in the shadow of terror. 
Thanks to the tools we made to keep us safe, no one truly is. 


Across the world, prosperity and poverty chase each 
other's tails. Slave-children make toys for the privileged elite. 
Governments mortgage their own lands in order to keep their 
richest people fat. “Revolution” is on everybody’s lips. Streets 
boil with epic protests. Militarized and often corrupt police 
wage war in our cities. Weeping prophets foretell blood in every 
gutter. The so-called Holy Land burns with insane zeal - and 
with three religions literally hell-bent on bringing about their 
Apocalypse, we might still see the visions of that demented 
scripture played out on the global stage. May all the gods help 
us then... but I wouldn't count on them for deliverance. 


Over 10 years back, the Technocracy declared victory. 
What a joke that was! 


The irony is that wonderful things have happened. That 
Internet - a toy for the elite 20 years ago - is now an intrinsic 
partoftheworld as we know it. Devotees of the Correspondence 
Sphere were right: in a virtual sense, at least, you really can turn 
all places into one. Social media, cell phones, high-speed wireless 
connections, and instant videos are at the literal fingertips of 
people across the globe. You can watch the streets of Istanbul 
from a laptop in Tokyo and call a friend in Sao Paulo from the 
phone in your pocket on the Appalachian Trail. We can speak 
to one another, see one another, care about one another in 
ways that were impossible 20 years ago. This should be Utopia. 


And instead, it’s... well, not. 


Who needs cannibal gods when you've got human beings? 
When scared and bored, we devour one another. Social media 
and a consolidated mass-media machine have turned us into a 
global box of angry rats, biting our neighbors over each perceived 
infraction. Terror’s profitable, so our media keep us terrified. 
Every channel, itseems, blares "SPECIAL REPORT!" and “It could 
happen to YOU!” in a round-the-clock orgy of orchestrated fear. 
We can see each abduction, every murder, the daily holocausts 
we inflict on one another. In our poisonous utopia, we turn 
miracles to miseries. Every neighbor is a monster, and we all 
live right next door. 


Our gods must be laughing through their tears. 


And here’s an unpopular truth for you: we made this world. 
It's the reality we've built - all of us. Sleepers and Awakened 
and the folks in between... we’re all responsible for this. Mystic 
mages blame the Technocracy, the Technocrats blame the 
mystics, and both sides of that divide are right. Folks will tell 


Chapter Three: The Shadow World 


IA 7 


i 
| 
a.d 


you that vampires made this world, that it’s corrupted by some 
cosmic Wyrm, fallen to demonic hands, or trembling in the 
shadow of God’s wrath. All those theories might be true. 
But the fact is, we allowed it to happen. This world is what 
we make of it. If it’s dark, then Darkness must appeal to us. 


Thankfully, it’s not all dark. 


Hope and Fear 

Beyond the nightclubs where folks go to dance their 
fear away, outside the churches and the protest camps, you'll 
find love in strange places and hope in the night. Candlelit 
shops and gleaming penthouses, soup kitchens and blessed 
sanctuaries all draw the people who refuse to be afraid. Those 
social media glory holes also help find lost kids, send out 
cries for help, dig up the truths our leaders choose to hide, 
and reveal that "the other" we've been told to fear looks 
pretty much like us. 


The global rise of technology has given us something 
else as well: the rise of extraordinary citizens whose dynamic 
worldviews accept broad and inclusive paradigms. The 
Technocracy likes to claim those people as their own, but 
the fact is this: people with open minds have a wider range 
of freedom. Sure, you might spend all day checking your 
"Twitter account, but those tweets could have you thinking 
all kinds of subversive thoughts. Freedom of information 
undermines tyranny. The source of that information does 
not dictate what you do with it. 


So yes, our world is scary. Yeah, things look kinda bleak. 
But here's the secret for both mages and the Masses alike: 
hope trumps fear when you dare to make it so. 


The tools ofthe masters have given slaves a voice. Magic's 
as real as the "preferred reading platform" in your hands. 
Every life, human and otherwise, has the potential to tip 
the balance in favor of a better day. It's up to us, then, to go 
nurture that potential - to strive against the weight of fear. 


Now more than ever, the power is ours if we choose to 
use it well. 


Dower and Sanctuary 


Even in such a world, we find places of safety and 
security. For unAwakened folks, those sanctuaries might be 
found in quiet glades, distant mountain peaks, houses of 
deep faith, or private homes and hospitals where kindness 
keeps the pain at bay. Compassion isn't always easy to find, 
but it's there ifyou know where to look and how to recognize 
it once you're there. 


Sanctums 

A studio not far from here holds freeform dances every 
other night. People come from all over the city to spend a 
little time spinning around the floor among people they can 
trust. A nearby mission hosts three meals a day, donated 


by local businesses and individuals whose hearts and bank 


76 Mage: The Ascension 20" Anniversary Edition 
= a à aw : 5 ; Ea ; — 


Future Fates: The New Millennium 


The world has changed a lot since the original Mage: The Ascension series, which ran between 1993 and 2003. 
Significant events and technologies have altered the social and political landscape. Beyond a certain escapade involving 
some planes and buildings and all the resulting insanities, the world has — as of this writing — experienced a time of new 
revolutions; a global financial crisis which has yet to be resolved; a surge of climate change and natural disasters; the 
rise of social media; a massive conflux of wireless, cell phone/ smart phone, online video, digital imaging, body armor, 
drone weapons, high-speed Internet, and other revolutionary technologies; global controversies about gender and ethnic 
identities and their associated rights; and an expansion and consolidation of mass media and government surveillance 
that makes 1984 look like a business plan. These events, and many others, have made the world of our new millennium 
a different place — for better and worse - than the world into which Mage was born. 


Inthe same vein, events that shaped Mage’s original setting — the crack wars, grunge/ punk/ Gothic music, the implosion 
of the Soviet Union, Gulf War |, and that newfangled "home computer” thing, among others — are ancient history now. 
Doubtless, there'll be people reading these words who weren't even born when the first Mage book slid off the presses, 


and other folks who'll want Mage to be exactly the way it was back when they played it during Bill Clinton's heyday. 
And so, with regards to the many changes our world has seen since 1993, a Mage Storyteller has several options: 


* ShitHappened: 9/11 happened, Hurricane Katrina happened, the Iraq and Afghanistan Warshappened, and the world's 
smack in the middle of global climate change. International revolts, Fox News, the Greek economic crisis, and all the other 
messes dnd miracles that define our era are in full swing. Mage 20 assumes this option, but you don’t have to. 


Some Shit May Have Happened: Maybe 9/11 happened but the Arab Spring did not; perhaps it’s the other way 
around. Maybe YouTube puts the world online, but other things never came to pass. The world’s a synthesis of certain 
real-life events and the lack of others. If you change things, though, just make sure the related things change too - it's 
hard to have YouTube if the world’s still functioning on dial-up connections. 


Shit Happened My Way: Maybe Iraq really did have WMDs. Perhaps the Reckoning described in Mage Revised 
is still in progress and the Earth’s in total chaos. It could be that President Maverick won in 2008 or that the world’s 
still watching Animaniacs and digging on Pearl Jam and 2 Live.Crew. The:setting blurs between 1993 and 2013, with 


the details as you want them. 


As the saying goes, reality is up for grabs. Define your Mage age as you see fit. 


accounts aren'ttoo tight for a little charity. A Pagan coven meets 
each Wednesday night at a bookstore down the street, and its 
members have ambitions that go beyond merely shocking the 
mundanes. And a local millionaire, heiress to a ship-building 
fortune, spends vast amounts of cash each year to sponsor causes 
and change lives. For all the selfishness and greed in this world, 
there are still folks who hold defiant candles against the dark. 


Those people often make safe space for themselves and 
their friends. These places - warded by mystic, spiritual, or 
oddly scientific technologies - provide Sanctums for folks in 
need of protection and rest. You might find dozens of them 
throughout any city or town on earth: the witch's herb garden, 
the mad scientist's garage workshop, the martial artist's dojo, the 
artist'sstudio. There's nothingoverly magical aboutsuch places 
- they're simply comforting work or worship spaces, crafted to 
support the people who use them. Sometimes, however, the 
things that go on there are magickal by definition - events, 
rites, and experiments whose effects should be impossible and 
yet clearly are not. 


Chantries, Constructs, Labyrinths, and More 


And then there are places where the dominant reality has 
been banished - places where “magick” is more than just a word. 
If you know the right passwords and attract the right friends, 


they might take you to that house down the block where the 
inside’s bigger than the outside would suggest. Each room has 
a fireplace that never runs out of wood. Certain doors there 
don’t go where you’d expect such doors to lead: the back door 
leads to a field in Ireland; a closet on the fourth floor (a floor 
that shouldn’t exist, yet does) opens into a luxurious meditation 
room, lit by votive candles that never burn out. The three 
dogs who live there are extremely intelligent; you'd swear one 
of them could talk if you asked her a serious question... and 
you'd be right to think so, too. This house, and others like it, 
is called a Chantry: a house where magick, and those who use 
it, can be relatively safe. 


Chantry is an old term used by Hermetic mages to refer 
to a mystic stronghold. It got adopted by the Nine Traditions 
as a common phrase. Other groups use different phrases; to 
agents ofthe Technocracy, such strongholds are called Constructs 
- places where the full force of Enlightened science may 
prevail. Nephandic mages speak of Labyrinths, where a person 
loses himself in the glory of the Void. Other groups employ 
traditional phrases - temples, groves, circles, and so forth - most 
of which get used by Tradition mages as well. 


A Chantry's look and feel and purpose depend on the group 
that employs it. A Fallen Labyrinth might be a fetish club where 
no safewords are honored or allowed, an occult bookstore with a 


Chapter Three: The Shadow World 77 


challenging array of books that only certain people even realize are 
there, the law office ofa particularly ruthless firm, ora mansion paid 
for by especially unholy means. A Technocratic Construct could be 
a genetics lab where research protocols go far beyond what normal 
labs can work with, an arsenal filled with gadgets that make Batman 
look like a Luddite, a luxurious penthouse office suite, or a bank 
that handles “veryspecial” accounts. Form follows function in sucha 
place. If the owners need a wax museum, gun range, or holographic 
danger room, then the Chantry has the essential facilities. 


The size and scope of those facilities marks one of the 
main differences between a Chantry and a Sanctum: a Sanctum 
is modest, not especially magickal, and fairly small - a large 
room or two at most. It probably has a good feel to it, but you 
won't find floating stone heads that speak in tongues when 
someone enters a room. Chantries, on the other hand, tend to 
step outside Consensus reality; talkingstone heads mightbe the 
least bizarre thing you'd find in one. Temples filled with small 
dragons or talking cats, labs out of Frankenstein's wet dreams, 
studio apartments that open out into endless fields... whatever 
a group of mages desires, you might find it in such a place. 


That said, a Chantry’s size, scope, and accoutrements are 
linked to the power of the mages who own the place. A tribe of 
gifted street-kids probably inhabits a squat with a few protective 
wards anda talking dog. The ancestral grove for a witchy bloodline 
could be filled with animals and plants that act as sentinels, 
plus a gateway to a pocket Summerland made just for them. 
A safe-house Construct for a team of Technocratic Black Suits 
might have extra floors, sub-basements you won’t find on any 
blueprint, and a motor pool James Bond would envy. And the 
ancient home of mighty wizards... well, let's just say that Hogwarts 
wasn’t based entirely on imagination! You can tell a lot about a 
group of mages by the Chantry in which they gather... assuming, 
of course, that you make it past the front door. 


Life-Blood of Reality 


Whenever possible, Chantries and Sanctums get set up in 
or around places of power: ancient altars, deep wildernesses, 
legendary peaks that haven’t been climbed by every thrill seeking 
idiot with an REI credit card. In such areas, you might say that 
the life-blood of Creation flows, gathers, and occasionally clots. 


Nodes 


There'sa place like that, in fact, in this very park - a fountain 
whose waters taste fresh and clean no matter how many bums 
bathe in them or throw up in the basin. An old sculptor named 
Carlito Castrovinci made this fountain over 150 years ago at 
the commission of a donor listed only as “Anonymous” in the 
city registry. No birds ever shit on it, spray paint doesn’t stick 
to it, and everyone who’s tried to chip a piece off or carve her 
name in the marble has been disappointed. The fountain’s 
waters never freeze, and its surface gleams as bright as it did 
on the day its stone was touched by Castrovinci’s hand. Folks 
call this fountain The White Lady’s Retreat. You can call it a 
Node: a mystic knot in an otherwise banal world. 


Despite the somewhat clinical name, Nodes provide a 
refreshing sense of wonder. Even to people who don’t believe 
in miracles, a Node feels special, more Real than real. Senses 
sharpen; perceptions deepen; breezes caress you as energy stirs 
beneath your skin. These are sacred spots with a distinct presence 
of their own. And to folks who know them for what they are, 
Nodes are precious beyond words. 


That’s not to say all Nodes are pleasant. Many are anything 
but comforting. There are Nodes in Auschwitz, Nodes in 
Normandy, Nodes that mark the spots of massacres. The Manson 
murders are thought to have been blood sacrifices that either 
made or celebrated Nodes, and Jeffrey Dahmer’s home, before 


Future Fates: Chantries and Horizon Realms 


The scope and abilities of Chantries, as well as their connection to Horizon Realms, changes drastically between the 
first two editions of Mage and the Revised Edition. In the original editions, Chantries can be fairly powerful, with 
Earthly manifestations tied to even more powerful Horizon Realms. In Revised, the effects of the Ascension Warrior's 
rampage, the Avatar Storm, the Reckoning, and the apparent triumph of the Technocracy cut most Chantries off from 
Horizon Realms, exile their residents, and reduce their magickal potential. 


Depending on the Storyteller's desires... 


* Chantries and Horizon Realms are greatly reduced and cut off from the Otherworlds: As per Mage 
Revised, Chantries are little more than fortified houses with very few ties to larger mystic Realms. Technocratic 
Constructs are incredibly powerful, filled with gadgets and hypertechnology, and yet still severed from the offworld 


Realms where the Inner Circle ruled. 


Many Chantries and Realms have been reduced, but powerful facilities remain intact: The balance of 
power has shifted, and magick is rarer and more difficult than it had been before. Still, Chantries and Constructs can 


still be pretty marvelous places. 


Nothing has changed: Chantries and Horizon Realms are as potent and magickal as ever before... more subtle, 
perhaps, than they had been in the legendary past, but still miraculous in comparison to mundane facilities. 


See Chapter Four for more details. 


78 Mage: The Ascension 20" Anniversary Edition 


itwas bulldozed, had supposedly become a Node as well. When 
I say that Nodes collect the life-blood of the world, that blood 
can literally be shed. Verbena witch-groves feed their trees with 
blood that's given willingly... and otherwise. 


It's been said that Nodes are rare. I’m not really sure 
that’s true. Nodes swell up wherever deep passions or massive 
expenditures of life force shape the fabric of reality. Haunted 
houses, battlefields, renowned churches, killing fields - all of 
them could contain or spawn Nodes. Natural phenomena, too, 
shape Nodes in places few human feet have touched. There are 
reasons that monks and hermits seek out distant sanctuaries; 
those waterfalls and mountain peaks hold Nodes that no one 
else has found. 


If Nodes seem rare, I suspect it’s more a matter of perception 
than of scarcity. Most people, even mages, don’t recognize a 
Node until they’re standing right on top of it. 


The most obvious Nodes, however, have been claimed. 
Groups tend to build temples on top of them... or - if the 
Technocracy gets there first - labs or shopping malls. Famous 
Nodes tend to become bones of contention or war, as any 
resident of Jerusalem can tell you! Lourdes, Mecca, Little Big 
Horn, Sherwood Forest... they're not just places, they're identities. 
Folks often fight over them, protect them, conquer them in 
the names of gods and heroes. Just look at the controversy 
over Little Big Horn National Park, where people still argue 
over what it should be called. To name such a place is to claim 
its power for yourself. 


Wellsprings 

Some Nodes are temporary. Energy wells up in one place for 
a brief period of time and then evaporates back into the world 
at large. Such Wellsprings appear at times of great excitement 
or stress, generated by the life force of the entities who gather 
there. Those entities aren’t always human, by the way. As my 
friend Painted Horse once told me, the Wellspring of a bison 
stampede feels like thunder beneath the earth... a thunder you 
can ride if you know how. 


Potent Wellsprings can become Nodes too. Black Rock 
Desert, Tiananmen Square, the New York and Tokyo Stock 
Exchanges - all began as massive Wellsprings of human hope 
and fear. Now, though, they’re all Nodes in their own right, 
pulsating with energy even when no one’s there to generate it. 
Most often, though, a Wellspring exists until a certain event - a 
concert, a battle, a protest march - ends. Once the source of 
that energy departs, the energy either soaks into that place or 
drains away like rain after a storm. 


Quintessence and Tass 


Among mages, Nodes are treasured not only for their 
metaphysical value but for their restorative properties as well. 
See, mage Avatars absorb that Quintessence I mentioned earlier 
- the “fifth essence” referred to in arcane metaphysics. That 
essence fuels the latticework of all Creation, restoring the 


sublime energy within us. Just think of it as chicken soup for 
the Awakened soul. 


Quintessence gathers along these knots and wells of reality. 
Sometimes it manifests in material forms called Tass. Think of 
Tass as ice formed from watery Quintessence: what flows as one 
becomes solid in the other. Tass embodies our metaphysical 
chicken soup, with Quintessence as the nutrition within that 
soup. And it takes a multitude of forms - water, roses, blood, 
food - that can be held, carried, and broken down into the raw 
Quintessence energy that sustains our Arts and lives. 


Unlike the things I’ve shown you up till now, Quintessence 
isn’t physical until it manifests as Tass... and even then, it’s 
only halfway there. Although mages who study the Sphere 
of Prime can understand such forces more deeply than most 
folk do, Quintessence slips out of the realm of concrete things 
and into the realm of seriously subjective reality. It’s slippery 
stuff, perceived by what people expect to experience. The 
nature of a Node often shapes the energy - the feel or flavor 
of Quintessence - but the ways in which that Quintessence 
manifests (if it manifests at all) can be wildly diverse. In that 
fountain over there, Tass feels like clear, cold water. A Node in 
Auschwitz or Wounded Knee, however, might give you blood, 
ash, or nightmares instead. 


Quintessence is liminal. That means it exists at the threshold 
of what people call reality. It's like a flow of spirit-water, except 
that even that description can't capture what it truly is. You'll 
hear many different definitions or descriptions of Quintessence 
because every human definition falls short. It exists in the realm 
of poetry and metaphor, a shiny spark of liquid God. 


Outside the physical elements of the periodic table, this 
energy is essentially the world’s life force. It’s one of those 
things people can feel but not quite measure unless their 
measurement methods reach outside materialistic science. It’s 
as real as gasoline, but its properties transcend understanding. 
Quintessence is literally as real as you believe it is, and each 
person experiences it differently. 


Science and Reality 


Here’s an important dividing line between what we 
currently call science and what we experience as reality: Science 
measures and defines repeatable, provable, and controllable 
phenomena; reality is what we perceive about the world as we 
move through it. There's plenty of overlap between them, but 
everyone - even scientists - experiences things that cannot be 
measured, repeated, or quantified. 


Take emotions, for example. Emotions can't be charted; 
memories cannot be reliably graphed. One person might smell 
roses and think of her sweet first date, whereas another person 
smells their cloying musk and remembers her abusive mother’s 
perfume. As I mentioned earlier, the saying “It’s all in your head” 
is literally true: everything we experience gets filtered through 
our consciousness... and consciousness cannot be measured 
in a lab. The electrical impulses that signify love, anger, or 


Chapter Three: The Shadow World 


EEA 


es 


In Mage Revised, Resonance becomes a game system Trait. Earlier editions leave it as a Storytelling and roleplaying 
choice, except with regards to Jhor (the Death Resonance that infects mages who work with Underworld energies) and 
the Flaw called Echoes. Mage 20 leaves the option to individual groups. For more details, see Chapters Two 


, Six , and Ten 


memory might show up on a brain scan, but no process can 
define what those impulses mean to us. 


In a very real way, then - and this is vital - each one of us 
experiences our own reality. Some of us just share those impressions 
on a bigger scale. 


Science - even Technocratic hypertech - measures and 
defines results. Consciousness, on the other hand, involves 
impressions. Results often flow from impressions, but that's 
not always true. I can feel angry because the perfume you're 
wearing reminds me of a shitty ex-girlfriend, but unless I act on 
that anger, you can’t prove my impressions in a lab. You might 
measure my heart rate, scan my brain, or make notes about 
the things I tell you, but my reality is not quantifiable by science. 
We are, each one of us, an alchemical codex that not even we 
can truly read, a codex that no one else could understand the 
same way we can. 


That's not to say that science isn't real. I’m saying that 
science gets only part of the picture. The same holds true for 
religion too; the feelings that inspire faith cannot be quantified 
in books or rituals. At some point, science and religion fall 
shortofexperience... and beyond that point, magick takes over. 
And so, when you get to the fuzzier elements of our world - 
Awakened and otherwise - remember that words and charts 
and definitions are limited. Everything real is real differently, 
even when it covers common ground. 


And if that sounds nebulous, you're beginning to 
understand why mages use such flowery descriptions. Art is 
the language of realities that science fails to understand. 


Resonance Energy and the World at Large 


If Quintessence is water and Tass is ice, then Resonance 
is the flavor of both. Here’s where the “subjective” part of 
subjective reality takes on a recognizable element. 

As I said earlier, when we were discussing the principles of 
magick, Resonance echoes the intentions and emotions behind 
the actions attached to that magick. The pure water in the 
White Lady’s fountain provides an example of Resonance. 


Mage: The Ascension 20" Anniversary Edition 


In this case, Carlito Castrovinci left a part of himself in that 
masterpiece. It meant so much to him and was shaped with 
such loving care that it adopted a Resonance of comfort and 
purity. His art invested it with a tiny sliver of his soul. 


Resonance, like Nodes, can be extremely unpleasant too. 
That creepy feeling you get when you step into a child molester’s 
basement is Resonance. You might feel it on the molester as 
well... possibly even on his victims. Traumas linger in the form 
of Resonance, tainting battlefields with the hatred that forged 
them. Also like Nodes, Resonance isn't limited to human activity. 
There are places that even the earliest humanoids could feel 
were somehow wrong, thanks to the Resonance around them. 
Remember this: we are not the only shapers of reality. Those things 
we call spirits, animals, aliens, and gods have powers as great 
as, and often far greater than, our own. 


When I said earlier that we live in the world we've made, 
I was referring to Resonance. Even the dullest Sleeper adds a 
bit to the overall atmosphere. You could even say that mages 
manipulate Resonance with our magicks when we shape reality 
in our image. A modern Pagan saying, “That which you do 
returns to you threefold,” reflects the Resonance effect. A 
controversial but inescapable element of magick, Resonance 
leaves a signature on magical acts. In extreme cases, it signs the 
mage as well as his activities. 


Incertain places and circumstances, Resonance attaches itself 
to a mage, echoing the effects of her actions. Candles flare when 
she walks by; milk sours and grass grows, flutters, or dies. The 
classical signs of witchcraft could be considered Resonance effects, 
and those phenomena can be extremely dangerous to mages who 
want to remain unnoticed. Technocrats and other huntertypes 
keep a wary eye out for Resonance echoes, so a wise mage is careful 
with the methods and intentions of her magickal acts. 


So when you're looking at the effects of our activities, 
keep that "threefold return" principle in mind. The things you 
do, magickal or not, make a difference in our world... and the 
more powerful you are, the more - for better and worse - your 
actions transform it. 


The Worlds Beyond 


And now comes the interesting part. 


The mortal world itself feels infinite. Never 
underestimate it or take it for granted. There's 
as much wonder in a Tennessee sunset or the 
vast expanse of Sahara sand as there is in any 
Otherworldly Realm. Everywhere in this world 
of ours, there are miracles in plain sight if and 
when you have eyes to see them. 


Perhaps the gravest tragedy of human existence 
is that we take so much for granted that we crave endless 
stimulation, often from false and banal sources. Folks these 
days would rather spend all day on the Internet - chatting about 
nothingwith people they'll never meet - than take a walk outside 
and open themselves to the sensations they typically shut out. 
Just by watching this street right here with an observant eye 
and ear, you could see and hear new things. Not all of them 
would be pleasant... but then, miracles rarely are. Life is a great 
and terrible gift, wrapped in love and suffering; those who seek 
only one will never recognize either for the wonder it truly is. 


And yet, our world holds far more than simply this... 


The Periphery: Awareness of More 


Almost everyone has flashes of the Periphery, that “corner of 
your eye" sensation that gives you a glimpse, a hint, of something 
beyond the materialistic world. These glimpses don’t have to 
be visual, either. A person might smell whiffs of brimstone or 
roses that aren’t physically there at the time. Or hear a whisper 
when no one else is in the room. Or catch a taste of pizza when 
she hasn't eaten any in a year. Dreams, déjà vu, that prickly 
sense of having someone "walk over your grave" - that's the 
Periphery. It's where experienced reality departs from scientific 
proof. You can't measure it, but you know it's real. 


Certain people are more attuned to this level of reality 
than others are. We call that extra level of perception Awareness, 
with a capital "A." A person with this degree of Awareness 
can sense things most folks miss. She might see auras, note 
phantom smells, or feel especially drawn to or repulsed by 
people with strong Resonance about them. An Aware person 
could be thought of as a Sleepwalker: too perceptive to be truly 
asleep, yet not totally Awakened in the formal sense. Such 
Awareness often signals an imminent Awakening... often, but 


not always. Lots of people spend their entire lives at this level of 


Chapter Three: The Shadow World 8l 


Future Fates: The Reckoning, the Gauntlet, 
and the Avatar Storm 


In Mage Revised, events within the Reckoning metaplot turn passage through the Gauntlet into a torturous and 
potentially deadly ordeal. This Avatar Storm flays Awakened Avatars, inflicting serious damage on a mage’s body 
and soul. Meanwhile, mages who journey outside of Earth’s material realm for more than three months or so become 
Disembodied; their material bodies fade and leave only their spirits behind. The inhabitants of many Otherworldly Realms 
have therefore become ghosts of their former selves, their Realms now echoes of the places they once were. According 
to this metaplot, master mages and mythic beasts are now only spirit entities, existing in a haunted, Otherworldly limbo. 
Earthbound mages lose their connection to Realm-bound masters, so they must forge new Paths for themselves. This 


catastrophe is said to mark the End Times, reflecting magick’s failure within the Ascension War. 


In order to capture the flavor of “classic era” Mage, this Reckoning metaplot is optional in Mage 20. Depending on 
the tone and nature of your chronicle, you could regard the Avatar Storm in one of the following ways: 


* The Avatar Storm still rages: Lashing Avatar Winds shred mages who dare to cross the Gauntlet, so few mages 
ever do. Otherworldly passage is a rare and treacherous thing, undertaken only under desperate circumstances. 
Travelers who do pass beyond the barriers risk transformation, death, and eternal Disembodiment. Thus, travel to the 
Otherworlds remains a desperate and uncertain endeavor. 


The Avatar Storm was temporary: After a horrific period of spiritual violence, the Storm subsided into a bad 
memory. Haunted Realms filled with spirits still drift throughout the Middle, High, and Deep Umbra, but the worst 
effects of the Storm have ended. 


The Avatar Storm never happened: Passage between worlds remains challenging but not torturous. Ignore alll 


references to the Storm, Reckoning, and Disembodiment. 


For game rules dealing with the Avatar Storm and its associated effects, see Chapter Nine (pp. 476-480). 


perception. “Gramma,” folks say of them, “had a feeling about 
things.” She might never have stepped across the threshold, 
but that old lady knew there was more to life than what was 
right in front of her. 


Vidare: How You See 
the Edges of Our World 


If the Otherworlds are an onion, then the Periphery is 
the smell of that onion. And as we know, some people love 
onions and others can’t stand them. Extend that preference 
to a person’s perceptions of the Otherworlds, and you have 
what Hermetic mages call the Vidare: the viewpoint through 
which that person perceives the Otherworlds. 


A few moments ago, I mentioned that our expectations 
shape the reality we experience. The Vidare is a perfect example of 
that. A person who thinks in complex, abstract terms experiences 
the Otherworlds as a sparking latticework of elaborate geometry, 
filled with archetypal concepts and shining energy. Many of us 
call this the Vidare Astral, a heady perspective of vivid clarity. 
Scientists, academics, spiritual ascetics, and wired psychonauts 
tend to see the Otherworlds this way. 


Meanwhile, a person who lives life with elemental passion 
experiences a sensual banquet of potent sensations. This Vidare 
Spiritus reflects a raw and vibrant perspective - life lived from 
the heart and guts. Shamans, witches, and Ecstatics view their 
world this way, with an animalistic purity that - though not 
always enjoyable - feels naturally raw. 


82 Mage: The Ascension 20" Anniversary Edition 


Melancholy souls who regard life as the doorway to death 
endure the Vidare Mortem - a literally grave perspective. This is 
the proverbial “dirty glass,” a grim view of the world as seen from 
the dirt beneath your feet. Whereas the Astral view sees bright 
colors, the Mortem offers up shadows; whereas the Spiritus 
perspective feels life rich with fang and claw, the death’s-eye 
view reveals bones and decay. 


How can three different views affect a single experience? 
Let’s look at that oak tree over there: to the Astral perspective, 
the trunk and leaves shimmer with bright energy spun into 
geometric forms of dazzling precision. The Spiritus perspective 
smells the sap, glories in the roughness of the bark, senses the 
currents of life force drawn inward through the roots and leaves. 
And the Mortem perspective sees a column of rot, etched with 
insects carrying dead and dying matter between stark branches 
and soil-bound roots. All three visions are true - the oak tree is 
the sum of all of those things, and yet even more. Our personal 
experiences shade the way we perceive a greater reality. That’s 
true anywhere, but it’s especially true when we step beyond the 
borders of this mortal realm. 


The Gauntlet 


Now we come to the skin of the onion. And although the 
analogy's actually reversed - the Otherworld’s layers surround 
our world, which would then be the core of the onion - it's 
helpful to think of the so-called Gauntlet as the skin you must 
bite through in order to reach the other layers. 


Thinner in the wilderness than it is in built-up regions, the 
Gauntlet seems to conform to the local level of so-called civilization. 
Areas with heavy concentrations of industrial technology have very 
thick Gauntlets, but remote or haunted areas have thin ones. The 
reality inertia I’ve mentioned earlier has a lot to do with the Gauntlet’s 
density; it's far easier to pass through that barrier in, say, Goa, India, 
than in midtown Manhattan. In deeply scientific places, it's almost 
impossible to penetrate unless you're using some sort of dimensional 
travel device. During this time of apparent Technocratic victory, the 
Gauntlet's quite difficult to pass. 


Folks have lots of theories about the Gauntlet. In some myths, all 
the worlds were once a single realm, perhaps part of a cosmic One that 
shattered into Infinity. In the first Days, spirits and living beings were 
all the same thing, with no barriers between them. Gradually, though, 
forces of fear and dogma forced their realms apart, blocking passage with 
the Gauntlet. Other, less romantic, theories maintain that the realms 
had to be forced apart in order to protect the living from the dead or to 
seal off demons from the world of humanity. Certain theories blame 
the Technocracy, but that’s absurd; the Gauntlet existed long before they 
did, and though they've certainly thickened it, that barrier isn't their 
creation. Other philosophies claim that the Gauntlet has always been 
there - the skin of our world, protecting us and holding us together. 


Whereveritcame from, however long it's been there, the Gauntlet 
exists. To reach beyond this world, you have to pass on through... 
and that's not easy. If it was, then everyone would do it! 


The Avatar Storm 


Fora brief but terrifying period, Awakened travelers found italmost 
impossible to pass through the Gauntlet at all. Some metaphysical 
cataclysm (again, blamed on the Technocracy) shattered portions of the 
Otherworlds and filled the passageways with shrapnel. Awful cosmic 
winds tore around the Gauntlet, shredding the bodies and souls of anyone 
who dared to cross over. This Avatar Storm inflicted gruesome setbacks 
on mystic mages... especially those who called the Otherworlds a second 
home. In time, thankfully, the astral winds calmed down eventually, 
allowing passage through a thicker but no longer hazardous Gauntlet. 


To Go Beyond 


Before we take this tour past the park and into the Otherworlds, I 
want to point out something important: most people never go farther than 
this. I'm not talking only about the Sleepers but about the Awakened 
as well. Otherworldly travel is a dangerous and complex discipline, 
especially in the present day. And though certain willworkers depend 
upon the Worlds Beyond for their spiritual or technological practices, 
most of us never leave the mortal realm. 


There are good reasons for that, too. It’s easy to get lost out there 
and never find your way home again. And when the old cartographers 
wrote “Here be dragons” on their maps, they had only the barest hint 
of what’s actually out there. Mages who do go beyond the barriers, 
however, become well-acquainted with the hordes of eerie entities that 
live outside this realm that we call home. 


If, knowing that, you still want to cross over... well, that can 
be arranged... 


I VLAD V AN AY 


Chapter Three: The Shadow World 


83 


Chapter F our: 
The Worlds 


Beyond 


But Eternals beheld his vast forests. 
Age on ages he lay, clos'd, unknown, 
Brooding, shut in the deep; all avoid 


The petrific, sient chaos... 


— William Blake, The Book of Urizen 
é 
Three of Swords cn) 


Associations: Sorrow; pain; upheaval; separation; focus on past; 


disorder... 


I scan the darkened ruins, seeking the exact spot where she fell through 
the cracks in the world. Feeling it come an instant, a nanosecond, before it 
crushed the city. The red-black pulse, rending, the shriek of twisted metal and 
shattering glass, earth moaning in agony as it ripped apart, sending her into 
the abyss. Stretching for her hand, knowing I could not reach her in time. 
Someone tackled me as I moved to follow. I lay in the broken street, shaking 
with the tremors that followed. 

"God's will,” they said, “A terrible tragedy." And they did nothing. 

She's down there, calling for me. I hear her whispering my name. I am 
ready now. Marshalling my will to rescue her, I return, finding the site of her 
impromptu grave. The streets are dark and quiet; the area still ringed with 
yellow tape, a bulldozer lurking silently, ready to wipe away the ruination 
of building, street, and shattered lives. 


ge afm fits; 


. Ip Oye, 


I gather the power to me. And I strike. 

The sky roars with lightning and blue thunder. Gale-winds lash the 
scattered brickand stone. The sulfur-stench of the world’s bowels overwhelms 
me as I raise her from the depths. 

I laugh as the city writhes and falls again. 

Tortured earth rushes away in crazy quilt cracks heading for the part 
of the city that escaped the last rending. Sirens blare while dogs warn of 
disaster. Waves of earth hump and grind their way outward, scooping the 


PX n 


sea into a frenzy of shock. Hundreds of miles away, that brine 
will overwhelm some other land, coating it with my tears and 
pain, forcing others to see that they should have helped when I 
cried out for it. 

She is here. Back where she should be — safe, as if she had 
never fallen. 


I treasure her laugh, her knowing smile, her grace and 
elegance as she lifts her hands in wonder to see me again. I will 


leap into the sky and carry her away from pain and death and 
misery. She will be with me always, for I will never let her 2o again. 


She is silent now, overcome by the crushed bones and blood- 
dyed corruption in her livid skin. Her eyes closed, her delicate 
mouth open and filled with earth as she hangs disjointed in my 
arms. 


I watched a toymaker once as she repaired a broken doll. 
How hard can it be to do the same? 


Beyond the Barriers 


There’s a fine line between courage and 
stupidity. Mages play jump rope with that 
line, hopping from skillet to crucible with 
the audacity of a pack of drunk teenage boys 
with a skateboard, fireworks, a camera, and a 
YouTube account. 


That’s most obvious when you consider the 
Otherworlds: that strange brew of spirit spaces 


and alternate dimensions woven throughout 
what we laughably call reality. Although I 
compared this mad cosmology to an onion earlier, it’s not so 
much an onion as a snow globe of parallel existences all swirling 
around at once. You've got to be a certain kind of crazy to step 


into that snow globe... and mages often are that insane. 


Back in the old days, that was no big deal. Find a portal, 
a Node, some spirit magick or a quirk of time and space; 
presto, you're good to go. Then the Avatar Storm turned the 
passage into a celestial cheese grater, which made that passage 
a bit more, shall we say, problematic. These days, it's a toss-up; 
the passage could be as easy as it once was before, or it might 
still turn an Avatar to shredded wheat. I think it depends a 
lot upon what you expect. In any case, it's not safe or easy. If 
it was, like I said, everybody would do it! 


So what do you do if one world isn't enough for you? How 
do you reach these fabled Otherworlds, and what will you find 
if you do? There are no simple answers for that question, but 
if you want to explore the possibilities, let's find us a rabbit 
hole and pass on through. 


Just don't say I didn't warn you... 


Portals to Elsewhere 

The easiest way to leave the Earthly realm is to find a 
bortal to another world, open it, and go through to the other 
side. This might be as simple as opening the right door (or the 
wrong one...), but it might also involve elaborate rituals and 
permission before passage is granted beyond that door. 


Otherworldly portals might be obvious - huge brass gates 
inscribed with ornate calligraphy, stone circles with chiseled 
runes, crackling vortices of coruscating energy - or subtle, 
like hidden doors that flip around an apparently solid wall 
and leave you elsewhere. The Chantry I mentioned earlier, 
with its rooms and floors that should not exist, is a place 


Ma$e: The Ascension 20^ Anniversary Edition 


filled with portals - or it could be one large portal in itself. 
The interdimensional doorway of an Etherite laboratory or 
a Technocratic escape route? A portal. The dancing-circle of 
a witchcraft commune, where dancers get whisked off to the 
Summerlands? Also a portal. Portals simply get you from this 
world to somewhere else without having to step sideways or 
employ another discipline. Established with powerful magicks, 
these gateways provide relatively easy access to distant places 
"out of this world." 


Shallowings 


Perhaps the rarest form of access, a Shallowing is an area 
where the Gauntlet thins out almost to nothingness. Common 
in folklore but incredibly rare in today’s world, a Shallowing lets 
someone walk into the Otherworlds simply by wandering in 
the right, or wrong, direction. 


With very few exceptions, Shallowings occur in remote 
wilderness - regions where neither Technocratic procedures 
nor human banality have been able to seal the gap. Typically, 
these places wax and wane, appearing and disappearing like 
metaphysical fireflies in the dark. Fireflies often do mark the 
passage to such a place; so do heavy fogs, dust storms, tempests, 
orvolcanoes. Nature, itseems, carves Shallowings with dramatic 
phenomena. Certain times of the year, too, mark a thinning 
between worlds; there's a reason that Christmas, Halloween, 
Easter, and Midsummer's Eve have reputations for uncanny 
events. Full. moon nights, misty mornings, the stroke of midnight 
- they're all known as times when a Shallowing might open. 
And although it's not likely that you'll walk through a foggy 
night and wind up in the Otherworlds, such things do happen 
more often than you might think. 


The Old Roads, Paths of the Wyck, and 
the Null Zone 

Legends tell of Old Roads, the Paths of the Wyck that were 
cut through raw Creation in the earliest days of humankind. 
It's said that only the most primal travelers - witches and 
shamans - can even find these Roads, much less travel them. 
According to lore, these paths can lead anywhere - to Tokyo 
alleys, Grand Canyon crevices, the mountains of the Moon, 
anywhere. Chilly, misty, and scary as hell, these legendary roads 
have more myth than substance. Though other mages claim to 


Trashing the 
Ombrascape? 


According to the Reckoning metaplot, the Otherworlds 
got seriously jumbled during the Avatar Storm. In the 
aftermath, many of the familiar landscapes and realms 


were hidden, scattered, or destroyed. Whether or not 
this is true of your chronicle’s Umbrascape is a matter 
for your Storyteller to decide. Just be aware that this 
chapter's travel guide might be a bit different than the 
Otherworlds that your characters encounter. 


For details about the Reckoning-era Umbrascape, see 
the sourcebook The Infinite Tapestry. 


have gone through the Forever Mists, the Old Roads remain 
the exclusive province of mages who'll willingly dare Creation 
in her most elemental form. 


More recently, travelers have noticed a Null Zone: a system 
of corridors and small and empty rooms that appear to connect 
the other regions. Sometimes referred to as “backstage at the 
Universe,” this Null Zone seems to permeate every other layer 
of existence. Anyone, apparently, can use these hallways, though 
no one’s found or made a map of them just yet. Travelers claim 
you could follow these corridors to the Moon or even further 
if you had enough time, determination, and supplies to walk 
such epic distances. It’s been speculated that this zone is the 
form the Old Roads take in the modern world. If that’s true, 
our industrial perceptions have taken something wondrous 
and turned it into a sterile maze. 


For our sake, and the sake of all Reality, I hope that’s not 
the case... 


Astral Travel 


A far more common and familiar path to the Otherworlds 
begins with the ancient discipline of astral travel. Meditating 
- preferably in a very secure place! - a traveler projects his 
consciousness out of his physical form, then flies off into the 
High Realms of concept and ideal. A traditional method of 
travel among monks, saints, wizards, and - more recently - 
transhumanist psychonauts, astral travel weaves a silver cord 
between the living body and the voyaging consciousness. 


In astral travel, only your consciousness journeys onward. 
Generally, this takes you to what's often called the High Umbra, 
which we'll explore shortly. An experienced traveler can shift 
her consciousness to go to other realms as well, but the High, or 
Astral, Umbra is the default destination. Like the Vidare Astral 
I mentioned earlier, this is the domain of abstract, elevated 
concepts - the realm of heady things. So it's appropriate, then, 
that your “head-self” provides the easiest way to get there. 

(A similar method jacks you into the Digital Web - the 
magickal side of the Internet. That's a whole other subject, 
though, that I'll get to shortly.) 


Chapter Four: The Worlds Beyond 


97 


Astral travel has two fundamental drawbacks: the first is 
that your body stays behind while you go voyaging, and that 


silver cord that links your two selves can be rather vulnerable. 
The second is that, unless you're very, very good at astral travel, 
you go there naked - bringing things along is extraordinarily 
difficult. Astral projection also employs your mental faculties, 
not your physical abilities... which is wonderful if you're 
exceedingly smart and not so wonderful if you aren't. An astral 
voyager essentially projects her mind-self, and so, if you use 
this mode of travel, you look like a silvery reflection of your 
ideal self-image. Fortunately for astral travelers, it takes a lot 
of confidence and self-understanding to master this discipline. 
Thus, an astral traveler may look more impressive than her 
physical self looks back in the material world. 


Stepping Sideways 

The most common way to reach the Otherworlds, however, 
involves what's often called stepping sideways. Using the Sphere 
of Spirit, a mage converts herself, and perhaps a handful of 
belongings, into ephemera: the elemental spirit matter that 
makes up that rarefied plane. This way, the voyager travels 
physically - transformed in essence, but more or less solid in 
the way that the spirit realm understands solidity. 


Travelers who step sideways enter the Middle Umbra: that 
primal spirit realm embodying elemental Nature. Vividly real 
and yet fleetingly unreal, this Otherworldly layer presents a 
strange mirror to the world we know in our daily lives. I'll go 
into more detail soon, but for now just remember that stepping 
sideways is probably the most familiar form of travel beyond 
the Gauntlet. 


(There’s a long-standing metaphysical debate about 
Shallowings, stepping sideways, and the form a traveler attains 
when passing through the Gauntlet. A person who enters a 
Shallowing tends to appear in the Middle Umbra, as solid as 
he was on the other side. Does he become ephemera when he 
passes over, or does he remain material? As far as I’m aware, 
no one has ever been able to answer that question conclusively. 
For all practical purposes, then, let’s assume that our traveler 
is solid, even if his material form is actually spiritual in nature. 
If nothing else, that assumption makes one’s brain hurt a little 
bit less when contemplating the trip.) 


Stepping sideways demands an in-depth understanding 
of the Spirit Arts (or its technomagickal variant, Dimensional 
Science), a traveling companion with such knowledge, or a 
mystic or hypertech device that can perform the necessary 
functions for you. Like astral travel, this isn't an easy trip to 
make, especially not in the currentage. In this regard, if nothing 
else, the Technocracy certainly has the upper hand. It might 
once have been a perfectly natural thing to cross over into the 
spirit realm, but that's certainly not the case anymore. 


Dying to Cross Over 


And then there’s the most dangerous trip of all: the one we 
make when we die. The journey to the Lower Umbra, the realm 


Mage: The Ascension 20" Anniversary Edition 


of death, is not one I would recommend. Certain willworkers 
- notably the Euthanatos death-mages, some Dreamspeaker 
shamans, and other fearless and potentially corrupt mystics - 
have the skill and daring to cross over into this realm and then 
return. It's a difficult trip, though, and one that carries a bit 
of death back with you if and when you make it home alive. 


Supposedly, a freshly-dead soul crosses over into this realm 
when she dies. In most cases, she moves on to whatever Afterworld 
awaits her - a heaven, a hell, an afterlife, or metaphysical 
recycling toward another incarnation. Occasionally, though, 
dead souls get stuck in this realm as ghosts, trapped in the 
bitter Shadowlands of our living world. 


Living travelers who want to take this trip must endure 
a death ritual in which the soul remains tethered to the body 
through complicated magic. Certain psychoactive drugs can 
supposedly keep a person hovering between death and life as 
well, although this is - shall we say - not a method for the faint 
of heart. Like stepping sideways, these methods allow a person 
to cross over into the death realm. The chance of coming back 
across the threshold, though, is a lot lower here than what other 
methods offer. For certain tasks, of course, only death will do. 
And so, though it's incredibly perilous, this so-called agama 
sojourn suits several mystic practices. 


For a while, this trip was impossible for anyone except the 
dead. A vast ghost-storm swept away all familiar aspects of the 
Shadowlands, rendering them impassible. These days, agama 
journeys are possible once again. I don't recommend that trip, 
though. Now more than ever, the effects of "temporary" death 
have proven rather permanent. 


Beyond the risks posed by spectral creatures of this realm, 
a Shadowlands traveler also picks up a bit of Jhor, the Death 
Resonance. Essentially, death becomes part of a person who 
enters its realm, and although that Resonance fades a bit with 
time, I'm told it never completely goes away. 


Disembodiment and Void Adaptation 

Allfiveofthe methods involved in Otherworldly travel have 
their own risks. As I mentioned earlier, this sort of thing is best 
leftto the experts. And even the experts fear Disembodiment: the 
state in which a living traveler goes too far or is gone too long. 
After three phases of the moon, or roughly three months by 
Earthly reckoning, a traveler's living body might begin to break 
down into raw spirit essence. The consciousness still drives 
this spirit, but the body fades away. Later, I'll mention Ghost 
Realms: places where the living inhabitants became spirits after 
their homes were cut off from the Earthly plane. Such uncanny 
regions remind us of the risks we take when we step away from 
the fields we know and journey off to unearthly realms. 


The Technocracy has its own name for this phenomenon: 
Void Adaptation. According to that theory, the physical and 
mental components of an Earthly being start separating 
once they cross over into another dimension. Eventually, the 
consciousness and physical body enter a quantum state of 


complete disassociation. In plain English, the probability that 
binds them together has been dissolved, so the complete person 
can never return to the physical state she had occupied before. 
That person essentially becomes an EDE: an Extra-Dimensional 
Entity whose existence threatens the world as we know it. 


Despite such risks, adventures beyond the barriers are 
traditional elements ofthe magickal Path. Even the Technocracy, 
whose ideals minimize contactwith such unpredictable realms, 
sends certain members off to explore these alternate dimensions, 
if only to seal them off from the fragile human world. 


So take a deep breath and hold my hand. That tingling 
stomach-flip will last a moment or two. An unlucky or 
inexperienced traveler can get stuck in the Gauntlet, but I’ve 
got decades of experience with this sort of thing, so you’re 
safe with me. Although the Gauntlet and other hazards make 
this a challenging trip (and yes, in case you were wondering, 
drug-trippers do occasionally wind up crossing over - that’s a 
common travel focus for Ecstatics, shamans, and the Virtual 
Adepts), the potential insights and adventures are worth the risk. 


The Penumbra: Skin of the Realm 


Passing through the Gauntlet’s reality wall, we 
step out... or perhaps in... to what you might 
call the skin of the world: the Penumbra, an 
imperfect shadow of a deeper truth. 


The Viewer Shapes the View 
This is where those Vidare I mentioned 
earlier come into play. Although the Penumbra 
always feels surreal, the dominant impression you 
get about it depends a lot on your point of view. 
The heady traveler sees the shimmering patterns 
of the Vidare Astral, the elemental one senses the raw nature of 
the Vidare Spiritus, and the gloomy, grave one perceives the rotting 
realm of that Vidare Mortem. As a result, not only is it possible for 
a group of travelers to see a very different world when they hit the 
Penumbra together, it’s fairly common for them to do so. 


Even more than most things in a mage’s world, travel 
into the Penumbra is subjective as hell, because although 
this layer of reality reflects the world on the other side of the 
Gauntlet, it also responds to each individual viewer. There’s 
an interplay at work here that demonstrates the Heisenberg 
Uncertainty Principle in vivid detail. The witness really does 
affect the situation. 


For the average visitor - if you can call anything about 
visiting the spirit realm average - the Penumbra reveals a 
shadowy, mist-shrouded reflection of the Earthly side of the 
Gauntlet in that area. Sensations are paradoxically muted and 
yet more vivid... and if you can wrap your head around that, 
then you're ready to go exploring. 


Domains: Glens and Blights 


Take a look at our park now. The Bright Lady's fountain 
gleams a pristine white against the evening gloom. The splashing 
water rings like the chimes of some sublime instrument. The 
entire site casts a faint glow that illuminates the surrounding 
grounds. That glow marks this as a Domain: a place of exceptional 
power that shines through all three layers of the Penumbra. 


Domains like the fountain radiate tranquility. Often called 
glens, they're places where Quintessence flows or gathers with 


refreshing purity. Other domains, though, are not nearly so 
appealing; reflecting areas of deep corruption, blights seethe 
with poisoned energy. The nearby dump probably has a blight 
or two, and the site of six murders down the street still throbs 
with atrocious echoes even now, long after the bodies have 
been cleared away. 


Any Node forms a Domain in its vicinity, casting energies 
around the Penumbrascape. Small Nodes have tiny Domains, 
whereas larger ones can radiate their influence for several yards 
in each direction. Like lamps, they illuminate the area with 
appropriate radiance... which, in the case of blights, can be a 
sort of antilight, swallowing up everything else within reach. 


Impressions of Our Shadow 

Past the edges of that fountain’s Domain, the ground coils 
with thick shadows. The trees reach high into the misty night... 
higher, in fact, than they do in the Earthly realm. Cleansed of 
graffiti, the stone walls hold a weight and age to them that few 
people would recognize on the other side of the Gauntlet; here, 
they look regal, as if they'd been quarried from a magnificent 
castle. The grass grows higher and thicker here, free of the 
broken glass and dog shit that makes it such an eyesore in the 
mortal realm. The breeze, too, smells cleaner - hints of rot, 
to be sure, but without the exhaust fumes that permeate the 
city on the other side. 


And yet you still catch glimpses of that city here: grim 
lattices of gleaming webs, crawling with mathematical spiders. 
These creepy bastards are often called Pattern Spiders, weaving 
a web of technological stasis. You'll see the damned things all 
over the Umbra, especially if you pursue the technomagickal 
Arts. Shamans hate 'em, and with good reason. Supposedly, 
those spiders present a metaphysical image of stagnation; if 
they ever succeed in weaving their web across the world, there 
won't be such things as possibility, magick, or imagination 
anymore. Ás things are now, the city looks like some haunted 
spider web, glowing with manmade light. 


Look closely and you'll see one of the reasons these trips 
can be so dangerous. Moving through the shadows, slipping 
in and out of view, you'll spot spirits - in this case, the tiny 


Chapter Four: The Worlds Beyond 


NE ai 


avatars of misery and corruption that feed on drug deals and 
furtive sex, the brave guardian spirits ofthe fountain, the urban 
animal spirits who refresh themselves at the fountain's edge, 
and the embodiment of the fountain: the White Lady herself. 
That’s why that girl over there seems as solid as we are - she's 
not human, she's a spirit. Normal humans can't be seen on 
this side of the Gauntlet except perhaps as faint smears of 
spiritual presence in the air... and then only if they have some 
fantastically strong or especially corrupted soul. 


Into the Mists 


Eternally bathed in moonlight, the Penumbra clings to the 
landscape like a thick mist, shifting slightly but more or less 
in place. To find your way to other realms - often capitalized 
as Realms when you're referring to a specific place or a type of 
realm - you head off into those mists and hope you're going 
in the right direction. 


How would you know? That's where experience comes in 
handy. A traveler who's skilled in cosmology; or who's spent 
time learning the secrets of the werewolves to whom this land 
is asecond home; or who has been initiated as a proper witch or 
shaman (as opposed to those New Age fruitbats who wouldn't 
know a near-death experience if one gave them a heart attack) 
understands how to read the signs. Even then, though, finding 
your way through the Penumbra and into an actual Realm 
is tricky. Navigation in the Otherworlds is more a matter of 
instinct and intention than of direction... which is one of the 
many things about these realms that give people fits. 


Navigation from this point onward is not a science - it's 
an art. You follow your instincts, aided by experience, skill, 
and more than a little bit of luck. Mages who have werewolf 
allies speak of trods and Moon Paths, but those sorts of things 
don't often work for our kind unless some other creature 
plays mediator for us. This is one of those areas where it's a 
good idea to listen to your Avatar; our Awakened spirits often 
understand this world better than our conscious minds do. The 
Otherworlds are often counteracademic. Human learning, at 
least in our era, seems to get in the way when you're trying to 
understand them. I've heard that people used to comprehend 
these things far better than we do now. But unless you've been 
raised in a shamanic culture, getting around once you pass 
beyond the Gauntlet appears to be one more of those things 
for which you have to unlearn all that you have learned. That 
said, technomancers who study Dimensional Science seem to 
have an easier time finding their bearings in the spirit world 
than most mages do. I guess that's yet another example of 
expectations shaping reality: if you expect to know what you're 
doing, you've got a decent chance at doing it. 


Infinity Given Form 


Speaking of expectations, there are two terms I want to 
explain before we go any further: Tellurian and Tapestry. Both 


Mage: The Ascension 20" Anniversary Edition 


are essentially metaphors for things that transcend words. 
When you're dealing with cosmic concepts, poetry usually 
speaks better than numbers. 


The Tellurian 


“Tellurian” essentially means everything. It’s Reality with a 
capital R - everything that has been imagined, can be imagined, 
or has yet to be imagined. It's aword for something that transcends 


words... an ineffable name of God, if you will. 


Why would the names of God or Infinity be unspeakable? 
The reason many religions forbid speaking the names of their 
God is because those religions consider Divinity to be beyond 
definition; to name it is to limit it... and thus, to insult it. Giving 
Divinitya name is to literally profane it - “to putyourself before the 
temple,” or to place yourself above Divinity. And so, if you think 
of Infinity in Divine terms, the name Tellurian, or “little earth,” 
offers an affectionate metaphor in place of that unspeakable name. 


In academic terms, a tellurian is a model that demonstrates 
how the world works; following the ancient principle of 
macrocosm and microcosm, or “As above, so below,” a tellurian 
reveals how the world works by offeringa “small” demonstration. 
And although many mages in our era remain agnostic or 
atheistic, the mages who put the cosmic Tellurian metaphor 
in place were men and women of faith, so that metaphor was 
important... especially when they were trying to bridge faiths 
without insulting anyone’s ideas about God. 


Tellurian is another way of saying Infinity, God, or Possibility. 
It’s potential that cannot be grasped except through metaphor. 
“the Tellurian,” 


So when you say you're literally saying 


"Everything." 


The Tapestry 

Infinity is too big to wrap your head around. Like God, 
it needs a face. The Tapestry is that face - a metaphor for that 
which exists. Whereas the Tellurian is potential, the Tapestry is 
form. All woven together like some artistic curtain, the strands 
of interconnected existence create a shimmering whole. 


Beyond the obvious pun about tying everything together, 
the Tapestry metaphor also makes a subtle nod to an ancient 
magical principle: the idea of interconnectedness. Sometimes 
known as contagion, this principle asserts that you can affect a 
thing - say, your landlord - by using something that's connected 
with it... in this case, perhaps your lease. And if this sounds like 
an outmoded idea, look up the quantum physics concept of 
superstringtheory... an idea thatalso echoes the Tapestry metaphor. 


Like I said, mages speak a language of poetics. Even the 
Technocrats resort to arcane acronyms and cumbersome yet 
Oh-So-Impressive titles. If you want to truly understand the 
magickal realm, much less the Otherworlds, it helps a lot if 
you can wrap your head around the idea of symbols that reveal 
a deeper truth. 


Realm of Shadows: 


When speaking to Umbral travelers, you’ll hear a lot of 
talk about the Three Worlds. Briefly put, those are... 


* The High Umbra, astral realm of ideas; 
* The Middle Umbra, elemental realm of Nature; and... 


* The Low Umbra, mortal realm of death. 


I’ve mentioned all of them earlier, but here’s where those 
distinctions really become important. See, when you move 
beyond the Penumbra, you head toward one of those three 
destinations... unless, of course, you wind up wandering 
around the Penumbra or choose to remain there in order to 
reach another earthly destination. Lots of creatures, especially 
werewolves, use the Penumbra as sort of secret door for moving 
around the mortal realm. Mages can do that too, simply by 
intending to stick close to the human world. 


If and when you want to move beyond there, though, 
you'll employ different methods, depending on your intended 
destination. 


Ombral Travel: 
Opwards, Sideways, Down 

This is where that Vidare concept comes in handy again. 
A traveler who wants to reach a certain level of the Umbra 


has an easier time of doing so if she already sees the world in 
that fashion. 


* [f she views things through the Vidare Astral, she'll 
soon notice doors, mirrors, reflective pools, and other 
idea-based gateways into the High Umbra. 


* [f she's got a passionate Vidare Spiritus, she'll find 
herself drawn toward pathways through the mist, inviting 
groves, illuminated Moon Paths, and other features of 
the landscape that seem to beckon the traveler toward 
them. This, of course, is an excellent time to practice 
discretion and watch out for traps. 


* [fhermelancholytemperament favors the gloomy Vidare 
Mortem, she'll perceive the rotting Shadowlands. In 
the distance, she'll hear the ever-moaning winds of the 
Tempest, an eternal storm that has been called "the Voice 
of Oblivion." Dour-minded reincarnationists claim that 
the Tempest is the whirl of Entropy itself, the karmic 
blender through which dying things are recycled for 
their next rebirth. It's been said that the Avatar Storm 
came up from this Tempest, after some sort of spiritual 
bomb had been dropped on a city of the dead. As with 
so many things in our world, that's open to debate. The 
idea, though, makes a certain degree of sense. 


The Three Ombrae 


Regardless ofyour usual perspective, you can think yourself 
in a different direction if you have the proper magicks to reach 
all three worlds. Thinking upward can draw you toward the 
High Umbra, going with your gut can pull you into the Middle 
Umbra, and feeling down can take you toward the fringes of 
the Shadowlands... although, as I mentioned earlier, it takes 
specific kinds of magicks to reach the Realm of the Dead, 
unless you want to die first. 


A portal, oran Otherworldly creature with the right powers, 
can take you almost anywhere. A traveler passing through a 
gateway, using an appropriate device, or riding on a spirit's 
coattails doesn't need magical knowledge in order to reach 
the Otherworlds. If you don't travel under your own power, 
though, then you're at the mercy of whatever force brought 
you there in the first place. For obvious reasons, this is not a 
method I'd recommend. 


Since the late 1990s, such excursions have become much 
harder to make, at least in the increasingly industrialized 
world. For whatever reason - probably for many reasons - the 
Gauntlet feels thicker, and the journey on the other side has 
proven more hazardous than it was before. And yet, there are 
aspects to a mage's Path - mystic and otherwise - that cannot 
be fulfilled without such adventures. Whether or not you ever 
make the trip, I feel it's important to at least know what you 
might find in the Realms Beyond... 


Resident Aliens 


Most of the entities you'll meet in the spirit realm are 
just that: spirits. They sometimes resemble us, but they're not 
quite like us. These beings are embodiments of concepts and 
consciousness - the literal minds and souls of our world. 
Technomancers think of them as extra-dimensional aliens, 
and that's a fair assessment too. By the standards of our mortal 
world, such entities are implacably alien. 


Trying to describe them in detail is a pointless task. 
Hermetic tomes and exhaustive demonologies contain the 
names and ranks of thousands of such entities, and any shaman 
worth that title can rattle off a bunch of names you'd never 
find in any of those books. There are idea spirits, animal spirits, 
embodiments of archetypes, and creatures who don't seem tied 
to any human idea at all. The awkward term Umbrood often 
gets used to describe such entities, but it's worth noting that 
many spirit beings find that term insulting. As God is reputed 
to have said, “I am as I am,” and it's as good a way as any to 
think of these entities. They are what they are - Otherworldly 
Popeyes who must be honored on their own terms. 

Remember that word, because it's important: HONOR. 
Spirit entities demand respect, and they often have the power 
to squeeze it out of you. Titles and greetings, offerings and 
acknowledgements are vital when you're dealing with the 


Chapter Four: The Worlds Beyond 


eo 


Ne No A 


92 


Mage plays host to a bewildering array of Otherworlds. 
Here's a relatively simple guide to them, more or less in the 
order of travel: 


the Tapestry: A metaphor for the structure of the 
universe — infinite potential given finite form. 
Nec r Umbra: ; | en TRE 


the Deep Umbra: Everything past the Horizon. 


the Periphery: Basic spiritual Awareness. 


Node: A place of power. 
the Gauntlet: The barrier between the Near Umbra 
and the mortal realm. 
OldRoads/ Paths ofthe Wyck: Primordial pathways 
through the universe. 


Stepping sideways: Transforming body into spirit-stuff. 


he only wa) nter the Low Umbra 
Dimensional Science: The Spirit Sphere as defined 
by mages who prefer to believe in technology and 
science. Underthis viewpoint, the Otherworlds are simply 
alternate dimensions. 


Otherworlds: When capitalized, this term refers to the 
various realms and Realms beyond the Gauntlet. 


,, and LOW 


Penumbra: The layer closest to the mortal world, 
reflecting most of the features of that world. 


Pericarp: Ihe Gauntlet bordering a Realm. 


Realm: When capitalized, a certain place or type of 
place in the Otherworlds. 


> High Umbra/ Astral Realm 


Ma$e: The Ascension 20^ Anniversary Edition 


sublime abstract concepts 
Middle Umbra/ Spirit Wilds: Realm of capital "N" 
Nature. Divided into a variety of Realms and connected 
to the High and Low Umbrae by Pattern Webs. Also 
known as the Velvet Shadow. 


Moon Path: A spirit road through the Middle Umbra, 
leading and often moving between Realms. 


Pattern Webs: Metaphysical spider webs that bind 
the Three Worlds together. 


Zone pnemeralreg isthatrioatl 


as, and probably something else a SI 
Mount Qaf: Supposedly the center of Creation, existing 
outside the material world in a reality all its own. 


the Digital Web: Metaphysical reflection/ essence of 
the Internet. 


e person experiencing ther 
T 


the Mirror Zone: Mysterious lost space where the 
normal order of things as they appear to the observer 
seems to be inverted. 


travelers who've stumbled across then 


the Hollow Earth: Fabled Inner Umbrathat supposedly 
exists in an alternate dimension-space within the Earth. 


The Aetherial Reaches: The inner layer ofthe Horizon, 
experienced from inside as the tops of mountains and 
wide open sky. The lowest Aetherial Reaches are often 
called Oblivion, where Creation gets recycled. 


Horizon Realm: A magickal/ technomagickal realm 
carved out of the conceptual space of the Horizon. 


na 


Ghost Realm: An ephemeral Realm in which the place 
andits inhabitants were cutofffrom Earth and have since 
become Disembodied spirits. 
de Realm 
orizon by the Shard Real 
ShardRealm: Metaphysical embodiments/ reflections 


of the planets and the mystic principles associated with 
them. 


Etherspace/ Deep Umbra: The infinite reaches of 
space, where the spirit and material realms supposedly 
become one. 


(Mage Revised introduces a second Horizon atthe borders 
of the Asteroid Belt; the space between those two Horizons 
is referred to by the old name of Etherspace, with the Deep 
Umbra being the reaches beyond that second Horizon. 
For details, see Chapters One and Five of The Infinite 
Tapestry sourcebook and Chapter Three of Convention 
Book: Void Engineers.) 


For detailed game systems that deal with access and realms, 
see The Otherworlds | 9p. 474-485) and The Digital 
Web 


) in Chapter Nine. 

For in-depth "a rm of those Otherworlds, see the 
Mage sourcebooks Beyond the Barriers: The Book of 
Worlds, The Infinite Tapestry, and the various Digital 
Web editions, plus the Werewolf: The Apocalypse 
sourcebooks Umbra: The Velvet Shadow and the various 
Book of the Wyrm editions. For the Low Umbra, see the 
Wraith: The Oblivion series. 


The Technocracy's view of the Otherworlds comes largely 
from Tychoidian cosmology: the view of a computerized 
cosmos based upon Tychoides' theorem: any perfect 
description of an object is the object itself, relegated to the 
order of things by divine providence. Essentially, this means 
that the universe makes room for things that appear to fitinto 
it. If a concept is malleable enough to conform to existing 
laws, it can be integrated into the existing universe if and 
when that universe chooses to accept it. 


A complementary idea, the Enlightened Anthropic 
Principle, assumes that sentient beings decide what the 
universe will and will not accept. For the Masses, that 
choice is unconscious; the Awakened/ Enlightened Ones, 
however, can consciously change those laws to some 
degree. All mages accept that idea under one name or 
other; technomancers accept it as a law of science. And 
so, under the Technocracy's Dimensional Science, the 
universe has been divided into various levels of reality by 
the Consensus of Enlightened and unEnlightened humanity. 
In short, weird stuff exists because it can exist... some of 
it is just more likely to exist, and Enlightenment helps you 
tip the odds of it existing. 


Under Dimensional Science - a hypermath fusion of A 
Mechanistic Cosmos, Everything is Data, Might» is Right, 
and Tech Holds All Answers (s 

72), the difference bebe reality models 
is Rosia matter of probability. Enlightened people can try 
to reprogram reality or shift between levels of reality when 
they understand the code. Tychoidian cosmology divides 


up the universe into the following layers, all of which can be 
accessed by sufficient understanding of Dimensional Science: 


e mundane pla 


the Gauntlet: The paraphysical membrane between 
the Conventional Earth Space and Subspace. 


Biospheric Space: Reality-model shadows shaped by 
non-sapient thought and human instinctual responses; 


the Middle Umbra. 


Ensemble Space: Reality models of abstrac 
intellectual concepts; the High Umbra 
Entropic Space: Reality models generated by decaying 
consciousness; the Low Umbra. 

Dic 
programmable artif 
Everett Volumes: Passages into alternate timelines, 
where other realities exist because they had a 


mathematical probability of existing; the Mirror Zone 
and/ or alternate-history worlds. 


Tychoidian Cosmology, the Enlightened Anthropic 
Principle, and Dimensional Science (Continued) 


the Horizons: Two layers that mark the limits of influence 
and computing power from Earth's intelligentlife. These are... 


the Biospheric Horizon: The upper reaches of Earth’s 
atmosphere, and the limit of influence for non-intelligent 
life forms. Could be seen as the old Horizon known by 
werewolves and primal mages. 


the Spatial/ Anthropic Horizon: The limit of 
Earthbound human influence. Reaches more or less to the 
Asteroid Belt and marks the end of Conventional Space. 


the Deep Universe: Region where human influence 
over reality breaks down; outer space. Extends roughly 
from Jupiter to the end of Earth’s solar system. 


spirit world. In the Umbra, a bunny-sized ball of cuteness 
can become a hurricane, so always - ALWAYS - be on your 
guard and best behavior. Although wizards and werewolves 
tend to order such entities around, that’s a pretty unhealthy 
habit unless you can back up your arrogance with power. 


The Three Worlds tend to feature related types of entities: 


* The High Umbra hosts angels and demons, archetypes 
and godlings, personified ideas, and self-willed geometric 
shapes. You'll spot naked astral travelers bound by vital 
silver cords; magnificent fractals in coruscating clouds; 
and creatures out of nightmares, mythologies, and dreams, 
most of which wear a dazzling array of faces and forms. 


* The Middle Umbra features spirits of Nature, ideal, and 
corruption - werewolves, totem beasts, majestic animals, 


* the Interstellar Deep: The Void of human-based 
reality: 


Ifallthisseems esoteric, that's because it is. Most Technocrats 
don't even begin to understand such stuff, and few people 
outside the Technocracy even realize that it exists. A few 
Etherites, Virtual Adepts, techno-Hermetics, and other 
tech-based mages have heard of the principles and their 
terminology, but, forthe mostpart, only Void Engineers truly 
getit. Fordetails, see Convention Book: Void Engineers, 
pps. 54-61. For the Sphere of Dimensional Science, see 
Chapter Ten (pp. 525-526). 


and malignant puddles of spiritual ooze. More than any 
other realm, this world features mortal humans too... 
some of whom are centuries old, having crossed over 
long ago and entered an ageless state of grace. 


* The Lower Umbra is the realm of ghosts - the Restless 
Dead whose lives were cut off before they'd been resolved. 
Such entities can be pathetic videos of people who got 
stuck in a single moment of time, selfwilled phantoms 
with agendas of their own, the horrific spectres that 
come from a person’s worst attributes, and the strange 
monsters that haunt this shadow of the living realm. 


In all cases, remember this: in the Umbra, they’re home 
and you’re visiting. Be a respectful guest, not an obnoxious pest, 
and you'll go farther and live longer in those worlds. 


The Astral Ombra, Realm of Ideas 


Mages, for better and worse, tend to spend lots 
of time in our heads. It's natural, then, that the 
High Umbra -a.k.a. theAstral Reaches - becomes 
a typical first stop for our kind. Whether or not 
they travel by astral projection or step sideways 
into the High Penumbra, Awakened travelers 
often gravitate toward this realm of ideas. 


Peering through the Vidare Astral, you'll 
perceive the strands of Creation weaving 


together in sublime patterns of energy. A 
sense of magnificent clarity prevails: sharp sensations, vivid 
perceptions, a feeling of constant epiphany. A friend of mine 
calls this “the ‘Of Course’ Factor." It's like putting on a new pair 
of glasses or having that light bulb over your head suddenly 
replaced by a halogen lamp. And although you eventually get 
used to that extra level of clarity, it never really goes away while 


94. Ma$e: The Ascension 20^ Anniversary Edition 


and once you leave, the rest of the world feels 
suddenly duller, as if those fresh new glasses had been replaced 
by scratched and dirty lenses. That's a common problem, 
actually, among astral visitors: upon returning to the mortal 
realm, that real world never feels quite as real again. 


you're there... 


The Astral Penumbra 


As I mentioned earlier, the layer closest to the mortal realm 
is called the Penumbra. And for travelers who either project 
themselves astrally or step sideways into their Vidare Astral, that 
Penumbra looks and feels like a glittering, ultra-clear reflection 
of the mortal world. Symbolic elements of the landscape become 
quite - often blatantly - obvious. A public school, for example, 
might look and feel rather industrial: square, blunt, maybe with 
cattle pens, assembly lines, or even a giant meat grinder straight 
out of Pink Floyd’s The Wall. Even at this Penumbra level, the 


idea of things dominates the surroundings. By entering the Astral 
Penumbra, we're walking into the literal landscape of the mind. 


Here's an important reminder: the High, Middle, and Low 
Penumbrae are all the same place. The differences between them 
don't reflect the Penumbra itself - they reflect the travelers 
who go there. 


Once you move beyond the Penumbra, though, that's an 
entirely different matter... 


Astral Doorways 


A traveler can move around the skin of the mortal realm from 
here, which is how an astral traveler can project his consciousness 
from a monastery in Tibet to a classroom in New Orleans. The 
silver, nude, idealized form of that traveler exists in the same 
Penumbra as the shaman who steps sideways and the gloomy 
Goth who sees that realm as a beautifully decaying mess. 


To move past that reflection of the mortal realm and 
ascend higher into the Astral Reaches, those adventurers must 
find an astral doorway: a shining pool, a vivid window, a mirror, 
or a literal doorway that provides passage into one of the High 
Umbral Realms. Stepping through one takes you out of the 
mortal realm’s reflection. That’s where the real challenges begin. 


The Vulgate 


Generally, astral doorways simply open for the person who 
finds them; occasionally, you'll need a password or other form 
of key. Once you get through that entrance, you'll find yourself 
in the Vulgate: the portion of the Astral Umbra dedicated to 
common concepts and easily-grasped ideas. Here, the truly weird 
aspects of the High Umbra begin to manifest: flying eyeballs, 
four-dimensional temples, Escherian landscapes, and snowing 
geometry... that sort of thing. 


In the Vulgate, you can find endless hallways filled with doors; 
rivers that speak in human languages; glass-tree forests where each 
leaf is a memory; places where the local reality takes on the flat, 
brightly colored, and caricatured appearance of an old-school comic 
strip... complete with word- and thoughtballoons. Libraries where 
books that were never written can be found, philosophical paradises 
in which abstract theories like Communism and anarchy really do 
work the way their proponents say they should work... If you took 
the analogy of Plato’s cave (which actually exists here, by the way), 
where people see the shadows cast on the walls and believe it’s reality, 
the Vulgate is where the watchers start to turn away from the wall 
and begin to see the things casting those shadows. 


And no, that view isn’t all it’s cracked up to be. 


Like all portions of the Otherworlds, the Vulgate can be scary 
as hell... and yes, you'll find teal hells in the High Umbra too, shaped 
by the things people fear about the concept of Hell. Beyond the 
freaky shit that’s part and parcel of the realm, there can also be a 
terrifying sense of disconnection. We humans are accustomed to the 
world as we know it; when you take that world and start breaking it 
down into its conceptual components - when the blinders we wear 
come off whether we want them to or not - the experience can be 


unnerving, depressing, even shattering. There's a desert where the 
reflective sands show you the way that other people see you, stripped 
of all your sel£identified illusions, and a realm in which the shared 
hallucination of money is revealed by stacks of phantasmal treasure. 


A traveler can feel her senses disassociating themselves from 
oneanother, breaking her perceptions into a fractal broken mirror 
rather than a coherent whole... or worse, she can actually see 
herself from outside her skin, watching that skin peel off or melt 
to reveal the muscles, bones, and mushy goo beneath her illusion 
of self. This is the realm of bad trips as well as ideals, and of ideals 
that reveal themselves in all their potential ugliness... an ugliness 
made even worse because of its purity of truth. 


Pericarps 

Like many other Umbral Realms, the Realms within the 
Vulgate usually appear infinite when you're inside them. Space 
has no real meaning here. Although Realms have barriers around 
them - little Gauntlets that are sometimes referred to as pericarps - 
those barriers are typically invisible to folks within the Realm. As 
usual, there are exceptions, places where you really can reach the 
Edge of the World. For the most part, though, a traveler must be 
lookingforthat Edge of the World to even have a chance at finding it. 


Most often, the Astral Realms have doorways leading 
to other Realms that share a conceptual link to the realm in 
question. You could, for example, find a path to Heaven if you've 
gone through Hell to find it. Once again, however, the traveler 
must hold her destination in mind if she wants to find it. It's 
frighteningly easy to get distracted in the Otherworlds... and, 
by being distracted, to get horrifically, perhaps even fatally, lost. 


For norzastral travelers, the Vulgate is as far as you can go 
withouthelp. Although some other entity might open a portal to 
a higher Realm, we poor mages are stuck wandering around the 
High Umbra's basement until and unless we learn to untether 
our consciousness and project it upwards to a higher plane. It's 
hard to talk about the higher Realms without using air quotes 
and dense metaphor, because language is such a limited thing. 
To reach beyond the Vulgate, you have to also reach beyond 
common ideas and into the realm of abstract thought... 


The Afferworlds 


Did you ever wonder if Heaven and Hell really exist? They 
do - and there are LOTS of them. Every vision anyone has had 
of Paradise or the Pit has a dedicated Afterworld in which that 
concept becomes reality. The really popular ones, like Dante's 
Inferno or the Pearly Gates, are vast, perhaps even infinite, 
fueled by their place in the popular imagination. Others, like 
the proverbial personal hell or little slice of heaven, are just big 
enough for the one or two people who originally envisioned them. 


Do souls go to such places for eternity? That depends, I 
guess, on them. 


The Afterworlds remain one of the great mysteries of the 
universe. Do they exist because we create them, or were they 
there before we conceived of them? Did godlike beings shape 


Chapter Four: The Worlds Beyond 


IA 7 


F j PEL 


l mil 


\ 
\ 
d 


l y, if 
p 
j / 


these realms for human souls? Oris it like Alan Moore once said, 
that "these halls were carved by men while they yet breathed"? 
No one has the right answer to those questions. The nature 
of subjective reality means that even the most dispassionate 
authority on the subject sees what he expects to see. 


Here's my theory: people who expect to go to Heaven 
or Hell go to the heaven or hell they expect to go to. A 
human consciousness, upon death, projects itself to wherever 
that consciousness deeply believes it deserves to go. Some 
consciousnesses remain stuck in the Shadowlands as ghosts, 
others disappear into instantreincarnation, and the majority of 
them head off to the Afterworld they expect to enter after death. 


“Expect” is a tricky word. I assume that a lot of people who 
consider themselves pious yet deeply fear Hell (the same people 
who secretly believe they deserve to go there) wind up in the 
Hell they fear, not the Heaven they crave. How long do they stay? 
Who knows? Maybe as long as they expect to stay... which could 
be a very long time. Are they sent there by God/ Goddess/ the 
Gods/ Whatever, or do they send themselves there? Folks have 
disputed that for centuries, if not millennia. One thing, though, 
is beyond dispute: these places exist, and people can go there. 


Sometimes even before they die. 


Mages who are brave, desperate, devout, or crazy enough to 
try to visit the Afterworlds can do so. The passage is difficult, 
frustrating, and often deadly, but as myths and stories suggest, 


: je 
utl 


LJ 


it can be done. We're not going to go there right now, but the 
potential to do so exists if you're willing to sacrifice everything 
you think you know about yourself and your world. There are 
reasons that people call such searches "underworld journeys" 
and "dark nights of the soul." It's a perilous trip no matter 
where you're bound... and again, you often find what you 
expected, on some level, to find there all along. 


Do gods and angels and demons exist? They do, if only 
because we believe they do. That's another chicken-and-egg 
dilemma, where the chickens - that is, us - have the idea of 
"egg" pretty firmly in our heads. For now, just remember this: 
if you would search for Heaven or Hell, recall that gods and 
angels and demons have long traditions of kicking mortal 
ass... and the prouder the mortal, the worse the punishment. 


The Ombral Courts 


That brings me to the Courts - another type of region that 
we won't visit now, but you should keep this in mind for future 
reference. Gods and angels and demons and other entities 
make their homes in the Astral Umbra. These courts can be 
whatever the resident entities want to make them: temples 
of light, clockwork dominions, deserts of shadow, thrones of 
blood and fire... they're all out there someplace. 

Occupying more or less the same conceptual layer as the 
Afterworlds, these Courts are shaped not by human expectations 
but by the plans and desires of the entities that forge them. (The 


entities themselves might be shaped by human beliefs, but... well, 
Chicken, meet Egg, and you guys can go sort things out between 
yourselves.) Umbral entities keep their Courts in whatever fashion 
seems appropriate to them; you could sip tea with a Mad Hatter or 
three in some Wonderland (there are several...), pay avisittoa Monkey 
King’s prison beneath a mountain, knock on Heaven’s door to have 
a chat with an entity called Saint Peter, or go visit Santa’s workshop 
in one of the several dozen North Poles floating around the Astral 
Reaches... and hope that you get the Santa you had wanted to find! 


This might be the most crowded region of the Otherworlds. 
There are so many Umbral beings and so many concepts out 
there regarding heavens and hells and their holy and unholy 
inhabitants that the Astral Umbra could be seen as a giant fizzy 
cup of soda, with bubbles crowding the top of the glass and 
a film of sediment at the bottom. Unlike that glass of soda, 
though, the Otherworlds don’t occupy physical space. They seem 
physical when you’re inside them, but a theoretically infinite 
number of Realms can exist without shoving the others aside. 


The Spires 

Rising here and there throughout the Courts, rooted in the 
Vulgate but peaking upward into infinity, you'll find the Spires: 
reflections of the idea of higher consciousness. As with so many 
other things in the Otherworlds, the Spires turn abstract concepts 
into concrete forms. Some of them appear as towers, minarets, or 
mountains that make Everest look likea speed bump. Many resemble 
glass cathedrals with spires that fade into the sky. I’ve seen beanstalks 
leading into the clouds and literal stairways to heaven. They’re all 
Spires. So if you want to get your head in the clouds, then you'll 
often have to climb these things. And that, my friend, is not easy! 


Climbing a Spire isn't a matter of physical effort but of 
metaphysical ascent. It's not your hands and feet that move 
you - it's your mind. The slopes can be slippery, treacherous, 
impossible to grasp. In order to rise up those Spires, you must 
wrap your mind around difficult concepts and drift beyond 
the gravity of common thought. Few travelers can make that 
journey at all... and only the most rarified can reach the top. 


The Epiphamies 
Swirling around the highest reaches of consciousness, the 
Realms within the Epiphamies are realms in name only. These 


The Middle Ombra, 


From the head to the gut, travel through the 
Otherworlds becomes a simpler matter. The 
dizzying Spires give way to the heart and innards 
of Nature Herself, red in fang and claw and rose 
and sunset. This is the domain where beasts 
and men and beast-men dwell. Far from the 
abstract puzzles of the Epiphamies, this is as 
real as it gets. 


regions are too abstract and ephemeral to feel much like our crude 
constructs of reality. Composed of symbols and superluminal 
concepts, these regions drift in and out of contact. For the astral 
traveler, Ephiphamy Realms remain solid for a few fleeting 
moments. Such mysteries are too transcendent for a mortal 
mind to grasp for long. 


Astral travel is the only way to reach such regions. Sleeping or 
inspired mortals can flash into the Epiphamies for brief seconds, 
but those visitors quickly fade out of that space, hopefully with 
memories of the visit to guide them through their imperfect lives. 
Even astral travelers can remain there for only a short time. It’s 
a place where the ground literally shifts under your feet... except 
that there’s no actual ground or feet involved! 


Imagine the love-child of Salvador Dali and Dr. Seuss. Now 
imagine it as a world. And now imagine that it exists because 
you imagined it. That’s the nature of the Ephiphamies. Fleeting 
concepts get smaller worlds, whereas lasting concepts, backed 
by millions of minds over hundreds of years, have massive 
regions with something approaching a stable nature. Within 
the Epiphamies, you might find a Fortress of Government that 
represents the symbolic might and futility of that concept; a 
River of Language that flows with the sounds of every dialect 
ever spoken on Earth; a titanic chiming clock with a thousand 
hands, each one marking some measure of Time; the realm of 
Platonic ideals, which exists perhaps only because Plato imagined 
that it might. There are tortured halls of Art and mindscapes 
so bizarre that Dali himself might have been amazed by them. 
You'll find realms based upon not only our popular images 
of holidays (though those exist as well) but around the very 
ideas those holidays represent. In short, the Epiphamies are as 
boundless as imagined consciousness itself. 


There are said to be Realms within this domain where 
mortal minds cannot go at all - regions too transcendent for 
human consciousness to grasp. Are they the dreams of gods? 
The secrets of the Universe? Who can say? That which we cannot 
imagine, we cannot travel to... just yet. As human history has 
shown, though, we puny mortals are capable of expanding our 
imagination to apparently limitless degrees. 


Again, who knows? Perhaps someday, you'll visit an 
Epiphamy Realm that hadn't existed until you conceived of 
it yourself... 


Reflection of Life 


According to certain primal mages, everything used to be 
like this. The Middle Umbra reflects Earth as it once was, 
with newer Realms arising to mark the things we have done 
with, and to, our world since then. I don't know if I agree with 
that... but then, as usual, it's a puzzle with no single answer. 
In contrast to the fleeting subjectivity of the Astral Reaches, 
though, these Spirit Wilds feel far more secure. 


Chapter Four: The Worlds Beyond 


eo 


EE,’ 


oe ee 


-m a. Em 


"That's not to say that it's safe or pretty. Anyone who's ever 
spent time in the wilderness - real time in the REAL wilderness, 
notan afternoon in the park - knows how awful Nature can be. 
There are reasons we frail critters built our houses and farms 
and factories and all that stuff: nature's scary when you don't 
have technology at your beck and call. Although travelers can 
step sideways with certain goodies in hand, mortal technology 
has a funny way of malfunctioning in the depths of the Spirit 
Wilds. Because the only reliable craft in this region is the bone- 
deep knowledge of primal magicks, shamans and witches do 
far better here than do heady wizards or tech-savvy mysto-geeks. 
Folks who recognize that beauty is often raw and terrible feel 
most comfortable in this Spirit World. 


The Spirit Denumbra 

Viewed through the Vidare Spiritus, the Penumbra shines 
in luminous fog. During the day, the sun's faint illumination 
turns that mist to a glow; at night, moonlight illuminates the 
shining shadows. Man-made structures sometimes disappear 
when you shift from our world to this one. Remember that 
construction site? Look - it's gone now. In its place, there's 
a ghost of the ice cream parlor that stood there for 40 years. 
And that's one of the tricks this Velvet Shadow plays: the 
Penumbra shows the memory of places, the spirit of them, more 
than the concrete "reality" of them in the mortal realm. Once 
again, the word "reality" belongs in quotes. Getting hung up 
on preconceived notions of what's supposed to be real in this 
world is a very good way to get lost. 


Airis and Moon Paths 


Getting lost is easy in the Wilds. The tricky landmarks 
and constant mist make navigation difficult. We could wander 
around in this twilit reflection for ages... assuming, of course, 
that something didn't eat us first. Take a look around - we 
haven’t really moved at all, but how much of this landscape can 
you recognize? You could "follow your heart," of course, but 
without signposts to guide you, how would you know where 


that might lead? 


Thankfully, there are signposts if you know where and how 
to look for them. Unlike the High Umbra - which usually offers 
you a door or portal to step through - the Middle Umbra sends 
more subtle signals. Shamans, priests, and witches are trained 
to look for omens, and with good reason. Middle Umbral 
pathways, sometimes known as Airts, reveal themselves within 
such signs: a handful of broken twigs, a meaningful pattern 
in the dirt, the cry of a raven that perches where one hadn't 
perched a moment ago. By following these signs, a mindful 
traveler can get where she needs to go. 


More obvious than Airts, the luminous Moon Paths shine 
their way through the mist. Moonlight picks out a rough road 
through the Umbrascape, often heralded by shining entities 
called Lunes. Again, a traveler who knows how to follow such 
a road might reach her destination, assuming that she knows 
the proper rituals too. Lunes, as I mentioned earlier, are spirit 


Ma$e: The Ascension 20^ Anniversary Edition 


beings; they want to be recognized and honored as the powers 
that they are. Some are tricksters too, like the fabled will-o-wisps 
that lead a traveler into bogs or over cliffs. And then there are 
the werewolves who use Moon Paths as well... and who rarely 
appreciate mages on their sacred roads! A Moon Path marks a 
clearer journey, but it’s often a dangerous route. 


Pattern Webs 


Strunghereand there, spiritual cobwebs hang throughout the 
Velvet Curtain. According to legends, they’ re spun eternally bysome 
vast cosmic Weaver - a spidergod with infinite offspring. These 
creatures hold the Universe together, and the strands they use to 
do so are most obvious in the Middle Umbra. This is probably just 
another myth, but the Pattern Webs are real. So, for that matter, 
are the spirit spiders who weave them. Brave or crazy mages can 
follow these webs - even climb them to get from one Realm to 
another. But unless you feel like screaming “Help meeeeeeeeee!" 
while some spidergod eats your face, I wouldn't recommend it. 


Ombral Realms 

Asin the high Umbra, the Middle Umbra hosts a multitude 
of Realms: forest realms and factory realms, blasted wastes and 
ancient cities, and places where dinosaurs do indeed still rule 
the Earth. Potent legends create Mythic Realms, like Hy-Brasil, 
Dystopia, Olympus, and Kun Lun. Earthy afterlives like the 
Valhalla battlefields and cultural myths like the Antebellum 
South exist amongst the near-infinite Middle Umbra planes. As 
with the High Umbra, you can find places that would qualify 
as primal heavens or hells - not the conceptual embodiments 
of such regions, but the primordial fears and hopes behind 
them. Various entities carve out little homes in these Realms 
as well, and though they look more like pristine wilderness 
than temples, such regions have a lot in common with the 


Astral Umbra Courts. 


In all but the most ravaged regions, Nature dominates these 
Realms. Monumental peaks, endless forests, unbroken deserts, 
titanic coastlines - this is Earth as it was before mankind fucked 
it up. Literally “in the spirit” of that destruction, you can also 
find industrial nightmares that make Gary, Indiana look like 
the Appalachian Trail. Witnessing such devastation, the rage of 
werewolves becomes easier to understand. The Middle Umbra 
echoes our origins and sins, reflecting our world’s immortal soul. 


The Aetherian Reaches and Anchorheads 


As in the Astral Umbra, gargantuan mountains reach 
toward the sky. Unlike those superluminal Spires, though, 
these mountains must be scaled hand-and-foot unless you’ve 
got wings or some other means of flying. Beyond those peaks, 
there’s a vast open sky, marked by rainbows and the glittering 
stars. This is the realm of Thunderbird, the Aetherian Reaches 
that have been called “the face of the soul of forever.” 


Through this boundless sky, cloud realms float and planets 
hover. It’s said that the Courts of the Sun and Moon can be 
reached by anyone with enough courage and insanity to try and 


ascend to such heights. Such travelers must rely on their own 
power to fly, however. Technology cannot work in the Aetherian 
Reaches. Jetpacks, planes, even guns and synthetic fabrics, all 
either refuse to function or fall to pieces and disappear here. 


High in the skies, whirling vortices often spin in and out 
of existence. These Anchorheads link the Aetherian Reaches to 


the worlds beyond the Horizon - the Shade Realms, Shard 
Realms, and the Deep Umbra itself. A flying traveler could, if 
he timed his journey right, pass through an Anchorhead and 
ascend to these enigmatic Realms. As the saying goes, however, 
many try and few are chosen. What happens to the ones who 
mistime that trip is anyone's guess... 


The Lower Ombra, Onderworld of Death 


sax NS 


And then, of course, there is death. 


We are all mortal. Magick gives us the means 
to stall death, even undo its effects for a short 


time. All things, however, die eventually: gods, 
vampires, even ideas. And the Low Umbra is 
where dead things go when they pass beyond 
the Earthly plane. 


As I’ve mentioned earlier, a living mage can enter 
theShadowlands; magick givesus that much power, 
though at a fairly high cost. Beyond that entry, 
though, the Low Umbra remains mysterious, with many stories 
but very few conclusions other than the ultimate end of life itself. 


Penumbral Shadowlands and the Shroud 


The Vidare Mortem shows us a glimpse of the dead 
realms - a gloomy forecast of earthly mortality. Even for the 
living traveler, this view of the world seems rotten. Dead 
and dying leaves hang on spindly trees, trunks cracked with 
terminal malaise. Glass surfaces are smeared or shattered. Soil 
squirms with pale white maggots. Every building seems like 
a tenement, each door or window tilting crazily in its frame. 
There’s no day or night in the Shadowlands - only Dark 
and Deeper Dark. The few faces you behold in this place are 
corpse-like, all too often showing the marks of their deaths. 


Without either the proper magicks or an actual death, a 
living person might see the Shadowlands but couldn’t enter them. 
I suspect that deeply morbid people, mages and Sleepers alike, live 
more in this Vidare Mortem than they would like. To truly step 
over - to pierce what's called the Shroud, Death's own Gauntlet 
- while still living requires special magicks with a heavy cost. I’ve 
mentioned the agama sojourn earlier, and though other groups 
- even the Technocracy - have different names for it, the essence 
of that Art is the same: a combination of Entropy, Life, and Spirit 
that few people can command. Haunted locations have thinner 
Shrouds too, where a living soul might temporarily cross over if 
she’s desperate or unfortunate enough to try. I’ve even heard that 
vehicles occasionally traverse into this dimension - lost airliners 
and ghost ships and hell-bound trains. If that is true, though, the 
effects on their crews and passengers must have been horrific indeed. 


As always, there’s that Penumbral mist, as if some mad 
stagehand went berserk with a smoke machine. It seems thicker in 
the Shadowlands, though... and terribly alive. That perpetual fog feels 
uncannily organic, too, like vaporized flesh. And the sounds you'll 
hear, if you stop to listen, might be the most disturbing things of all. 


Why would anyone visit this place? Why would someone 
want to? I suspect it has a lot to do with a simple yet unnerving 
truth: everything that lives is dying too. And to visit this realm is 
to see that truth head on, without comforting illusions. 


Future Fates: The Spirit-Nuke 


In the Reckoning metaplot, a Void Engineer named Xerxes Jones piloted a specially designed Umbraship into the Shadowlands 
around 1999. His trip coincided with an Underworld war that apparently involved the spiritual reflections of Earthly nukes. 
When Xerxes dropped his experimental spirit-nuke into the Tempest, the combined detonation raised a titanic Maelstrom that 
tore much of the Underworld apart. This act, in turn, caused the Avatar Storm. The fate of that ship and its crew remain unknown: 


Depending upon the Storyteller’s wishes: 


* The Maelstrom remains: The Shadowlands and Dark Kingdoms have been obliterated. The Low Umbra is one big 


storm, and passing into it means annihilation. 


* The Shadowlands and Dark Cities have been rebuilt: The passing years have calmed the storm and allowed 
new wraiths to construct Underworlds from their own passions and the memories of recent events. Ground Zero in 
New York, for example, might have a spectacularly gruesome City of the Dead, perpetually burning and exploding 


in an endless horror show. 


* The spirit nuke incident never happened: The Shadowlands, Stygia, and other Dark Empires remain as they're 
presented throughout the Wraith: The Oblivion series. And for updated possibilities, check out Wraith: The 


Oblivion 20" Anniversary Edition. 


Chapter Four: The Worlds Beyond 99 


The death-mages I’ve known embrace this truth. It’s part of 
their Awakened Path. To recognize mortality first hand, I'm told, 
is oddly liberating. Just as old-school shamans, ascetic mystics, or 
Ecstatic mages ofthe LeftHand Path will “die to themselves” in order 
to be reborn, these death-mages find deeper understanding when 
confronting the most awful aspect of life’s cycle. Out of birth comes 
life; out of life comes death; out of death comes rebirth. This is the 
cycle of Earthly existence. Pain is inevitable, but suffering is a choice. 
Byconfronting the Shadowlands in person, a mage chooses suffering 
in order to understand - and transcend - the inevitable pain of life. 


And if that sounds gloomy... well, the Low Umbra is 
gloom personified. 


The Tempest 

Existing ina parallel space within the Shadowlands, there's 
a monumental storm: the Tempest. Essentially the embodiment 
of passion, memory, and mortality, it whirls through the 
basementofour Earthly cosmos. This, I'm told, is Entropy itself 
- an eternal vortex that draws all things into itself eventually. 
The Tempest occasionally rips through to the Shadowlands, 
manifesting in lesser storms called Maelstroms that can transport 
a soul to another destination or - more likely - rip it to shreds. 


Dark Mysteries 

As with the High and Middle Umbrae, the Tempest houses a 
multitudeofRealms: Dark Kingdoms, hellholes, the dens ofpowerful 
entities, and the refuges of souls considered lucky by the standards 


of this region. According to death-mage lore, ghosts forge so-called 
Necropoliupon islands in the Tempest. Beyond these Dark Kingdoms 
- which are built, from what I'm told, out of crafted souls - there's 
a titanic Labyrinth chewed out of the Maelstrom itself by monsters 
that might have once been human. At the center of that cyclopean 
maze, legends say, there's a Void... THE Void, called by some folks 
the Great Unmaking. This gateway to Oblivion is the punch line to 
our cosmic joke. All that is, was, or ever aspired to be gets swept into 
the Void eventually and becomes nothingness once more. 


Oddly enough, certain mystics consider that a comforting 
thought. If everything ends in a Void, then everything must come 
from that Void as well. The Universe can't be an endless flow of 
water going down the drain; eventually, that water - all matter, 
all energy, all potential - must get cycled back again. Just as living 
bodies break down into soil, so the new lives spring nurtured from 
that soil. And so, by that reasoning, the Void is our metaphysical 
recycling program, from which all new things come. 


There’s just one problem with that thought: maybe the Universe 
isn’t endless. Perhaps a finite amount of energy, matter, and potential 
exists...andit’sliterallyspillingaway. Whetheryou call such speculations 
"the heatdeath of the Universe" orsome more mystic name, there are 
theories that speculate that we really are going down the drain. That 
this life is everything, and after it comes nothingness. Forever. 


And that, perhaps, is where the Nephandi draw their 
inspiration from. Not from Ascension, but from Oblivion. 


Comforting thought, isn't it? 


100 


Mage: The Ascension 20" Anniversary Edition 


Zones 


Stepping away from such gloomy ruminations, 
Iwant to talk about dreams. Literal dreams, the 
dreams that Realms are made of. Fleeting pieces 
of ourvast cosmic puzzle, the Zones drift through 
all three Worlds without belonging to any of 
them. Like the Tempest, these regions exist in 
a sort of hyperspace - separate yet bridgeable. 
And for Awakened and unAwakened souls, 
these Zones slip in around the edges and 
occasionally occupy an aspect of reality. 


Imentioned the Null Zone earlier; the other Zones, as they're 
commonly defined, have been divided in the following ways: 


Maya, the Dream Zone 


These are such stuff as dreams are made on, and their 
reality is rounded by our sleep. As usual, mages debate whether 
the Maya - "the illusion of life" - predates humanity and 
therefore shapes us or whether it was the dreaming minds of 
our ancestors that first brought this Zone into being. A few 
people even assert that our Earthly reality is the true Maya, the 
Matrixlike shared dream/ nightmare that only seems real to us, 
and that the Dream Zone is where Reality actually resides. The 
old Zen joke about a man dreaming he's a butterfly who may 
truly be a butterfly dreaming he's a man... that's the essence 
of such puzzles. Once again, Chicken, meet Egg - now try not 
to break yourself figuring out who came first! 


Like all Zones, the Maya exists independently of the three 
Worlds, the mortal plane, and the other Zones. Bits of it cross 
over for brief moments, but the place itself exists on its own 
terms. It's tempting to think of it as an outgrowth of either the 
High or Middle Umbra, and some authorities see it that way. 
More often, though, cosmologists consider it a region with its 
own metaphysical laws. Although powerful dreams are said to 
expand into the Mythic Realms of the Middle Umbra or the 
Afterworlds and Courts of the High Umbra, most of them 
exist in the ephemeral fabric of their own Zone. 


Travel, Faeries, and Control 


Unlike most of the Otherworlds, you probably won't be 
able to step sideways into the Maya; certain shamanic traditions, 
mostly among the Australian Aborigines, do teach their members 
how to do that, but it's a rather obscure art. Skilled astral 
travelers can project themselves into the Dream Zone too... 
often into other people's dreams; once again, though, that's a 
very specialized trick. 


The fae-folk supposedly share a common tie to the Dream 
Zone, which they refer to as The Dreaming. The realm of 
changeling magic, their vision of that Dreaming consists of a 
Near Dreaming - essentially the Dream Penumbra - and the Far 
Dreaming, which resembles an obscure version of the Middle 


Umbra... and might, in fact, be part of it. Most of us, however, 
enter the Maya almost every time we sleep. The Dream Zone, you 
see, is the place where dreams take form, exist for short periods 
of time, and then pop like bubbles when the dreamer wakes. 


Normally, a Dream Realm controls your reality; like a 
puppet, you're at the mercy of its whims. Taking control of 
your experience involves the technique called lucid dreaming - 
that thing you do when you recognize that you're in a dream 
and so decide to work it to your advantage. In a way, this is 
a lot like magic itself - you awaken to the idea that you can 
change reality to suit you. Oddly enough, plenty of mages 
never understand this element of a Dream Zone journey; it's 
like their conscious mind is so used to changing reality that it 
craves a place where it can surrender control. As any dreamer 
knows, however, the most pleasant dream can flip over, without 
warning, into nightmare territory. And if you find yourself 
running from a Freddy Krueger rip-off, it’s comforting to know 
you can take control away from him if you're smart and brave 
enough to do so. 


Demesnes: 
Your Personal Dream Kingdom 


A very few dreamers manage to craft personal domains 
among the Dream Realms - places where the dreamer can 
return again and again, retaining a form of control over his 
domain. Sometimes known as a Demesne (a manor or estate, 
named from the same French root that gave us domain), this 
dream world takes cues from the subconscious desires and 
fears of its creator. If that dreamer realizes that he's got “his 
own private Idaho" to retreat to when he sleeps, this Demesne 
can become a sort of refuge. If he's not careful, though - or if 
he falls into a coma or a very deep Quiet - that Demesne can 
become a trap as well. 


Lasting Realms and Dreaming Gods 


There are supposedly more permanent Realms among 
the Dream Zone, too: the collective dreamscapes of cultural 
memory, like Hollywood, the Land of Nod, and the fearsome 
Dream Theatre of the Dead. Or like the primordial Onerae, 
where comatose and demented people spend their entire lives. 


Dream Lord entities, the Oneira, make their homes among 
these regions, shaping dream-stuff into powerful Demesnes. 
Given the relationship between the Onerae and insanity, 
it’s not unreasonable to assume that the deranged Marauder 
mages share a cosmic tie with the Oneira. When the Mad 
Ones disappear into vortices of their own insanity, they might 
even become Dream Lords within the Onerae. Perhaps this is 
what Ascension is to them... in which case, some Marauders 
essentially become gods. 


Chapter Four: The Worlds Beyond 


| 
l 
d 


N 


f 


DX 7T 


Midrealm and 
The Aelder Bole 


At the center of all things, it is said, there's a Realm that is 
All Realms and yet part of none of them. A primal expanse of 
virgin wilderness, it reaches to the borders of the High, Middle, 
and Low Worlds, branches into dreams, winds around the Paths 
of the Wyck, and pokes tendrils into the furthest corners of the 
Digital Web. This is the Ur-Forest, supposedly the origin of all 
forests everywhere. Legends call it Eden, Paradise, Midrealm, the Root 
of Creation. And at its center grows the largest tree in the universe: 
the Aelder Bole, a World Tree that reflects the majesty of life itself. 


Ringed by a wall of rainbows that few travelers - and no 
technology - can pierce, Midrealm features four eternal rivers. 
Each one begins at the base of the World Tree and then ranges 
off into the distance, pointing almost exactly along the four axes 
of North, South, East, and West. In between those rivers, various 
biomes - forests, glades, wetlands, meadows, plains, and even 
deserts and ice - divide Midrealm into every earthly environment. 


The Tree itself, a titanic pillar that reaches beyond the 
clouds, has been called by many names: the Tree of Life; the Tree 
of the Knowledge of Good and Evil; or the dense embodiment 
of the Otz Chaim, which traces the 10 Sephiroth that lead 
from the Divine Crown to Earthly Matter and back again. In 
the Tree's branches, a Protean Hawk guards the secrets of the 
immortal fruit of the Tree; under its roots, the serpent-dragon 
Typhon - said to be seven miles long - creeps through endless 
burrows dug beneath the surface of Midrealm. A Hall of Many 
Meetings, shaped from living wood, greets visitors who have a 
purpose; the titan Forethought hangs from a bough in a copse 
of oaks and pine trees, his blood nourishing the soil beneath 
his body. Some folks see Forethought as Odin; others view 
him as Christ. By any name, he embodies the Hanged Man, 
drawn between planes of existence and sacrificed to himself 
in the name of wisdom. 


Some folks have tried to climb the World Tree. That's 
no easy task. Few travelers can even find Midrealm, much less 
enter it, and so although various legends speak of journeys up 
the World Tree, I've yet to meet anyone who could prove he'd 
actually performed that feat. 


Mount Qaf 


Certain legends claim that the Center of All Things is 
a mountain, not a tree. Known as Olympus, Qaf, or Meru, this 
Mountain dwarfs every Earthly mountain put together. Again, a 
vastwilderness radiates outward from the Mountain; sometimes 
it's a desert, other times a forest, and still other times a rocky 
plain or an expanse of ice. In the slippery metaphysics of the 
Worlds Beyond, this appears to be essentially the same place 
as Midrealm and the Aelder Bole. Is it human imagination 
that shifts these landscapes, or are principles beyond human 
consciousness at work here? I'm afraid there are no simple 
answers to that question. It’s one of the many ineffable mysteries 


of the Awakened world. 


Mage: The Ascension 20" Anniversary Edition 


The Mirror Zone 


I’m sure you’ve had those moments in your life when 
expectations turned themselves inside out. Folks you'd thought 
were friends suddenly did things that seemed wildly out of 
character. What had been safe turned hazardous. "Evil twins" 
appeared to replace people you'd grown to trust... perhaps 
including you. Welcome to the Mirror Zone, in which things 
you had come to expect are inexplicably inverted. 


You don't go to the Mirror Zone. The Mirror Zone comes 
to you... usually, but not always, in the Otherworlds. It isn't so 
much a parallel world so much as it appears to be composed 
of short-lived delusions straight out of your own mind. Some 
folks argue that it's not a Zone at all but a collection of astral 
manifestations that come about because we have issues to 
resolve. In plain English, you could say these mirrors pop in 
and out of existence because we need to work some shit out. 


A Mirror Zone trip begins when you notice things out of 
place; someone you thought was dead is alive, old rivals start 
fucking right before your eyes - that sort of thing. Maybe other 
beople notice something odd about you, crediting or blaming 
you for things you know you didn't do. Eventually, you come 
to realize that these incidents are tied to unresolved baggage. 
If and when you face up to your issues, the Mirror visit fades. 


The Mirror Zone manifests most often in the High and Middle 
Umbrae, probably because of their cosmic ties to the imagination. 
Ghosts, I’m told, can face such manifestations too - harrowing 
encounters with the shadowy sides of their personalities. And, as I 
mentioned a moment ago, encounters with the Zone can happen 
in mortal reality too. If and when your world suddenly flips over, 
you might be facing some issues in the Mirror Zone. 


Paradox Realms 


Remember what I said earlier about Paradox and 
Thunderdome? Two realities enter, one reality leaves. If a mage 
oversteps his bounds, Reality sometimes reaches out, swallows 
him down, and sticks him in “reality jail.” That’s what Paradox 
Realms are: cosmic bubbles caused by metaphysical hiccups. The 
mage gets pulled out of his surroundings and stuck inside a 
bubble until he serves his time or manages to escape. 


Like dreams, Paradox Realms are personal. No two of them are 
ever thesame. Shaped not by Nature or gods but by the acts of magick 
that conjure them, these cosmic prisons pop into being around 
an offending mage and then suck him out to where his paradox 
causes less of a crisis than it had been causing before. Junior gets a 
time-out and the rest of the world moves on. Whether or not the 
mage moves on after that depends on whether he's willing to figure 
out what he did wrong. Folks who think that Reality is neutral - or 
that it lacks a sense of humor - have yet to visit a Paradox Realm. 


Entering and Leaving 
Assuming you're the mage in question, getting into a 
Paradox Realm is easy - getting out again is the trick. Generally, 


this involves serious soul-searching and a form of penance, 
perhaps something as simple as a sincere "I'm sorry" to the 
Universe at large. 


Gettingintooneifyou'renotthe mage who caused that paradox 
is far more challenging. First off, you'll have to find the right one... 
which, ifyou'relookingforabuddy's Paradox Realm, is fairly difficult. 
These Realms can resemble soap bubbles or sparkling holiday 
ornaments scattered across the shell of the Horizon or floating in 
the distant reaches of the Aetherian Reaches or Epiphamies. Once 
you find the right Realm (assuming that you can), there's the puzzle 
involved in opening the door. You see, there isn't one... and because 
every Paradox Realm is different, each Realm has a different means 
ofentrance and exit. You mightfind yourself singing nursery rhymes 
backwards, kissing a winged pig, or speaking a familiar spell in a 
differentlanguagebeforethe Realm letsyou in. Onething's constant, 
though: each Realm, without fail, is based upon the magick that 
brought it into being. If you can figure out why a given Realm exists, 
then you'll have a key to freeing its prisoner. 


Getting free one way or another is important with a 
Paradox Realm. Eventually, Reality gets tired of having such 
things around... and, like bubbles off the inner surface of a 
glass, they float away. To where? Into the Deep Umbra, that's 
where. And once that happens, the chance of getting free on 
your own power disappears. Unless someone finds you and sets 
you free, you're stuck with the results of your own Paradox... 
possibly forever. 


The Hollow Earth 


Paradox Realms aren't the only places where time stands 
still. Remember when I mentioned dinosaurs? Yes, they still 


roam free in a place known as the Hollow Earth: a strange inner 
Umbra that supposedly rests on the inside of the Earthly world. 


Known by a variety of names, this region has been spoken 
of for millennia. It's the Land Beyond the Edge of the World, 
the Inner Earth, Hyperboria, Annwyn, Underhill. Whereas most 
cosmologists place the Umbrae outside the mortal realm, tales place 
the Hollow Earth under the crustor oceans of our world. Tunnels, 
whirlpools, caves, and rabbitholes lead into this region, supposedly 
without a need to step sideways over a Gauntlet; that gauntlet, in 
this case, is the edge of the everyday world. For obvious reasons, 
its really bloody difficult to locate Hollow Earth passageways. 
Especially in our age of satellite cameras and GPS tracking, those 
"edges of the known world" are difficult to find... in order to find 
the Hollow Earth, you must first get seriously lost. 


Etherites and Engineers 

Two groups in particular have focused on finding the 
Hollow Earth: the Society of Ether and the Technocratic Void 
Engineers. The first group wants to explore it, and the second 
wants to seal it up forever. For obvious reasons, this place is 
dangerous - not only because it's too random for an ordered 
world but because hidden, often forbidden, knowledge, tends 
to wind up there. Before and during World War II, a group 
called the Thule Gesellschaft tried to bolster the Nazi forces with 
secrets from the Hollow Earth. Supposedly, a combined effort 
between the VEsand the Etherites managed to quash that effort, 
though with high costs to all parties involved. The nature of 
those secrets remains... well, secret. The archives of both groups, 
it's said, contain stories of lost races, amazing adventures, and 
things best left beyond the reach of mortal men. 


The Digital Web 


And then there's the Zone that remained an 
esoteric secret until recently but has since 
become a fulcrum for the mortal world: the 
Digital Web, a metaphysical reflection of the 
Internet. As theoretically boundless as the 
human imagination, this region began as a 
hazy, unformatted sector fading in and out 
of existence. Within the last few decades, 
though, it's swelled to a point where even its 


most dedicated travelers don't know where... 
or if... it ever ends. 


Thinking Makes It So 


Physically speaking, the Digital Web is virtual space: a 
level of reality defined strictly by consciousness. It's the there 
when "there" is a state unrelated to physical proximity. Folks 
used to think that reality was what you could see and hear 
and touch - a state defined by physical presence. Telephones 
and the Internet shattered that idea. Now you can share very 


"real" experiences - a friendship, a romance, an argument - 
with people with whom you never have shared, nor will you ever 
share, physical space. It's a state of reality that affects your life 
in ways that have nothing to do with physical existence. And 
if you have to ask whether virtual reality is actually real, just 
try counting the lumps of gold in your bank account and then 
ask that question again. 


(Money itself is another form of virtual reality, but I won’t 
muddy the waters by going there just yet...) 


Virtual reality is defined only by consciousness - by a 
thinking mind's ability to perceive, process, draw conclusions, 
and adjust beliefs based upon nothing except mental activities. I 
could get all esoteric and argue that all reality is virtual reality, but 
I'll save that lecture for another time. In the Digital Web, several 
forms of astral projection send the traveler’s consciousness 
into this virtual reality, typically leaving the physical body, or 
“meat,” behind at home. All elements of reality in that space, 
therefore, are products of the traveler’s consciousness. 


Chapter Four: The Worlds Beyond 


| 
| 
d 


Ne No 7^: 


oe ee 


For this reason, among others, the Digital Web - which 
is neither digital nor a web - exists in a state outside of the 
other Otherworldly Realms, and yet it overlaps almost every 
one of them. Even more than any other form of reality, it's all 
in the mind. It's not quite the High Umbra; nature and death 
are intrinsic parts of it as well. On a lot of levels, the Digital 
Web is the ultimate magickal domain... a fact that its pioneers 
tried, unsuccessfully, to keep to themselves. 


Where Did This 
Come From? 


In the beginning was the Mount, and the Mount was Qaf. 
And though Mount Qaf was said to occupy the center of all 
existence - as I mentioned earlier - almost no one knew it was 
there. You could reach this place only in your mind. A handful 
of mystics who would eventually form the Tradition called the 
AhLi-Batin recognized the significance of Mount Qaf, and they 
safeguarded the secret from common men. Millennia passed, 
and a world grew across the fringes of Mount Qaf. Eluding 
almost everyone, however, was the importance of Mount Qaf 
- the mountain standing at the center of everything and yet 
existing nowhere. 


It's been said that early experiments in virtual reality - 
telepathy, prophecy, remote-viewing magicks like crystal balls 
and scrying pools - all touched upon the fabric of this Web. 
Some philosophers even speculate that books constitute a 
form of virtual reality. It took the invention of the telephone, 


Ma$e: The Ascension 20^ Anniversary Edition 


however, to break through to the virtual space dominated by 
Mount Qafand its surroundings. When people could hear the 
words of a person in one physical location reach across space 
to be heard in another one, the obvious conclusion appeared: 
the parties were meeting somewhere between the two of them. 
And from there, the real fun began... 


Flatlands 


Unlike the primordial enigmas that constitute the Three 
Worlds, the Digital Web as we know it has a verifiable history; 
in several cases, the Zone’s pioneers are still alive today. The 
primary founder, however, perished from the Earthly plane, 
if not from existence, in the process of opening this grand 
can of worms. Computer genius Alan Turing, revered as an 
Archmaster by the Virtual Adepts who dominate the Web, 
created the esoteric computations that allowed him to access 
this space. Reputedly assassinated (a so-called “suicide” in 
mortal histories) in the middle of a grand experiment, Turing 
is said to have either opened, created, or been sucked into the 
Digital Web in 1954. Whatever it is that actually occurred that 
day, the virtual frontier literally started with a bang. 


In its earliest days, the Web is said to have been composed 
of text and fog, drifts of typewriter-font words drifting or 
darting across a dark void of luminescent mist. According 
to certain Web-historians, even that mist was formed of 
code - glowing strings of numerals and symbols drawn from 
all human languages, bound together by the odd alchemy of 


human thought. Rigid geometric patterns - perhaps reflecting 
the Platonic solids in a new configuration - soon followed the 
discovery of this space, with bold colors and angular shapes 
replacing the original environment. 


During its transition from code-fogs and bright geometry to 
the Zone's current state, the Digital Web went through a phase 
right out of Heavy Metal Magazine. Bizarre sectors, comic-book 
physics, bright colors, and more testosterone-fueled perversity 
than should be allowed to exist in one space, all flourished 
from the late ‘70s to the mid-‘90s. A circular trade-off between 
Web reality and popular sci-fi crafted the visions of both. By 
thelate '90s, though, a combination of sophisticated Computer 
Graphics Imaging, increased net traffic, and the combined 
imaginations of Sleepers and Awakened had turned the Tron- 
like cyberscape into a lush electronic world. 


These days, a trip to the Digital Web brings you into a 
hyperreal multiverse of rich vistas and startling colors. Although 
it’s still bolder and often louder than the mortal realm, there’s 
asensual sophistication that was lacking, perhaps impossible, in 
the older Web. As with the Three Worlds, the Web reverberates 
with vivid sensations. And yet there’s a lingering flatness to it 
all, especially when compared to the primal impressions of the 
Three Worlds. Most of the Web feels like a pyrokinetic bazaar, 
but for all the sound and fury and polymorphous culture, 
there’s something missing. 


It’s scent. The Digital Web doesn’t smell like anything. Taste 
is oddly lacking too - not just in the aesthetic sense, but in the 
sensory sense. As vivid as the sights and sounds and even tactile 
impressions can be, the Digital Web still falls a bit short of full 
satisfaction as far as the human animal is concerned. That said, 
considering how ripe certain netizens probably are in person, 
that missing sense might not be an entirely bad thing. 


Techgnosis and Transhumanism 

Given its escape from physical constraints, the Web has 
nurtured a growing movement toward transhumanism: the 
ideology in which human consciousness transcends our animal 
limitations. Like many philosophies, transhumanism comes in 
lots of flavors, including genderfuckers and identity nomads 
who sidestep conventional social norms, posthumanist flesh- 
jockeys angling for the next stage of human evolution, and 
the “escape key" variety that believes that we'll all be better off 
when we upload ourselves into Reality 2.0. A thick strain of 
Gnosticism - that ancient belief that we exist in a corrupt world 
but can transcend it through arcane knowledge - runs through 
Digital Web society. From Virtual Adept technomystics to the 
hard-headed Technocrats of Iteration X, many groups within 
the Web see it as the back door out of physical reality... a self- 
booting Rapture, if you will, that leaves the mortal world behind. 


As usual, people wind up fighting about doctrine and 
territory. And predictably, the opening of virtual space sparked 
a reality race that parallels the Ascension War. Just as mortal 
mystics and Technocrats battle to decide the fate of Meatspace, 
so their uploaded counterparts have slugged it out in the Digital 


Web - often with more civility and mutual respect, but with 
no less determination to win the future for their side. 


Over the last 50 years, and especially within the last 20, 
the great race to claim virtual space has picked up speed. Like 
all wars - and on many levels, it has been a war - that race 
spurs new technologies. Now, any number of mages will tell 
you that their faction-of-choice created personal computers, 
ARPANET, icon-based interfaces, or even Facebook. Whatever. 
The undeniable truth is that the Digital Web has grown, since 
the early 1990s, from an elite playground to a foundation of 
the human world. And like all growth spurts, that has involved 
a fair amount of pain. 


Whiteout 


The greatest pain in this virtual world remains the spectre 
of Whiteout. Essentially a reality crash, Whiteout occurs when 
the strands of the Web, if you will, get twisted or broken by 
carelessness. Just as power surges or viruses can disrupt or 
destroy computer systems, so a Whiteout disrupts localized 
Webspace. In late 1997, one literally crashed the entire Digital 
Web, killing dozens, if not hundreds, of travelers and injuring 
many more. Linked to the destruction of Doissetep, this colossal 
Whiteout was the worst of its kind thus far. Fears of a similar 
event at the end of 1999 didn't pan out, thank the many gods, 
butlong-time netizens keep watching over their shoulders. The 
Internet, after all, has undergone vast changes in the physical 
world; the fact that events in that world can still affect Reality 
2.0 is rarely far from anyone's mind. 


These days, the Digital Web is neither the Wild West it 
once was nor the Reality 2.0 its idealists hoped it would be. 
The amusing and often tiresome leetspeak that once defined 
it has given way (again, thank all the gods that be) to a highly 
visual, mixed literacy defined by text, graphics, links, video, 
and shared points of reference. Even now, though, there's a 
vast gulf between the people who use the Internet and the folks 
who truly live in virtual reality. You probably do the first thing 
every day, but you might never do the second thing in your life. 


Internal Access 


Any conscious entity can dream; very few, however, can 
enter the Dream Zone under their own power and then walk 
around there at will. The Digital Web works the same way. 
Billions of people access virtual space every day, via phones 
and keyboards. These folks don't actually enter the Digital Web, 
though - they skim along its proximity, brushing its strands 
the way that insect wings displace the air. As Sleepers do in 
the magickal realm, most people affect the nature of Reality 
as a whole yet rarely work their Will upon it. They pass briefly 
through the virtual realm, fireflies flashing here and there. To 
become human in that region, you've got to send yourself there 
through one of several methods: 


e Sensoryvisitation involves projecting an enhanced version 
of your consciousness into virtual space. Using VR gear, 


Chapter Four: The Worlds Beyond 


eo 


Ne No AA 


Future Fates: Cell Phones and the Internet 


When Mage appeared in 1993, the Internet barely existed. A mere handful of people had even heard of it, and fewer 
still knew how to access it. Since then, the Internet has become a cornerstone of the world as we know it. In the new 
millennium, that Internet connects the human world in ways that seemed impossible around 1993. By 2013 — thanks to 
cell phones and wireless Ethernet (neither of which existed in 1993) — net access is pocket-sized and portable. With rare 
exceptions, anyone in the industrialized world can reach it whenever they want to. 


This makes a huge difference for certain elements of Mage: The Ascension. 


A wired world is a more knowledgeable world, for starters, with access to a theoretically infinite collection of information; 
that information is far more consistent and accurate than it was in the 1990s... and often more entertaining, too. Between 
cell phones and online social media, there’s more connection and less solitude. People can compare notes from across 
the world, plan flash mobs, expose police brutality, stage protests, and spread the word about anything from political 
corruption to grumpy cats. It's hard to hide in this world, and most folks don't seem to want to. On some levels, this is 
the Virtual Adepts’ dream fulfilled. 


And yet, cell phones and the Internet trivialize things too. When everything’s accessible, it all seems less special. By 2014, 
many folks suffer from information overload, over-familiarity, and a circular obsession with online distractions. These 
new technologies flatten social interactions as well. You can have friends in Greece yet never see the folks next door. 
If you live in the industrialized world, you don’t need to be a dungeon troll in order to spend most of your life online. A 
paradoxical sense of connected alienation seeps into many relationships, in which partners argue with strangers while 
ignoring the person beside them. Self-centered outrage trumps social interaction. Sexism, racism, and all manner of social 
grotesquerie pour from social media communities where bizarre forms of intimate sociopathy manifest as real-world 
brutality and terroristic “pranks.” With the world at our fingertips, it seems to slip through our hands. 


Whose ideal world is this? It’s too unpredictable for the Technocracy, too brutish for the Virtual Adepts, too trivial for the 
Society of Ether, and too banal for many Awakened folks. Yet it is magickal in every way that matters. Who’s behind it 
all? And do you even want this crap cluttering up your Mage: The Ascension world? 


A Mage 20 Storyteller has several options: 


* Your story takes place in the 21* century, with current Internet and cell phone technology: Adjusting 
the influence and abilities of the Virtual Adepts and other factions, you run your chronicle amidst the familiar trappings 
of the ever-wired world. 


Your story takes place in the 1990s, before things take their current shape: Your retro chronicle employs 
the limited Internet and technologies of the “classic Mage” era. Things may or may not eventually take their present 
form, depending on your chronicle’s events. 


Your story takes place in an alternate present: Like a Quentin Tarantino movie, your chronicle plays out against 
a backdrop that mixes decades and trappings in whatever way you please. Retro elements mingle with up-to-date 
technologies; the Crips and Bloods have Facebook pages; Nine Inch Nails still sounds cutting-edge, and folks can 
use terms like “cutting-edge” without wincing. You might use your cell phone to patch into the Digital Web, but the 
format of that Web is still up for grabs. 


It’s your chronicle. Incorporate the Internet, cell phones, and the influence of both in whatever ways seem best for you 
and your troupe. 


Chapter Nine features an extensive section dealing with the Digital Web. For more details about the late-’90s Internet, 
see Digital Web 2.0. 


106 


you achieve a clumsy sort of presence in the Web. It’s 
safe but awkward. Despite refinements of VR gear over 
the last few decades, this method is still like trying to play 
ping-pong in a hazmat suit. 


Astral immersion sends your consciousness into the 
Web while fooling your senses with an illusion of virtual 
space. Essentially, it employs a scientific truth: everything 
you experience consists of electrical impulses sent through your 
sensory organs and into your brain, where your brain perceives 
them as reality. Astral immersion allows a person to 


Mage: The Ascension 20" Anniversary Edition 


perceive astral reality (in the Web, at least) without being 
a master of astral projection... which is helpful for folks 
without the time or training to achieve such expertise. 
It’s more dangerous than sensory visitation because it’s 
more real. That said, it's still less risky than... 


Holistic immersion, in which a traveler downloads 
himselfinto the virtual realm as living information. This 
is easier now than it once was, but it remains a powerful 
act of magickal technology. For travelers, this is the most 
dangerous type of journey, for though sensory and astral 


trips leave the meat at home, holistic immersion brings 
the whole of one's self into the Web. What happens to 
you there happens to you on all levels of Reality. 


e Web-Climbing, a laborious trip, remains an art few 
mages ever learn. Scaling the Pattern Web between 
Otherworlds, a traveler can holistically enter the Digital 
Web without using technology at all. Despite this 
apparent convenience, however, it's a rough option to 
employ. For starters, you've got to find the Pattern Webs 
leading into the Digital Web... and then, you've got to 
be able to climb there. I'm told that werewolves can do 
this sort of thing, but mages are not werewolves. Hardy 
shamans might be able to accomplish this task, but itd 
take a fit and crazy mage to dare that sort of climb. One 
slip or hesitation along the way, and who knows where 
you'd end up...? 


Mind Matters, Icons, and Avatars 


In both sensory and astral modes, a Web visitor employs 
her mind, not her body, in order to get results; because her 
traveling form is shaped entirely by consciousness, not matter, 
her meat means nothing here. You can be a standard-issue 
dungeon troll back in Meatspace yet look like Milla Jovovich's 
hotter sister in the Web. Appearance, in the Digital Web, is 
most often whatever travelers want it to be. 


Although holistic and Web-climbing visitors bring their 
physical selves into virtual space, the majority of people who 
spend time here remake themselves through the power of 
imagination. In truth, any traveler in virtual space can do the 
same thing - even physical bodies are made of information 
here, and information can be adjusted. Essentially, you can 
remix your appearance when you're in the Web. All it takes is 
some imagination and - in all but che Web-climbing cases - a 
bit of computer skill. 


€ 0» 


Adopting small-“a” avatars called icons, netizens create the 
forms and faces they want to have. You could be an idealized 
version of yourself, a cartoon character, a puff of purple smoke, 
or whatever else you might want to become. It’s a lot like the 
video and computer games that let you customize your avatar 
to suit your tastes... and because so many netizens from the 
current generation grew up playing those games, the wild variety 
of older icons has given way, in most cases, to standardized 
arrays of customizable humanoid icons that look a lot like 
characters out of World of Woecraft, Rock Hero, or Grand Steal 
Auto. The graphics are better these days than they used to be, 
but the imagination quotient has dropped through the floor. 


Thanks to Massive Multiplayer Online Roleplaying Games, 
folks these days are used to the icon concept. Even Sleepers 
accept the idea of making a new self and identifying yourself as 
aBlood-Elf, Tauren, or badass war-panda. The powerful sense of 
identification between someone's meat and her online persona 
has made it fairly easy for online gamers to project parts of their 
consciousness online. Thanks to popular media, it’s also easy 


for them to imagine themselves as characters in a vast Matrix 
of virtual reality. In a perverse twist of fate, Technocratic toys 
have opened doorways of magical potential. Computers and the 
Internet have become indispensible elements of techno-culture, 
but that culture reverberates with magical - and magickal- ideas. 


As I said, the Digital Web is a realm of pure consciousness. 
A traveler’s mind is her ultimate tool. A brawny, stupid dude is 
dead meat, so to speak, in this realm, whereas his nerdy Meatspace 
punching bag can become a virtual Terminator. In the Digital 
Web, wits and imagination, not agility and strength, make you all 
that you can be. No wonder it's been the Otherworld of choice 
for geeky mages for the last quartercentury or so! 


Virgin, Formatted, 
and Corrupted Web 


Like the Three Worlds, the Digital Web Zone is essentially 
infinite. Trying to map its ever-shifting expanse would be like 
trying to chart frost patterns on a window over the course of a 
winter - some spots last, most fade, and many of them overlap 
to form new patterns. That fractal comparison suits the Web as 
well; its reach is more like a cosmic god-net - a gleaming Indra's 
Net in which each strand offers reflections of the others - than 
like any mortal geography. 

That said, the Digital Web’s net-scape can be seen in three 
distinctly different forms: 


* Virgin Web has yet to be set into form. Perceived as 
ghostly tendrils of uncanny pasta or cryptographic fog, 
such areas reflect the potential of virtual space. No matter 
how much the Web expands, there always seems to be 
virgin territory along its borders. According to theory, 
new users create new areas of Virgin Web because those 
newcomers have yet to feel they know its possibilities. 
So long as new folks join the Internet/ Digital Web 
experience, the theory goes, that Web will expand to 
accommodate them. If we ever reach a point at which 
everyone alive is online (an extremely unlikely event), 
then Virgin Web would probably disappear. 


* Formatted Web springs up when someone claims Virgin 
Web. Spinning its potential into form, that Formatted 
Web becomes sectors (essentially websites) and conduits - 
corridors and teleportation pads that link those sectors 
together. The sectors themselves can be Free (for open 
access) or Restricted (with access closed except to certain 
protocols), with details as varied as the people who use 
them. 


e Corrupted Web has been ruined by some disaster or 
abuse. Like a corrupted hard drive, such regions cannot 
be reformatted or employed - they can only be avoided. 
Avoiding them is a good idea, too. They’re extremely 
disturbing. In Corrupted Web, the net-scape skews or 
flickers, its original contours warped with nightmarish 


Chapter Four: The Worlds Beyond 107 


. 


TN E 


E 


4 
S 


[à 


ia 
>i 
- En 
S 
ak 


EL Pal 


surreality. Rooms become razored mazes; conduits 
become neon spaghetti. Nothing is permanent, safe, or 
reliable, and although that might sound like a fun place 
foraromp, a Corrupted Sector hosts vicious critters and 


a.k.a., digital death. 


a definite threat of de-resolution... 


Digital Death: The De-Rez 


That death, incidentally, tends to be as permanent as your 
method of travel. De-rezing when you're in sensory visitation 
mode usually results in a headache and scattered perceptions but 
not much worse than that. An astral visitor gets those effects, 
plus - quite often - minor brain damage, physical burns, or 
both. A traveler who gets cacked while holistically immersed 
dies for real. The more you enter, the more you risk. And so, 
while the Digital Web offers opportunities to die another day, 
that death might one day prove permanent. 


Sectors: Haunts, 
Constraints, and Grids 


When Formatted or Corrupted regions have been shaped 
into sectors - the Realms within the Digital Web - those sectors 
assume a variety of forms: 


Haunted Web 


The most fearsome sectors feature literal ghosts in the 
machine. In places that have been corrupted by Whiteouts or 
malicious programs, that overlap with the Low Umbra, or that 
mark the site of a particularly nasty digital death, you might 
find such ghosts... 
obvious; like Meatspace haunted houses, they feature ghostly 


or worse, become one yourself! Haunts are 


phenomena, often acted out against a misty, ruined backdrop. 
Such places play ugly games with your mind... and because 
consciousness is everything in the Digital Web, those games can 


have nasty consequences. 


More frightening still are the Hung Sectors, where 
metaphysical data stutters can trap unwary travelers and get 
them stuck, frozen or flickering, in potentially endless loops. 
And then there’s the Rip: fractal storm-tides that are said to 
draw netizens into the Trash Sector, a legendary virtual hell of 
lost data and broken-code chaos. Some folks think that the Rip 
and the Trash Sector reflect the damnation of Alan Turing - 
making that Sector a virtual rock where the Prometheus of 
net-space gets eternally devoured for the hubris of opening it 
up to us. Others speculate that it’s where data goes to die... 
and because everything is information, it’s the ultimate fate of 
all things. An even cheerier theory posits that the Trash Sector 
is the demented side of virtual reality, the broken shell of its 
divine consciousness. 


Oh, yeah - didn’t I tell you? According to some theories, 
the Digital Web is alive... 
we spend time in it - which, when you think about it, would 


and it feeds on our life energies when 


explain a lot of things about the Internet age. 


108 Mage: The Ascension 20" Anniversary Edition 


C-Sectors 


To preserve what netizens build in this Zone, Formatted 
Sectors are typically Constrained - that is, set into certain forms by 
protocols thatlimitthe possibilities within that sector. That process 
used to be anathema to many Virtual Adepts, who claimed that 
information needed to remain free, especially in virtual reality 
space. That idea, sadly, faded under the stress of conflict, division, 
and the incursion of all those goddamned Sleepers who could not and 
would not follow the plan. Even the most idealistic Adepts soon 
wound up Constraining private realms where only the mostelite of 
them could go. As usual, meet the new boss, same as the old boss. 


For awhile, sectors that had been Formatted within certain 
protocols were called Constraint Realms, regions where visitors 
and their activities had to follow a certain theme. Folks who 
bridled at the term “constraint” preferred configuration instead. 
Eventually, the clunky phrase was streamlined into CSector 
(occasionally even into the grotesque pun “C-Section”), a term 
that’s come to mean “any area configured to suit a given idea.” 
And because almost any Formatted area is configured to suit a 
given idea - and, by extension, to exclude ideas that don't fit 
the creator's plans - C-Sector now refers to an area designed 
for a particular kind of use. Any type of sector that's been 
deliberately Formatted by netizens is essentially a C-Sector. 


Under that huge umbrella, you've got SRVRZ, the highly- 
Restricted Technocratic strongholds; FreeSpace, which has 
ironically been Constrained to keep out everyone but the most 
idealistic transhumanists; a multitude of private Saves where 
netizens gather in exclusive company, shaping little reality rooms 
to suit their needs and fancies; Coms (or ComGrounds) like the 
legendary Spy’s Demise, where folks from different factions can 
mingle in relative safety; and the massive Grid Sectors where the 
majority of the action, Awakened and otherwise, goes down... 


Grids 


Known dismissively as “sheep pens,” those Grid Sectors 
get Formatted to keep the majority of Sleeper net traffic 
from clogging up the Digital Web at large. Originally seen as 
glowing grids of lines and typeface (hence, “grid”), many of 
these regions have since taken on the dreamlike texture of CGI 
artwork. Although quite a few of them - especially the ones 
denoting office environments, industrial information, and so 
forth - retain that grid-like appearance from a netspace view, 
others - particularly gaming zones, social networks, and art 
communities - feature graphics that Hollywood would kill for. 
As the theory goes, people invest themselves in the Web... and 
so, groups of people - even Sleepers - who spend lots of time 
and energy here are rewarded with more impressive realms. 


Even now, the majority of websites on the Meatspace Internet 
are Grid Sectors. They can grow vast, but their reality is pretty 
Constrained. That's intentional. Grid Sectors have Restriction 
protocols that keep the majority of the sheep (sometimes known 
as bleaters) from wandering around and shitting all over Webspace. 
Awakened travelers can come and go easily enough, but it takes 


a dedicated (or fortunate) Sleeper to hop the fence and go off 
elsewhere. Byand large, folks don’teven knowtheycan go elsewhere; 
they ping from Grid to Grid, never realizing there's so much more 
to the Internet than the things they see on their screens. 


Despite the original intent behind them, Grids make 
up the majority of shared space in the Digital Web. Sleepers 
and Awakened share company in such regions, where the 
Awakened netizens simply realize what's really going on. To 
Meatspace bleaters, these Grids combine text and graphics to 
create a computer interface. Awakened visitors, on the other 
hand, can walk through those spaces, interacting with people's 
icons as if they were sharing a room in Meatspace. Although 
the mortals interact through keyboards and headsets, visiting 
mages experience the Web as full-contact Reality. 


As I’ve mentioned, virtual geography is changeable - now 
more so than ever before. The majority of Grid Sectors, though, 
include a variety of zones, including Warzones: gaming areas 
that are among the largest and most elaborate communities 
on the Web; FaceSpace, the various social media Grids, which 
look like tract housing made of pictures; the Wharchives, colossal 
libraries filled with ever-changing content; Trawlers, little virtual 
teleportation boats thatskim the Web for information; InfoSpace, 
where blogs and newsfeeds appear as handbills with shifting 
text and illustrations, often flying around on virtual winds, 
getting stapled to posts, or being snapped up and slapped up 
with “sticky” glue to surfaces in other Grids; the Restricted 
Salons and Galleries where artists and bloggers meet and share 
their work with exclusive company; the Dream Theatres, where 
virtual memories play out for enthusiastic (and often obnoxious) 
audiences; Echo Chambers, where folks preach from virtual 
soapboxes and get swept up in amplified hysterias; the Pleasure 
Zones, drenched in cheesy sexuality for any taste imaginable; 
and many other Grids besides - all of them flickering with 
advertising space, flame wars, and the lambent glow of mortal 
egotism on a vast yet disconnected scale. 


Icon-ogasm 
“Sleepy” visitors can spend the better part of their lifetimes 
in the Grids. Embodied as ghostly icons with synthetic voices, 


these people drift throughout the Grids, acting out shadow- 
puppet reflections of the human experience. Their words tend to 
be clipped, slurred, or overly eloquent, depending on the typing 
speed and writing skill of the people on the other end of the 
icon. Quite often, they’re an obnoxious, self-centered reminder 
of how far we are from global Utopia. Years ago, many Virtual 
Adepts claimed that Reality 2.0 would uplift the human animal. 
If the Grids provide examples of that theory, though, it’s pretty 
hard to find. Although you can witness kindness and affection 
on the Grids, the SCREAMING ALL-CAPS STUPIDITY of many 


Grid-sheep makes for a disillusioning experience. 


And yet, as in the mortal realm, there’s still hope for us 
there on the Grid. For every racist, homophobic Echo Chamber 
fuck, there are charities and sympathies, hugging icons and 
old friends reunited on the Web. You'll find forgiveness and 
enlightenment and folks hooking up, sexually or otherwise, 
through shared interests and validations. The Grid Sectors 
provide cacophonous proof that humanity bounces between 
angels, apes, and assholes. We might be a long way from 
perfection, but it’s not time to give up on us quite yet. 


Awakened visitors have vivid icons with voices and 
behaviors that seem almost human. Astral immersion provides 
the most flexible experience, whereas holistic immersion and 
Web-climbing provide the most solid icons. Sensory visitation 
creates a hazy icon that’s still more tangible than a Sleeper 
icon from the Grid. It sometimes takes a moment or two, but 
Awakened folks can often recognize each other’s nature, if not 


identity, in the Web. 


Identity is an elusive concept in this space. As I mentioned 
earlier, folks project aspects of their Earthly selves here, but 
those aspects can be deceptive. An icon might look nothing 
whatsoever like that person’s physical self. Skilled netizens can 
appear in whatever form they choose. More often than not, you 
can guess a lot about a person in Meatspace by the way they 
behave. After all, appearances aren’t everything. In the Digital 
Web, however, identity is fluid and often unpredictable. For 
bleaters and Awakened netizens alike, this Zone provides potent 
lessons about the tricky nature of reality. 


The Horizon 


There’s a point of demarcation between what 
we knowas reality and the vaster Reality beyond 
our world. And that point’s often called the 
Horizon. A metaphysical membrane around the 
many layers of our Earth, it presents a second, 
thicker Gauntlet that insulates our world from 
outer space... and probably protects space from 
us as well. 


Unlike the Earthly Gauntlet, you can’t 
step through this wall unless you’re skilled 


and powerful enough to try. Astral masters can project their 
consciousness beyond this point, and lucky travelers can fly 
through Anchorheads. Technologically inclined folks hop on 
rocket ships and blast through the planet’s atmosphere, and 
the fortunate (or unfortunate) others employ portals to reach 
the Horizon and beyond. 

Metaphysically speaking, the Horizon is a titanic wall 
around the Otherworlds - a shadow of the edge of material 
Earth’s atmosphere. Whereas the air gets thin up there, however, 
the spirit barrier gets thicker. Appearing in the Middle Umbra 


Chapter Four: The Worlds Beyond 


IA 7 


| 
i 
| 


Future Fates: The Horizon War, 
Doissetep, and.the. Storm 


As mentioned elsewhere, the Mage metaplot features several cataclysmic events. In the late ‘90s, the Ascension Warrior's 
crusade included Doissetep’s demolition, several other devastated Horizon Realms, and a massive attack on the Tradition 
stronghold called Horizon. Followed by, perhaps even culminating in, the Technocratic disaster in the Underworld - and 
the resulting Avatar Storm — the majority of Horizon Realms were either destroyed outright or else cut off from Earth, 


doomed to drift into deep space forever. 


Depending on the wishes of your troupe and Storyteller: 


* The Horizon Realms are history: A handful of Realms still exist, but the majority of them perished. Ghost Realms 
floatthrough Etherspace, acting out ephemeral extensions of their original forms. Even the Technocracy has been cut off 
from its offworld Constructs, and that disconnection has led to profound changes within the Union. For details, see The 
Technocratic Union in Chapter Five and the Revised-era Convention Books for the five Technocracy groups. 


The mystic Realms were attacked but have recovered: Despite a few nasty battles, the majority of mystic 
Realms survived and prospered while other Realms have grown. Perhaps mystic mages fled from Earth's Consensus (as 
described in Mage 1* Edition) and set up a multitude of Realms where they'll be safe from Technocratic persecution. 


Ignore the metaplot: Ascension Warrior who? Avatar what? There are as many Horizon Realms as you want there 
to be, with no attrition from metaplot concerns. Doissetep could be alive and well, and Horizon might remain a safe 
haven for Tradition mages everywhere. The fate of those worlds is whatever you want it to be. 


For extensive, though rather dated, details about Horizon Realms, see The Book of Chantries, Horizon: Stronghold 
of Hope, Beyond the Barriers: The Book of Worlds (Chapter Four), The Infinite Tapestry, and the Sorcerers 
Crusade sourcebook Castles and Covenants. 


as a rain- or moon-bow and in the High Umbra as the clouds 
atop the Spires, the Horizon has been called the Dreamshell - 
enclosing the dreams of humanity while sheltering us, perhaps, 
from the dreaming Void. 


Because, you see, the Void does dream. By "Void," I 
don't mean the inner Void where souls get recycled in the 
Underworld, although that probably dreams as well. I’m referring 
to the Great Void of outer space, the fathomless reaches that 
stagger comprehension. Throughout most of human history, 
this was the place we could not go - the Vault of Heaven, the 
Firmament. In recent years, however, human beings have not 
just observed and theorized about the mysteries of outer space - 
we have pierced them. And in our dreams and nightmares, it 
comes to visit us as well. 


The Traitor Copernicus? 


Where did the Horizon come from? Was it always here, 
or did we dream it into being? Like so many enigmas, that's 
a matter of debate. Certain myths claim that all things were 
once One but got shattered by some monumental sin. Other 
theologies insist that the cosmos came about in a single, divine 
thunderbolt - a blast of God becoming Many and descending 
into fragments of Its Majestic Presence. We have Big Bangs both 
scientific and theological. What we don't have are definitive 
answers... if such answers, in a subjective cosmos, are even 
possible at all. 


There'san old beliefamong certain mystic mages that Earth 
was once the center of the Universe. In those days, it's said, the 
Horizon was either weak or nonexistent. The various planets 


IO Mage: The Ascension 20" Anniversary Edition 


were just shadows in the sky - Shard and Shade Realms left over 
from a cosmic cataclysm. That myth still reverberates in the 
names Tradition mages use to describe the heavens. According 
to that belief, mages could pass from the Earth into outer space 
on huge Skyrigger ships, or they could grow wings and fly off 
to Mars or elsewhere. What we call space was limited, and it 
surrounded the Earth like a blanket or shell. And then, in the 
Renaissance, astronomers like Copernicus - who's reputed to 
have been a mage - claimed that impression was backwards. 
We were just a speck in an endless Void, a fragile spot of light 
in a sea of eternal darkness. And that claim, it's said, caused 
the Horizon to appear. 


Personally, I think that's nonsense. For starters, Copernicus 
and his peers did not change human belief with a few strokes 
of their pens. It took centuries for what we call "the scientific 
worldview" to spread across humanity... and in many places 
it's still not the dominant belief. Secondly, the concept of the 
Earth in space has existed for thousands of years. The Maya, the 
Babylonians, the Classical Greeks, and other cultures speculated 
about the boundless reaches of space long before Copernicus 
ever wrote his theories down. Astronomy has generally looked 
outward, not inward, from Earth's gravity. Still, something changed 
dramatically during the Renaissance. If nothing else, the growing 
voice of science shifted the balance of beliefs. 


According to legends about that era, mages used to sail 
into the Void, breathing almost as easily as they could here on 
Earth. Now, of course, that's supposed to be impossible. The 
Technocratic Void Engineers - named for that infinite space 
- dress up in bulky suits and armor. And yet, mad Marauders 


and Nephandic shock troops get spotted out in space wearing 
nothing more than body paint and crazy grins. Does their 
insanity protect them... or is it the space troopers who are the 
crazy ones? I haven't been there yet, so I’m not sure. Again, 
though, our Horizon marks a point of departure. Once past 
it, the old rules no longer apply. 


Horizon Realms 


Tucked into the Horizon, carved out of its metaphysical 
shell, are the legendary Horizon Realms. Shaped by powerful 
magicks (or advanced technology - your call), these pocket 
worlds are designed, like C-Sectors, to suit specific desires. 
Horizon Realm creators reweave the Tapestry in fundamental 
ways, changing what is and is not possible until the local reality 
meets with their approval. 


I couldn't tell you when or how the first Horizon Realm 
was formed. No one really knows. I've heard theories that the 
cave complexes of Lascaux extended into the Otherworlds, 
shaping the original man-made Realm; I've also heard that the 
Pyramids, the Hanging Gardens of Babylon, the Tower of Babel, 
Solomon's Temple, and the Yellow Emperor's Court were all 
either constructed within Horizon Realms or else extended into 


them. The European catacombs certainly reach into Horizon 
Realms; the Vatican is attached to at least one of them too, as 
are the Taj Mahal, the Forbidden City, the Tower of London, 
and - so I'm told - Grand Central Station. The World Trade 
Center is said to have been tied to a Horizon Realm, which 
would explain the odd pattern of its collapse. Such Realms 
can even be connected to movable anchors back on Earth. I've 
heard of vans, trains, and one or two real-life magic buses that 
opened into pocket Realms builtto their owners' specifications. 


Nodes, Portals, and Earthly Aspects 

Each Horizon Realm - or, in Technocratic terms, Horizon 
Construct - must be forged with powerful magicks, fueled with 
Quintessence, attached to a Node, and connected to the mortal 
plane by pan-dimensional portals and earthly anchors, or 
aspects. These aspects hold clues to the connected Realm - stone 
walls, mystic sigils, sterile laboratories, or what-have-you - and 
literally keep the Horizon Realm grounded. Without these 
other elements, a Realm soon folds in upon itself or winds up 
cut off from the Earth and drifting away into deep space... a 
horrific fate that supposedly befell many Realms around the 
turn of the millennium. 


Chapter Four: The Worlds Beyond M 


— 


There used to be dozens, perhaps hundreds, of Horizon 
Realms. Between the Ascension War, consensual belief, and 
the simple need to find safe space in an ever-growing world, 
mages of all kinds made Horizon Realms to fit their needs. As 
they discovered, though, such places are precarious. The more 
isolated you become - and the fewer doors you make in and 
out of your home - the easier it is to get cut off. And for some 
Horizon Realms, that's exactly what happened. 


Ghost Realms 


During the dust-upsa few years back, many portals slammed 
shut, Nodes were seized or destroyed, and Horizon Realms 
were severed from their Earthly ties. This proved catastrophic 
to the inhabitants of those Realms. The lucky ones escaped to 
spread nightmarish tales of Realms that folded up and sucked 
everyone and everything within the Realm to an unknown 
- but clearly uncomfortable - destiny. Some become those 
Ghost Realms I mentioned earlier - spectral reflections filled 
with Disembodied spirits who essentially believe they're still 
alive. The most unlucky people, I assume, either perished or 
wound up in some dimension we have yet to learn about. The 
results of this catastrophe tipped the balance of power in the 
Ascension War... and, more vitally, showed the true cost of 
what it is that we do. To be Awakened is to risk everything for 
a glimpse of self-made miracles. And sometimes, through little 
or no fault of our own, we find ourselves swallowed by forces 
beyond our control. 


S.R. The Shade Realms 


Cast against the Horizon by the physical and metaphysical 
light of the Sun, the Shade Realms - once known as the Vada - 
feature strange vortices of energy that are said to contain the 
essence of the Nine Magickal Spheres. Occupying what could be 
thought of as the Umbrae of various planets - which, through 
some head-twisting quirk of celestiography, typically manifest 
on the Horizon of our own world - these Realms often go by 
the abbreviation S.R. followed by the Sphere associated with 
the Realm in question. 


In Tradition cosmology, the planets within our solar system 
are associated with gods, energies, earthly phenomena, and 
magickal Spheres. Science, of course, seeks to strip away those 
associations and replace them with measurements of cold, dead 
space. Even then, however, the awesome spectacle of planetary 
might cannot be purged of wonder entirely. Scientists can wipe 
Pluto off the celestial roll-call, but the uncanny essence of S.R. 
Entropy still wears its mysterious shadow-cloak ... or so folks 
say. The Euthanatos Tradition sealed access to this Realm long 
ago and supposedly still control the few portals that reach it... 
which may, of course, have something to do with why those 
scientists purged it from the rolls! 


Like Horizon Realms, these regions can be visited only 
through direct portals or Umbral wanderings. Several of them, 
like S.R. Correspondence, cannot be reached from Earth at 


I2 Ma$e: The Ascension 20^ Anniversary Edition 


Shard Realm/ Planet Shade Realm (S.R.) 
Sol Infinite 

Mercury Correspondence 
Venus Life 

Earth & Luna Prime 

Mars Forces 

Jupiter Matter 
Saturn Time 


Uranus Spirit (also originally 


regarded as the Realm 


of Mind) 
Neptune Mind 
Pluto Entropy 


For details about each place, see Beyond the 
Barriers: The Book of Worlds (Chapter Five) and 
The Infinite Tapestry (Chapter Four). 


all, although lesser Realms - essentially their moons - can still 
be found by a dedicated traveler. Occasionally, Shade Realms 
manifest as natural gateways on the skin of the Horizon, boiling 
with the energies associated with each Realm. Several - most 
especially S.R. Life and S.R. Forces - have long histories as 
Ascension War battlegrounds. The Doissetep conflagration 
sparked a war in the ruins that drew mages of all kinds to the 
stormy domain of S.R. Forces. Such conflicts, though, demand 
vast resources from everyone involved, so they rarely last for 
long. The few mages who indulge in such adventures are brave, 
powerful, and often crazier than hell. Grudges, greed, curiosity, 
and boredom inspire these daredevils, and very few of them 
return to Earth intact, if they return to Earth at all. 


As for the Realms themselves, they blaze and shudder 
with their associated energies. S.R. Forces is one huge, eternal 
tempest with tiny islands of temporary calm; S.R. Life boasts a 
primevalecosystem that could shame the Hollow Earth; and S.R. 
Correspondence features more dimensions and perspectives 
than Picasso on an acid trip. S.R. Time is extremely hazardous, 
as moving through it at all results in temporal distortion and 
uncontrolled time travel. In S.R. Mind, a traveler's experiences 
depend entirely upon what she expects to see, whereas S.R. Spirit 
strips all illusions from the mortal/ spiritual divide, allowing 
a mage to speak face-to-face with her Avatar. S.R. Matter is 
thought to be the Hollow Earth itself (or, perhaps, a series of 
related Hollow Earths), and S.R. Entropy supposedly showcases 
the grand designs of mortality, possibly cycling directly back 
into the Underworld. The recursive nature of these regions 
and the especially subjective nature of their environments both 
demonstrate the folly of thinking too literally about landscapes 
or geography when discussing the Otherworlds! 


The Second Horizon 
and Etherspace 


Certain cosmologists insistthere's a second Horizon - a True 
Horizon - located out past the moon and Mars, in the region of 
this solar system's Asteroid Belt. Between Earth's Horizon and 
this True Horizon, acosmic Umbra often called Etherspace reaches 
outward toward the stars. Here, a traveler might pass from the 
hard vacuum of scientific space into the strange expanse of spirit 
space, where the laws of legend still prevail. 


Out past Earth's Horizon, reality as we know it is far more 
fluid than it ever was back on Earth. Here, the principles of 
magick, faith, and science remain in constant flux. We have the 
airless vacuum ofspace, true enough, butas I mentioned earlier, 
certain mages survive just fine there without life-support gear. 


In the old days, it's been said, flying ships waged strange 
wars and journeyed to distant planets in what was known as 
the Void of Heaven. In the Age of Steam, star-faring Etherites 
journeyed out into Etherspace, setting up colonies on Mars 
and Luna, discovering civilizations of other beings that could 
simply have been conjured by their own imaginations. (There 
are, after all, certain types of legendary Martians - Bug-Eyed 
Monsters, tentacled horrors, red-skinned nude beauties, and 
so on - and who's to say whether those entities exist on their 
own terms or whether they're there because someone expected 
them to be there...) More recently, the Void Engineers, the 
Etherites, and occasional other explorers staged weird battles 
in this fluctuating space. Etherships and rocket ships out of 
science-fiction fantasies populated this space between the stars. 
Once again, however, that wild era screeched to a halt when 
the Avatar Winds kicked in and travel beyond our Gauntlet got 
more perilous. Given the distance between destinations and the 
risk of Disembodiment, few travelers have dared to start that 
space race up again. Supposedly, phantasmal ghost ships still 
flowthrough Etherspace, re-enacting cosmic firefights or flitting 
between colonies of ghostridden ruins. If these rumors are 
true, it puts an eerie spin on that whole idea of a space ghost... 


To pass through this second Horizon, you'd need to find 
Etherspace Anchorheads - elusive vortices of arcane energy that 
flare and fade around the distant reaches of Etherspace. Like 
the lesser Anchorheads in the Earthly Horizon, these swirling 
clouds of energy can take a traveler out past the barrier. In 
this case, however, all known Anchorheads are warded by 
powerful entities that challenge and often destroy mortal 
trespassers. These beings are very territorial, and they must be 
tricked, appeased, or otherwise defeated before you can venture 
into deep space. It's been said that these creatures were once 
Master mages, or even the fabled Oracles, whose powers or 
understanding grew too greatfor Earth to contain. Now, though, 
they often appear as mad gods, protecting their Anchorheads 


like cosmic Cerberoi, snapping at anyone who intrudes upon 
their domains. If that's the origin of such entities, then the 
ideal of Ascension may be just an esoteric joke. There's nothing 
enlightened about these monsters at all! 


Oh, and speaking of jokes, here's one on the Technocracy: 
the theory of Ether was supposedly disproved by scientific 
consensus around the turn of the last century. That disproval, 
in turn, was the reason the Etherites cited when they left the 
Order of Reason. Now, however, a new scientific theory posits 
thatthe universe consists ofa near-zero-viscosity superfluid. And 
although no one’s officially calling it Ether yet, the Technocracy 
may find itself hoist by its own metaphysical petard. 


Creation works in very strange ways. 


Shard Realms: 
Fragments of Genesis 


Genesis stories both secular and sacred allude toa Big Bang 
that birthed the universe. According to certain cosmologies, 
the Shard Realms - which we now know as the planets of our 
solarsystem - were especiallysignificant chunks of metaphysical 
debris. Reflecting mystic principles, these Fragmenti were 
considered the realms of ancient gods: Jupiter, Mars, Mercury, 
and so forth. We can see their influence in the everyday puzzles 
of astrology and the corresponding zodiac, through which we 
are "children of Mars" or "littered under Mercury." 


To Otherworldly travelers, the planets are enigmas of the 
scientific revolution. According to the archives of Etherite 
explorers, those planets were, until recently, worlds unto 
themselves, with workable atmospheres and indigenous life. 
Now, though, the cold hand of Technocratic wisdom has reduced 
these worlds to spinning protoplasmic cauldrons and icy stone. 
Certain Etherites suggest thatthe only things standing between 
Earth's wonders and a similar fate are the mages who refuse 
to let such things happen. I don't know how true that is, but 
the idea is worth considering. 


Whether or not the fabled adventures on Mercury and 
Mars actually took place on the planets themselves or within 
their Umbral Shade Realm reflections, it is a matter of record 
that modern-day mages occasionally travel further than Earthly 
scientists would have us believe. These days, the Shards are 
more or less "dead" by human estimations; if the great god 
Mars still makes his home on that red ball of rock, he's hiding 
his presence well. Still, the Etherites and Void Engineers send 
spaceships to the various planets and their moons, occasionally 
finding ruined Skyriggers and other mysteries on those planetary 
surfaces. Although the more obvious magickal phenomena seem 
restricted to the Shade Realms... at least for now... there has 
clearly been more mystic history throughout our solar system 
than the average person would possibly believe. 


Chapter Four: The Worlds Beyond 


~~ eo 


TN AE 


EL Pal 


PS 
/ 


Zi 


Outer Space: The Deep Oniverse 


Out past the Asteroid Belt and its True Horizon, 
the Deep Umbra (or Deep Universe) plays host to 
the most powerful Marauders and Nephandi - 
mages too unstable for Earthly confines. Rumor 
has it that the Traditions and Technocracy 
joined forces during and after World War II 
to drive these demented creatures out past the 
Horizon. Afterward, the story claims, those 
factions thickened one or both Horizons to 
keep the Mad Ones, the Fallen, and their 
various cosmic horrors on the far side. If that's 
true, however, then Earth's Horizon is a poor protection - a 
powerful wizard can get around it easily enough. Beyond that, 
though, the story has another major flaw in its logic: if the 
Horizon is supposed to keep sinister titans out in deep space, 
why have so many Technocrats and Etherites been dedicated 
to leaving Earth behind and venturing off into the dark? 


Because, yes - there are demonic entities out there in the 
Void of Heaven. That much is a matter of record. Just as the 
deepest seas contain creatures too vast for dry land, so the Deep 
Umbra teems with creatures who'd eat Godzilla for a lightsnack. 
The Void Engineers have their Pan-Dimensional Corps to deal 
with such threats, but their record is spotty at best. The age-old 
terror of alien invasion is apparently valid, and although the 
Engineers and Etherites maintain their Earthly rivalry in deep 
space, they also share camaraderie and occasional cooperation 
in the face of mutual threats. 


Sowhygo there to begin with? Because Paradox, the scourge 
of magick here on Earth, does not exist in deep space at all. A 


mage who's powerful enough to fly through space naked while 
shooting fireballs out his ass can do so without Reality slapping 
him into next week. The difference between "realspace" and 
"Umbraspace" gets hazy out beyond the Horizon. Both science 
and magick seem equally possible in the Void. 


Such metaphysical ambiguity makes the Deep Umbra a 
natural playground for the Mad Ones, who're crazy enough to 
create their own bubbles of personal space. Powerful wizards can, 
and do, construct majestic fortresses on asteroids and distant 
planets, tapping cosmic sources of alien Quintessence to fuel 
deeds that would be impossible back on Earth. Distant moons 
and solar systems supposedly hold Nephandic strongholds of 
cyclopean scope. For obvious reasons, the Deep Umbra seems 
like a tempting destination for mages who want to remake 
Reality in their own image. 


Thing is, most mages can'tsurvive in this environment. Toss 
any Technocrat - and almost anyone else, for that matter - out 
an airlock door, and she's dead. If nothing else, her own belief 
will kill her. Travelers who've been less indoctrinated by the 
scientific view of space stand a better chance of survival in those 
situations, but even the most primal willworkers still have to 
eat and drink... and such resources are not exactly common in 
the Void. Without some sort of spaceship or portal, a traveler 
could spend centuries getting from one place to another. In 
the meantime, she'd probably go mad from sheer monotony. 
Think of space as an infinite desert, featuring occasional oases 
separated by mind-numbing stretches of epic nothing. When 
you realize how vast this Deep Umbra truly is, it’s a wonder 
anyone comes back from there at all. 


Return to the Inner Experience 


Supposedly, deep space leads back into the 
Earthly realm. I’ve heard that Umbral travelers 
occasionally wind up in the blackest regions of 
our oceans and that deep sea travelers discover 
portals into space. Once again, recursive 
quirks in the universe connect “out there” 
with “in here.” Perhaps, as the Masters of 
Correspondence say, all places really are one 
place. The distance between them is merely 
an illusion we can transcend if and when we 
learn to forget everything we think we know. 


Just think of it this way: right now, you could be standing 
in a park or sitting in a room while your mind roves out across 
the universe. My words might come to you across vast distances 
of space and time... and yet, for a while at least, we occupy the 
same space and time. By sharing visions of what magick could 
be, what our world might be, what human potential might be 


Mage: The Ascension 20" Anniversary Edition 


if and when we stretch beyond what we think we know, we can 
span eternity without moving a step. 


And that, fellow traveler, is the truest magick there is. 


Microcosm, Macrocosm 

In that old concept called microcosm and macrocosm, 
small things symbolize large things and vice versa, too. The 
human body reflects the universe, and the universe can be 
found in the cells of a fingertip. According to the mystic 
Jewish Kabbalah, the Divine Presence split Itself into infinity 
through a titanic thunderbolt that birthed the universe. 
Whether or not you choose to call that Presence God is 
your decision; there are, by most reckonings, many gods, a 
single God, and no gods at all. Whatever creed you choose 
to follow, it’s been said that all existence remains tied to that 
Original Cosmic Source... and so, in that sense, all things 
still are One and the same. 


Scientific theory asserts that we're the product of a Big 


Bang - acosmicexplosion that essentially recalls that Kabbalistic 
thunderbolt. By that explanation, we are, as the song says, all 
made of stars. Deep space, then, is inner space as well. The 
Void becomes the Ocean becomes the molecules from which 
we're made. The journey of a thousand years can take place in 
a moment without moving through space at all. 


It’s easy to get lost in this life - to wander through 
shadows searching for Truth. And the more Awakened you 
are, the easier it can be to get lost. Sure, it's dangerous... but, 
as danger often is, it's beautiful as well. And if you recall the 
microcosm and the macrocosm, you'll keep the map of your 


travels deep inside yourself. I can't guarantee you safe passage 
or a happy ending - hell, everybody dies in the end - but I 
can promise you this much: miracles and adventures are as 
close as you want them to be... as close, really, as the cells of 
the skin upon your hands. 


So when you step out the door and into this strange world 
of ours, keep your eyes open and your mind keen. Recall the 
connections between yourself and the world around you. As 
Walt Whitman said, you are infinite. You contain multitudes. 


To look in the mirror is to gaze into infinity, and to see your. | 


fellow entities, in all their vast potential, is to view the living 


face of God. 


Chapter Four: The Worlds Beyond IS 


m le 
e F. [^ 


. —9 S 
GA : 


BOOK I 
BELIEVE - 


The more we see, 
Ihe more Wwe think we know. 


|. 


Porthos Fitz-Empress, 
_ Ihe Fragile Path 


t : 
4 y 
M x { a = -— 
Y $ ne. Cag y 
AEN ^ ' 
NM SS Ww: " : » P d oS 
NV f \ ^ VS z AM 
NN SOR 
\ H 


Chapter Five: 


Ascension 
Warriors 


As he entered the cave, they heard a voice from inside: 


« |? 


This is the man who shook the earth, who made the kingdoms tremble 


— Daniel C. Matt, "The Wedding Celebration" from The Essential Kabbalah 


Ten of Swords 


Associations: Release; sacrifice; paralysis; the end of a problem; 
reward and punishment; ends and beginnings; letting go... 


Well, THAT doesn't look good. 

The RD I'd been tangling with is a grease spot on the floor. He tagged me good a few 
times, though, and my backup seems to be stuck in traffic. 

On days like this, I'm thankful for adrenaline. The shock hasn't set in yet, and once it 
does I'm going to be down for the count. 

Broken ribs for sure. I can see one of them peeking through the gash in my shirt. Blood 
like you wouldn't believe. No wonder we always wear black. The blood doesn't show up 
much on black. 

Rightarm'sat 26% functionality. The rest of my team is down. Puddles, really. Stupid 
werewolves. They never come quietly, and this one was ready for us. 

Where the hell’s my backup? 

Okay. Assess the situation. Repeated blunt trauma. Probable concussion. Four 
sharp-trauma injuries I can count. Broken ribs, possible broken right arm. Blurry vision. 
Substantial blood-loss. The ringing in my ears is not a good sign. 

Hmmm. I wonder if the burn in my veins is boosted adrenaline, or the start of 
self-activated detection-and-identification avoidance measures? Now that Agents Royce, 
Faber, Campbell, and Chiacuma have been fully activated, my appraisal of the effects is a 
bit more than strictly academic. 

No. I have to maintain. Someone needs to make a report. 

“This is Passel,” I whisper into my com. “We're down. Where's my backup?" 

"Situation contained?" Dispatch's voice sounds steady and flat. 

" Affirmative. Contained." 

"Sit tight, Agent Passel," she tells me. "Backup's en route." 

As the burn in my veins intensifies, I wonder if she's telling the truth, or if 
I'll be the next puddle on the sidewalk... 


Mage history is a chronicle of lies. Each group, 
sect, faction, cult, Tradition, and what-have-you 
has its own version of what-happened-when and 
who-did-what-to-whom. There's a ton of legendry 
involved, as well as wishful thinking, cultural 
myopia, and flatout deception. You'll rarely 
get straight answers from a mage when you 
ask about the history behind his practice. 
And so, in the interests of clarity, we'll be as 
straightforward as possible in this section of 
Mage 20° Anniversary. 


Unlike previous editions of Mage (aside from Sorcerers 
Crusade), Mage 20 does not default to a Traditions-centric 
viewpoint. Instead, we're presenting a wide range of potential 
Mage characters. With that range comes a bigger perspective 
on the Awakened experience, so the following chapter features 
as objective a view as you could possibly get from a world in 
which reality is anything but certain. 


Does that mean we're going all kumbaya on your ass? 
Not hardly. In a way, knowing that everyone is both right and 
wrong throws the Ascension War... or, more properly, its wars, 
plural... into greater relief. Every faction holds both wisdom and 
corruption. The Traditions fight a good romantic fight while 
ignoring the potential horrors of their victory. The Technocracy 
oppresses everyone else in the name of order, often crushing 
its own people in the process. The scattered groups known by 
other factions as the Disparates or Crafts tend their own turf 
but lack the power or cohesiveness of the larger groups. And 
the Marauders and Nephandi celebrate nightmarish goals of 
mass insanity and damnation. For the so-called “orphans,” 
life's a constant struggle in the wake of greater forces. And all 
mages, regardless of their faction or lack of one, find themselves 
pitted against vampires, werecritters, hunters, spirits, demons, 
changelings, human rivals, and Reality itself. No matter which 
faction you prefer - especially if you favor no faction at all - a 
mage's Path is perilous at best... her biggest enemy perhaps 
being the one within. 


As previous chapters have mentioned, a mage must be 
proud to do what he does. That pride, in turn, leads to hubris, 
egotism, and self-delusion. The history of the Awakened, then, 
is a long tale of people and groups so full of themselves that 
reality trembles at their touch. Even with their best intentions, 
these groups and people leave corpses whenever they go... and 


Familiar Enemies 


the more devoted to their ideals they are, the more corpses they 
tend to leave. The greatest casualty, though, is the illusion of 
certainty - for, as any mage soon learns, there's no such thing 
as a single, objective Truth. 


Mage isn't about good guys, bad guys, or clear-cut realities. 
It's about deciding for yourself what is and is not true. And 
so, even here, in a section devoted to Awakened history, the 
Rashomon Effect applies to everything you read. Take it all 
with a few shakers of salt, and remember that truth - whatever 
that might be - lies somewhere between the lines, not in any 
single faction's view. 


Who, What, Where, and Why 


For clarity, the following chapter is divided up into several 
sections, each one dealing with a specific group or subject: 


* Part I: An Awakened History (pp.121-135) covers the 
evolution of mage society, from its mythic beginnings 
to the present day. 


* Part Il: The Council of Nine Mystick Traditions 
(pp.136-165) explores this proud alliance of survivors 
who strive toward an age of miracles. 


e Part III: The Technocratic Union (pp.166-195) 
presents the governing force of Enlightened Science 
and implacable Control. 


* Part IV: The Disparates (pp.196-223) examines some 
of the most prominent sects that refuse to join either 
the Council or Technocracy. 


* Part V: The Fallen (pp.224-233) reveals the Nephandi, whose 
vision of Descent is more powerful than anyone realizes. 


e Part ?*!: The Mad (pp.234-243) takes an unsettling look 
at what happens when the Marauders swallow sanity 
whole and make everyone else choke on the remains. 


None of the Above? 


For all the monumental metaplot covered in the following 
chapter, remember this: 


You don’t HAVE to fight the Ascension War at all. 


In several ways, this chapter is optional. Your mages might 
not belong to any of the groups described here. You could just 


According to the Revised edition of World of Darkness: Sorcerer, the Traditions now have unAwakened hedge 


magicians as well as Awakened mages among their ranks. Given the complexities and complications involved in hedge 
magic game systems, however, that merger has been ignored in Mage 20. If your individual troupe wants to feature 
sorcerers among the mages, go for it. The following chapters and rules do not address that subject — there's simply not 


enough room here to do justice to the idea. 


120 Ma$e: The Ascension 20^ Anniversary Edition 


check out the Orphans entry (pp.214-215) and then run self- 


Awakened or unaligned mages in groups of your own design. 
The following metaplots could follow various Future Fate 
options, and they might not even exist within your chronicle at 


all. The Mage canon can get pretty elaborate, but your chronicle 
doesn't have to be. 


Mages have a vast world, but that world can be as epic or 
as intimate as you want it to become. 


Part I: An Awakened History 


Where did it all begin? 


That’s always the question, isn’t it? And 
especially when you're talking to and about the 
Awakened, it’s not a question you can answer 
with surety. The truth, assuming one exists, 
keeps getting tangled up in mythologies. We 
do know this much, though: 


It started with a bang. 


According to many myths, a cosmic Sound 
- a phrase, a song, a thunderbolt - cracked 
through the empty Void, filling it with possibilities. One, or 
Nothing, became All. Was this some Big Bang, a titanic OM, a 
godhead shattering itself into infinity... and really, aren’t they 
all just different ways of looking at the same thing? Whatever 
the cause, the Void broke and Creation spilled forth. 


Infinities passed. Stars blazed. Balls of spinning stone cooled 
to become worlds. It’s been said that in those earliest days, holy 
hands passed over waters and set things into place. God-wars 
raged and their carnage shaped the universe. Deities cast their 
servants down into an Abyss, and that Divinity tore itself in half 
- Light and Darkness, the broken shells of what was and the 
bright spheres of what is. Perhaps it was simply a mythologized 
play of natural forces... or maybe there was something more. The 
truth, as it so often is, was lost to time and space. 


The Awakening Era 


These forces shaped the Earth we know - a crown jewel 
of Heaven, perhaps, or just one spinning rock among the 
multitude. In any case, this has always been our home. In the 
First Days, legends claim, the gods walked across that home, 
giants in our world. They shaped it, claimed it, chose their 
people, and set our world into form. 


Some folks claim that Pure Ones, living shards of the divided 
One, incarnated themselves into human flesh; other tales say we rose 
from beasthood to claim this world or that we were born as servitors 
to some Great Race now lost to time. There are stories telling how 
animals and humans were once family, one People with many skins; 
other myths tell of a single God who claimed a Garden from which 
we Fell through disobedience to Him. We are said to have gathered 
long ago at Mount Meru, the center of the world, or around a great 
Tower that trembled and then fell to ruins. These are the Primordial 
and Edenic Ages, when human origins rise from myths. Whatis certain 
is that both magick and humanity began in this vast span of time. 


Before we were hunters, we humans became prey. A Great 
Fall supposedly cast us down from Eden and wrecked celestial 


harmony in our world. Monsters chased us to our caves, clawing 
their way into our deepest memories. Fallen from some greater 
grace, we became toys for demons and fiends. This is the Predatory 
Age, when we ran through the shadows like frightened mice. 
In time, though, fire and stone, magick and faith drove the 
monsters back. We formed tribes, creeds, technologies, and 
they separated us from the beasts. 


Perhaps kingdoms rose - empires we remember now only 
as legendary names like Atlantis, Mu, Hyperboria, and Nod. 
Or maybe we just scrabbled in the dirt for millennia, grasping 
at tools and pulling ourselves up from feral origins. There were 
cataclysms, though - we know that much: fires, floods, icy ages, 
and falling stars. Those legendary kingdoms (if they'd existed 
to begin with) fell into ruins. In this Cataclysm Age, humanity 
advanced, was broken, and rose again. Hubris, our fatal pride, 
might have been to blame for this Shattered Time. If this is true, 
though, then that same pride brought us back from ruin. 


And magick and technology led the way. 


The Legendary Era 

In a long Tribal Age, the remnants of humanity began to 
struggle upward. Once again, tribes swelled slowly into villages, 
towns, and cities. Through it all, Awakened leaders paved the 
way, battling monsters and sharing their Arts. Metalwork, 
pottery, witchcraft, language, math, and mythology all led to 
greater things. Some mages, though, became tyrants, enslaving 
their rivals or burning settlements to the ground. At the Dawn 
of Empires, large cities became hubs of wisdom, trade, and 
warfare. India, China, Mesopotamia, and Africa saw the first 
stirrings of our remembered civilizations. A Heroic Age arose 
from them - an age recalled in myths and scriptures in which 
gods, men, and monsters battled across this dawning world. 


The Classical Era 


Swords and spells carved a path toward the Classical Era, 
when the foundations were laid for our modern age: Israel. 
Troy. Babylon. Qin. Meroe. The Olmecs, Persians, Nubians, 
Mycenaens, Aryans, and so forth. Vast empires forged greater 
civilizations, bringing trade and war to every place they touched. 
Extensive networks of travel and conquest crossed Africa, 
Asia, and Europe, exchanging magicks, goods, technologies, 
and creeds. A heady alchemy of achievements bred sects that 
still exist today. Scriptures were written, texts set down. And 
although the distant landmasses we now call Australia and 
the Americas will remain isolated from this interplay for over 
two thousand years, these places began to see their own Arts 
and cultures grow. 


Chapter Five: Ascension Warriors 


EE,’ 


7 


7/3 


"A 


eo 


Boa tas 


The Cup and the Reed 


Accordingto Hermeticlore, we can date the foundations 
of the Nine Traditions and Technocratic Order to a 
gathering in ancient Egypt. Two rulers - Hatshepsutand 
Thothmes IlI — supposedly gather a collection of sages, 
clerics, artisans, and seers or acrossthe known world 
sometime around 1480 BCE. Forming two orders from 
these disparate individuals — the Cupbearers of Isis and 


the Reed of Thothmes - the rulers briefly unite warring 
factions and create common ground forfuture alliances. 


In later years, this gathering will be called a myth, if it’s 
recalledatall. The Hermetics, though, insistthey have proof 
in their archives... or atleast, that such proof used to exist 
before the fall of Doissetep. In any case, these orders, or 
lodges, provide a foundation for greater understandings 
of magick, faith, and science. From this point onward, all 
three Artswill grow, advance, and prosper... oftenthrough 
alliances and wars with one another. 


Through it all, mages from around the world joined together 
in fellowships, or else divided themselves into warring clans. 
Thanatoics, Ecstatics, Akashics, and courtly wizards clashed or joined 
with witches, shamans, sages, priests, and seers. Philosophers 
and artisans cultivated Arts and Sciences; prophets hurled harsh 
words and miracles. The origins of modern mage-sects began 
their problematic dance with one another, shaping rivalries and 
alliances that continue even now. Magick, faith, and science started 
distinguishing themselves from one another, leading to battles 
over the source of truth and heresy. At some times, these rivals 
met respectfully; at others, they turned cities into sand and ash. 


Written language, originating around this time, preserved 
names, events, and empires from this period: Imhotep, Abraham, 
Suleiman, Huangdi and Lao Tsu, Djhowtey and Sesheta, Moses, 
Daedalus, and many more. The lines between heroes, gods, 
legends, and mages of this time remain blurry to this day. Great 
things happened, some of which we remember, many of which 
got lost. In that hazy early history, truth is debatable at best. 


The Himalayan Wars 

One of those conflicts holds special significance: the 
Himalayan Wars. Around 900 BCE, groups of Indian Thanatoics 
and Asian Akashics suffered a profound misunderstanding; 
that misunderstanding provoked a war that raged for centuries 
and left permanent distrust between the rival factions. Because 
both sides embraced reincarnation, mages slain throughout the 
conflict kept being reborn to fight it again. In later years, it 
will be said that this conflict was intentional - a fire through 
which both groups needed to pass in order to forge their 
later incarnations. In either case, it was rather miserable for 
all concerned. The Akashayana - originating somewhere in 
present-day Tibet - moved further east and west, whereas their 
rivals dug in further in the Indian subcontinent. The worst 
elements of mystic conflict flickered across Lower Asia and 
Upper Africa for over 600 years. 


122 Mage: The Ascension 20" Anniversary Edition 


War marked this entire period; Celts ranged across Europe; 
Greeks, Persians, Assyrians, Nubians, Chinese, Koreans, Aryans, 
Egyptians, Hebrews, and other cultures wet their foundations 
with the blood and skins of their enemies. Great discoveries 
and arts defined this period too, but the entire world seemed 
to be at war. The greatness of one group often came from 
stomping other groups into the ground. There can be room, 
it seemed, for only one truth at a time. 


Shaping Reality to Your Will 


In this period, mages discovered a strange principle: reality 
is not constant; its parameters shift and change depending on 
the dominant beliefs. If you rulea land, and you rule its people, 
then you begin to rule its reality too. Certain forms of magick 
or technology prospered in some places and failed in others. 
This discovery led mages to fight over territory - to begin a 
metaphysical imperialism that shaped the world we know today. 


Some mages became conquerors or monarchs; most, 
however, put their power behind the throne or spoke for gods 
that seemed unhappy with this group or that empire. Quite a 
few of them simplystaked out their own territories and defended 
them from rival mages. The word “mage” appeared around 
this time, defining a priestly order dedicated to certain Persian 
gods... really, a select type of mage. Still, that connotation of 


The Kitab al-Alacir 


Rooted in the discoveries of this era, a variety of 
Greek observations are eventually collected by Arab 
scholars into the Kitab al-Alacir: "Book of the Ether." 
This paradoxical text spans mythology, puzzles, 
dialogues, philosophies, and ruminations on truths 
that remain impossible to codify. Rather than present 
facts as mortals understand the term, this venerable 
work inspires Awakenings in the people who manage 
to grasp its slippery implications. Centuries after its 
composition, the Kitab remains an essential texibook 
for — of all people — the Etherite Scientists, who view 
its metaphysical complexities as the foundation of 
understanding. 


Using the analogy of Troy as the cosmos and the 
Trojan War as a metaphor for human consciousness, 
the Kitab postulates that understanding involves a 
perpetual conflict between what can be accepted 
and what mustbe possible. Each person must therefore 
become a "hero of Troy,” pursuing glory in the struggle 
for ultimate truth. Because only the bravest and most 
dedicated souls possess the determination to become 
such heroes, most people will remain mere soldiers 
inside or outside the walls of this metaphysical Troy. 


In that conflict (and its labyrinthine commentary 
throughout the Katib), each reader must find his or her 
own answers. The core of the work, though, seems to 
be this: everything is REAL, but not everything is TRUE. 
When we take what's real and make it true, we create 
miracles of Art and Science; when we craft truths to 
deny that something's real, we create disaster. 


sacred, mystic dedication will eventually define the folks who 


bend Reality with force of Will. 


Artisanship - the Art of Enlightened Technology - attained 
new heights in China and Greece. Great philosophers, scientists, 
and artisans redefined possibility. Side by side with mystics, 
these men and women forged the greatest civilizations since 
the mythic Hyperborian Age. Miraculous machines and titanic 
feats of architecture dominated the Classical world. In contrast 
with the bloody Arts of prophets, seers, and witches, these 
achievements made all other crafts seem positively... barbaric. 
That tension - civilized Masters of Order versus barbaric Hordes 
of Chaos - became a defining element of human culture. 


In the shadows of these achievements, other sects 
undermined civilization. Certain mages and cults dedicated 
themselves to corruption and pride, whereas others went mad 
and destroyed everything they touched. The names Marauder and 
Nephandi were still far in the future; their effects, however, could 
be felt along the seams of the Legendary Age and Classical Era. 


Other regions, too, refined their Enlightened Arts. On 
every continent, human cultures thrived, each with its own 
types of mystics and artisans. Although China, Persia, Greece, 
and soon Rome defined this era’s history, you could find 
mages anywhere in the world: shapechangers, medicine-folk, 
witches, priests, philosophers, healers, craftsmen, and seers. 
Certain mages worked to improve the common good, but 
others summoned monsters and ruled through fear. Humanity 
spread; the Gauntlet thickened between the human and spirit 
realms. Belief and culture shaped humanity... and humanity, 
in turn, reshaped our world. Again. 


Modern Mage Factions Emerge 

Several groups took shape throughout the Classical Era. 
Although many of them won’t be known by the following 
names for quite some time to come, they'll eventually define 
the modern battles for reality: 


* The Hermetic Orders that emerged in Egypt, Greece, 
Nubia, and Rome. 


* The Dalowlaoshi, Chinese sacred artisan-technologists. 


* The Pythagoreans, whose applications of magick and 
technology spawned both mystic and Technocratic sects. 


¢ The Collegium Praecepti, supreme academy of Enlightened 
Artisanship. 


e The Akashayana, an Akashic Brotherhood whose mystic 
Way involved both harmony and violence. 


¢ The Chakravanti, Thanatoic mystics who bonded together 
for protection from Akashic warriors. 


* The Ahli-Batin, who emerged from the Himalayan Wars 
as a force for Balance and Unity. 


* The Eleusinians, whose mysteries of ecstasy, death, 
and rebirth will influence initiation and practice for 


thousands of mystic sects and secret societies, Awakened 
and otherwise. 


* The Great Mother Temples, networked throughout the 
Classical world under many names. 


* The Mithraics, warrior-priests of a heroic god. 


e The Druids, nature-clerics whose loose confederations 


guided the Celtic lands. 
¢ The Ngo-Ami, Nubian wizard-artisans from Upper Africa. 


* The Uzoma, spirit-speakers from Northern and Central 
Africa, whose ways will be scattered but not forgotten. 


* The Wu Lung, court sorcerers of Imperial China. 


* The Messianic Voices, who emerged in the wake of Jesus’ 
ministry. 


* The Taftáni, Persian and Arabian “weavers” of sacred 
Arts, inspired by Suleiman the Wise. 


* The Buddhist sages who transformed the religious and 
secular beliefs of Asia. 


e and the Abrahamic Prophets, whose fiery words inspired 
Judaism, Christianity, and Islam. 


In the vibrant intersection of Lower Asia, Upper Africa, 
and Lower Europe, these groups, and others, create a Golden 
Age of Empires, Magic, Technology, and Faith. 


It lasted for centuries... but nothing endures forever. 


The High Mythic Ages 


The cracks appeared as “barbarians” oppressed by empires 
began to gnaw at the empires, infiltrated them, and gradually 
tore them down. The birth of the Christ heralded the fall of 
older gods. Faiths clashed as tribal cultures grew to hordes. The 
hubris of Egypt, Greece, Carthage, Israel, Rome, Persia, and 
other empires led to their expansion, collapse, and assumption 
into other hands. Vandals, Visigoths, and Huns turned cities 
into ruins. China’s empire teetered between internal wars 
and external invasions, eventually breaking into three warring 
kingdoms. By around 600 CE, the Classical empires were mostly 
gone... and with them, their hold on mass reality. In this surge 
and ebb of empires and sects, grand acts of magick, faith, and 
science dominated the age. 


Later days will call the era after Rome’s collapse the 
Dark Ages, but that idea really isn’t true. Although most of 
Greco-Roman culture slipped between the cracks of Europe’s 
history, China remained battered and divided and yet still 
strong. Lower Asia enjoyed the Golden Age of India. Korea and 
Tibet emerged as vibrant powers, with similar expansions of 
the Mayan culture in Lower America and the Axum in Upper 
Africa. A Golden Age of Pagan Magick dominated Europe as 
Celtic, Pictish, Germanic, Slavic, Scandinavian, and Greco- 
Roman mages worked their Arts. Christian mystics began to 


Chapter Five: Ascension Warriors 123 


IASA 


PW 


P 


124 


Ma$e: The Ascension 20^ Anniversary Edition 


forge a cross-cultural empire throughout Europe, and African 
Berber Moors conquered the Iberian Peninsula. Meanwhile, 
the armies of the Prophet spread the new-born creed of Islam 
across Africa, the Middle East, parts of Asia, and segments of 
Europe. The Ngo-Ami and their people crossed further down 
into Africa to escape this Muslim expansion, founding cities 
and sects along the way. This mix of culture and liberty fueled 
the Golden Age of Wizardry. 


Withoutthe centralized influenceand technologies of Rome 
and aided by the Pagan paradigm, most of Europe became “open 
territory" for any mage strong enough to take it. The embattled 
Three Kingdoms provided similar freedom throughout China, 
whereas the Indian, North African, and Arab-Persian cultures 
(also battered by invasions) embraced high magick as part of their 
realities. Most of the world accepted magick as perfectly real, so 
mages whose practices fit the regional cultures (as nearly all of them 
do) enjoyed grand power. The extensive cultural exchanges of the 
Classical Era combined with the mystical freedoms unleashed by 
thebarbarian conquests refined the mystic Arts to unprecedented 
heights by this period. With the new Art of alchemy - originated 
by Greek and Arabian mages - these Arts allowed for a glorious 
range of mystic pursuits. When modern wizards speak of "the 
Mythic Age,” they're usually referring to this era. 


Blood, Passion, and the Elements 

To hear Tradition mages talk about it, you'd think that the 
European Middle Ages were a time of unbridled wonder and 
magnificence. In fact, the era was nasty, brutal, and filled with pain. 
Fiefdoms trembled between war and starvation, with the growing 
influence of an increasingly corrupt Church offering comfort in 
the storm. Monsters filled the nighttime hours, and toil filled the 
days. Forests that had been cut back to accommodate Roman 
roads and cities regrew, thick and perilous. Roads crumbled and 
ruins tumbled. Various kings and warlords attempted to preserve 
Roman laws and government, and artisans retained technologies 
of the lost Classical Age. Christian monks became the keepers 
of law, science, and literature, with their libraries being the few 
places between Cordoba and Byzantium where such knowledge 
was preserved. Proud Pagans reached deep into the Old Ways of 
blood, passion, and the elements, filling the word “witch” with 
connotations of envy, horror, and admiration. 


There was freedom of a sort in this age... the freedom to 
be murdered, sucked dry, or hauled off in a plague-cart. Pagan 
mages and their Christian counterparts fought mysterious 
battles throughout the continent; Muslims pressed the edges 
of Christendom, enjoying a prosperity few Europeans could 
imagine. There were flashes of hope in this desolate age, places 
where the wars, plagues, and invasions never reached. And it 
was a vigorous time, filled with inquiry, experiments, and lots 
and lots of magick. Still, it was also a dismal era for the common 
European. Many folks embraced the mystic Arts, if only as relief 
from crushing poverty, famine, field work, and war. 


The Web of Faith 


For Islam, this was a Golden Age in which science, faith, and 
magick became almost indistinguishable. The Mokteshaf ALHour - 


Ideals of Avalon 


Even among the Awakened, authentic details about the Arthurian Era wind up obscured by time and romanticism; later 
impressions of Camelot, for example, involve concepts and technologies that won't exist in common history for over 500 
years. Still, the ideal of Camelot and its heroes shines to mystics.and Technocrats alike. 


Originally founded by Romanized Britons, the kingdom that will later be known as Camelot begins sometime around 600 
CE. Mingling mystic Celtic and Pictish practices with the ritual Arts of Rome, the founders of Camelot devise a sophisticated 
blend of Classical Artisanship, Christian mysticism, and Pagan elemental Arts. Forging advanced armor and weapons, 
these visionaries also strike pacts with Britain’s fae inhabitants and the werewolves known as Fianna. By presenting a 
stronghold of tolerance and mutual protection, the kingdom prospers. The Pendragon Dynasty shares a sacred marriage 
with the Clan of Morrigan, a witch-priestess lineage tied innately to the land, yet the dynasty retains the technological 
Arts of Rome. Through communion with the faeries, spirits, and gods, Camelot rises to attract the best in every side. 


In the reign of Arthur's father Uther, the wizard Merlin (also called Merlinius) offers to aid the dynasty; when Arthur 


comes of age, the two of them present the masculine face for the kingdom at its height: magick and majesty working 
side by side. And for a time, they work well. 


Is it the lusty Gwenhwyfar (Guinevere) whose influence destroys Camelot? Or the Christianized betrayer Lancelot? Or 
the Pagan witch Morganna? Is there a magical pact broken between the king and the land, or do they fall out of favor 
with the gods for mingling religions? Every legend tells a different story, and more than one of those stories may be true... 
or even, perhaps, none of them at all. Whatever the reason, Camelot falls in a massive battle that kills nearly everyone 
involved. Enemy forces burn the kingdom, and the castle eventually falls into ruins. Dying Arthur is taken ot Avalon, 
where he supposedly awaits England's hour of greatest need. (Considering that he didn't emerge during World War II 
or the Thatcher era, this last part may be wishful thinking...) 


So who was Arthur? Ultimately, he's a symbol. Although the Verbena, Hermetics, Choristers, Templars, Gabrielites, and 
even lteration X will eventually call him one of their own, the real Arthur is a myth larger than any real person or faction. In 
the ideals of Camelot and Avalon, that symbol speaks an eloquent gospel almost anyone can relate to. Honor, courage, 
wisdom, leadership — few mages, even among the Nephandi, wouldn't want to see those virtues in the mirror. And so, 


the myth of Avalon, beyond its historical reality, has become a vibrant paragon for mages everywhere. 


"Collectors of Light” - epitomized this fusion, combining Allah's 
creed with ancient wisdom to forge new mystical technologies. 
The Taftani - a loose collection of nomads until then - forged 
a single group under that name in 650; the AhLi-Batin created 
a Web of Faith in 724; and in 756, an alliance of these mages 
finally ended an infernal DevilKing Age that had dominated 
the Middle East for six centuries. Muslim and Jewish scholars 
collected the scattered remnants of Classical achievement, then 
expanded upon them. Kabbalism, an elaborate tradition of Jewish 
mysticism, came from this conflux of ideas and prosperity. 


Islam expanded throughout Mediterranean. Europe and 
upper Africa, melding various Pagan and Classical traditions 
from Nubia, Egypt, Persia, and Arabia under the banner of 
the Prophet. Kingdoms thrived in the African interior, where 
the Ngo-Ami pursued an African discipline of High Ritual 
Magick that blended Egyptian, Greek, Muslim, Zoroastrian, 
and Pagan African elements. Other groups appeared as well, 
but the Ngo-Ami, Uzoma, Batini, Taftáni, and Mokteshafi, 
along with unaligned sohanci (^wizards"), dominated the region 
during these so-called "middle ages." 


In Europe, North African Berbers and Arabs ruled most 
of the Iberian Peninsula - modern-day Spain and Portugal - 
then known as Al-Andalus, a pinnacle of medieval European 
civilization. Divided, like mostof Europe, into often-fractious 
kingdoms, Al-Andalus became a hub of scholarship, art, and 
magick where many of the "lost" secrets of Rome, Greece, and 
Egypt continued to flourish. Although later generations will 


dismiss this era as “the Moorish conquest,” Al-Andalus lasted 
over 700 years and nurtured Muslim, Jewish, and Christian 
cultures in relative peace and prosperity... a peace that ends 
in the bloody rise of two nations that will crush civilizations 
and usher in an age of conquest, slavery, and war across five 
continents. 


Wizards and Witches, Clerics and Knights 


After centuries of skirmishes between rival factions, the 
Order of Hermes came together on Midwinter Night, 767. Lady 
Trianoma, a Gnostic seer, foresaw the imminent collapse of the 
Hermetic way, so she gathered allies to establish a mystic alliance. 
Divided into 12 Houses, these wizards pursued a synergetic form 
of High Ritual Magick. The Order enjoyed perhaps its greatest 
triumph soon afterward, defeating a Turkish necromancer and, 
from him, seizing the massive stronghold called Doissetep. 


Around the same time, an order of Christian warrior-magi 
swore fealty to Emperor Charlemagne, echoing an older legend 
of King Arthur and his Knights of Camelot. These Palatine 
Knights drew upon Classical lore, Romanized Christianity, 
and the nascent form of what will soon be called “chivalry.” 
Recognizing a potential threat, Pagan mystics banded together 
in loose confederations sometimes referred to as Spirit Talkers, 


Valdaermen, and devotees of the Old Faith. 


And there were other groups too, whose Arts and Craft 
would soon shatter this world... 


Chapter Five: Ascension Warriors 125 


The Dra$on Emperor 

In Asia, a divided China spent most of this period in 
chaos, torn by war, intrigue, dissent, and periodic invasion 
from Mongols and Turks. The High Artisans of various clans 
kept themselves busy inventing weapons, fortifications, and 
other technologies of war. Like China itself, the Wu Lung 
divided themselves into various factions - some allied with the 
Akashics, others battling against them. The Akashayana, for 
their part, refined devastating Arts of self-defense but began 
to withdraw to a more peaceful monastic life. Despite internal 
schisms between various Chinese, Tibetan, and Indian factions, 
the formerly “warring fists” strove for unity under the Akashic 
Way... and, for the most part, they found it. 


Aided by a powerful warriorseer known as Curly Beard, a 
dragon-rider called Li Tsing, and the gender-changing Akashayana 
warriorconcubine Chang, a heroic mage named Li Shihmin 
reunited China around 618, becoming the T'ang Dragon Emperor 
Daizon in 627. Within a few years, he crushed the Mongols, his 
son conquered Korea, and this T'ang Dynasty absorbed both 
rivals into a growing Chinese Empire. China's return to glory 
reenergized the Wu Lung and Dalowlaoshi, by this time often 
known as the Five Metal (or Elemental) Dragons. The Akashayana, 
sadly, were not so fortunate. Burdened with generations of 
imperial displeasure (exacerbated by the Wu Lung), they suffered 
attacks and persecutions throughout the era. 


For almost 300 years, China dominated the region as a 
singleunified force. As before, though, intrigues, invasions, and 
betrayals cracked the Empire. By this time, however, the Wu 
Lung, Metal Dragons, and Akashic Brotherhood had attained 
the forms that would determine their ultimate futures. 


The future Americas saw various sects rise and prosper. 
Sadly, the coming storm from the distant east will wipe away 
almost every trace of their achievements. 


The Sorcerers Crusade 


Revolutions begin with men and women of vision. 
Wolfgangvon Reismann was one such man. Angered by warring 
wizards and sorcerous tyrants, he convened the Gathering of the 
Square in Frankfort during the summer of 997. This assembly 
of High Artisans, rich merchants, restless craftsmen, zealous 
clergy, and holy warriors formed an alliance of Gabrielite Knights, 
Enlightened Craftmasons, and the Cabal of Pure Thought... an 
alliance that would soon blow the High Mythic Ages apart. 


Meanwhile, the Hermetic Order ripped itself to pieces. 
Houses Tremere and Flambeau exterminated the druidic House 
Diedne between 1003 and 1012. Tremere's Primus secretly 
became a vampire and turned his House into a clan of undead 
monstrosities. While Christianity gained power, Pagan mystics 
opened the Paths of the Wyck and herded magical beasts into the 
Otherworlds. The Crusades pitted Christian and Muslim mages 
and mortals against one another for over 200 years, leading to 
new sects that included the powerful Knights Templar and the 
Hermetic House Golo... the first stirrings of the future Sons of Ether. 


Alliances between African and European sects fractured, 
and the Hermetic Order continued to do the same. The defecting 


Ma$e: The Ascension 20^ Anniversary Edition 


House Golo helped found the Natural Philosophers Guild, and 
the vampiric House Tremere incited an allout war in 1201. 
Ecstatic and Thanatoic groups formed the Ananda Diksham to 
protect their ways from Muslim purists as Islam began to push 
its way into India. An English visionary, Stephen Trevanus, 
defended the poor folk in the name of his majesty King Richard 
the Lion-Hearted; mythologized as "Robin Hood," Trevanus 
turned his reward from the king into the Hanseatic League: an 
alliance of merchants, artisans, and craftsmen that erected the 
pillars of a much more potent Order. 


And then, the cannons roared. 


1210 began the fall ofthe High Mythic Age. The Craftmason 
Convention laid the groundwork for a pending Order of Reason 
and then, with new-forged cannons and age-old treacheries, 
destroyed the Hermetic Covenant of Mistridge that fall. 
Invaders - bringing their own warshamans - tore through 
Europe, Asia, and the Middle East. Two decades later, the 
Catholic Church officially declared an Inquisition to purge 
heretics, witches, Jews, Muslims, and sorcerers from Europe. A 
Mercy Schism shattered the Messianic Voices, whereas Artisans, 
alchemists, merchant guilds, and Craftsmen fought, put aside 
their differences, and, in 1250, they formed the Golden Guild 
Alliance. The Ascension War had begun. 


In Asia, Mongol Emperor Genghis Khan absorbed China 
into his empire by roughly 1280, adopting technological 
weaponry and governance. The Kamikaze War between China 
and Japan brought new allies to the Akashic Brotherhood: 
Shinto mystics whose shamanic ways blended well with the 
Taoist elements of the Way. Even here, the clash between 
Enlightened Science and Awakened Magick turned the tide... 
or, in this case, the winds and weather. By 1300, the writing 
was clearly on the wall. 


The next century saw that tempest become a surge. Sects 
came together and broke apart. The Templars were betrayed and 
apparently destroyed by a French king called Phillip “the Fair.” A 
Chakravantiseer called together mystics from across India, Europe, 
Asia, and the Middle East. Muslim and European Artisans severed 
ties, although Emperor Mansu Musa from the African Empire of 
Mali sent emissaries to Europe so they could join... 


The Convention of the White Tower 
Between March 1 and March 25, 1325, the Order of 
Reason began. Called together in a tower once owned by an 
assassinated Hermetic Master, delegates from Europe, China, 
the Middle East, India, and Mali forged the alliance that would 
eventually become the Technocratic Union. Under an Inner 
Circle council, eight Conventions form: the Gabrielites, High 
Guild, Cosian Circle, Void Seekers, Celestial Masters, Craftmasons, 
Artificers, and Solificati. This, in turn, kicked off over a century 
of warfare, both open and covert. The Solificati left the Order 
in 1335, to be temporarily destroyed and soon replaced by 
shadowy enforcers called the Ksirafai. Not long afterward, a 
Screaming Ghost Purge pitted the Wu Lung and Dalou-aoshi 
againstthe Akashics and theirshamanicallies; new Enlightened 
Technologies drove the Brotherhood into remote mountain 
retreats throughout Mongolia, Tibet, and Japan. The warring 


fists suffered heavy casualties and lost most of the influence 
they once held. In Central Africa, meanwhile, the War of the 
Dust Witch devastated large portions of the region; the Ngo- 
Ami, now in decline, reformed under the name Ngoma and 
joined a new sect, the Madzimbabwe, to defeat the marauding 
Dust Witches. A century and a half of plagues, purges, witch- 
hunts, lodge wars, assassinations, intrigues, and all-out wars 
began the era of the Sorcerers Crusade. 


As airships rose into the heavens, hell descended to Earth. 
More plagues, more witch-hunts, more and larger wars all erupted 
across Europe, Asia, and Africa. The Year of Great Sickness broke 
the Ngoma/ Madzimbabwe alliance in 1420. The Gabrielite 
Wolf Guild ravaged Germanic Romani and Pagan settlements. 
Alchemists, Masons, and Hermetics waged bloody Lodge Wars 
across Northern Italian city-states, and Appa Bloodax made 
pacts with demons and created an infernal horde of his own... a 
hordesoon commanded by his son, Tezghul the Insane. General 
Wyndgarde of the True Cross began a savage purge throughoutthe 
British Isles... a purge stopped by Nightshade, the only survivor 
of one of his massacres and a founder of the Verbena Tradition. 


Those Nine Traditions gota slow but brilliant start around 
this time, as the Middle Eastern Ecstatic Sh’zar the Seer began 
to collect mystic allies. In 1440, Nightshade, Sh’zar, Messianic 
Singer Valoran, and Hermetic Master Baldric La Salle met in 
the ruins of Mistridge to discuss a new mystic alliance to combat 
the Order of Reason. In Africa, visions of a titanic white ghost 
heralded years of war and plague, while in Asia fighting began 
once again between Akashics and Hindus of the Left-Hand 
Path. A Decade of the Hunt swept through Britain, establishing 
the Verbenae as a terrifying force. And in 1448, the Daedalean 
armies of the Order of Reason besieged Doissetep, whose Earthly 
manifestation got demolished as wizards shifted the stronghold 
to a distant Otherworldly Realm. The following year, dragons 
and airships clashed as a Second Mistridge Convocation was 
attacked by Daedalean troops. Vampires united and Tezghuls’s 
horde invaded. The Daedaleans swore an Oath of Fire to 
exterminate magick throughout the world. 


But the mystics had had enough. 


It took time. It took diplomacy. It took ordeals and visions 
and battles and journeys across the known world and through 
the Paths of the Wyck. It cost the participation of the Disparates: 
mystic groups, like the Ngoma and Taftani, who refused to 
follow the Council’s plans. But between 1457 and 1466, the 
Council of Nine Mystic Traditions was born: the Ahli-Batin, Akashic 
Brotherhood, Chakravanti, Cheeur Céleste, Dream-Speakers, Order 
of Hermes, Sahajiya, Solificati, and Verbenae stood united... if 
only for a short time. 


The Council Rises... and Falls 
It all started out so well... 


The March of the Nine saw a First Cabal of nine hand- 
picked representatives - one from each Tradition - set out 
from the Council's home-realm of Horizon on a mission 
of alliances and war. For three years, they made friends and 


annihilated enemies. Their example led other groups from both 
the Traditions and the Order. But in the Spring of 1470, the 


Solificati representative - Heylel Teomim - led the First Cabal 
into a Daedalean trap. After a massive battle, the Cabal was 
shattered. Most members were slain; the rest were captured; the 
seer Akrites escaped and led a rescue mission; and Heylel, then 
called Thoabath (“Abomination”) the Great Betrayer, was taken 
to Horizon, put on trial, sentenced to Gilgul, and destroyed. In 
the course of the trial, the Solificati Primus was assassinated, 
and that group scattered for a second time. 


In the wake of this defeat, the remaining Traditions 
sequestered themselves in Horizon. Tezghul rampaged across 
Europe and Asia, but he was finally defeated by the Order of 
Reason in the Battle of Harz. The triumphant Order of Reason 
attacked Horizon ina Concordia War that lasted throughout 1475. 
As devastating as that attack was, however, the Council defeated 
the Daedalean siege. Shortly afterward, the assassination of a 
Gabrielite Master sparked a retaliation effort that climaxed with 
the infamous Burning Times: a period of near-constant persecution 
in which mages, innocents, and anyone else unfortunate enough 
to be near them was put to painful, hideous death. And so, the 
Nine Traditions went underground... and for roughly 300 years, 
they stayed there, rebuilding their strength while the Order of 
Reason consolidated reality worldwide. 


An Age of Conquest 


That same period brought a sort of Apocalypse to the 
world at large. In the 1350s, a marauding confederacy of 
bandits, the Red Turbans, began to undermine Mongol China. 
By 1356, a former monk (said to be an Akashic Master) named 
Chu Yung-Chung took command of the Turbans. Forming a 
disciplined military force with substantial mystic power, the 
Red Turbans spread throughout the region in a network of 
secret, often magickal societies. Winning the common people 
over through his virtuous ways, Chu Yung-Chung expanded 
the Turbans’ influence into Korea. After harrowing years of 
war, Chu Yung-Chang declared himself Emperor Hung-Wu 
and, in 1368, initiated the Ming Dynasty. 

Ming China became a hotbed of secret societies - some 
instigated by factions among the Akashayana, Wu Lung, and 
Metal Dragons, others independent of them all. The formerly 
benevolent Hung-Wu turned into a paranoid tyrant. As the 
Emperor expanded Chinese influence into new regions, China 
grew rich in wealth and knowledge even as it was rocked by 
revolts and invasions. Hung-Wu’s successors lost control of the 
growing number of secret societies, and by the time European 
explorers (many of them Daedaleans) spread their influence 
into China during the 1500s, the Ming Dynasty trembled 
toward collapse. 


In what would soon be called Central America, the Aztec 
Empire brought brutal forms of enlightenment across the 
upper part of the continent. Although that Empire featured 
some of the most advanced cultural achievements in the mortal 
world, its gods possessed an implacable thirst for blood. All 
empires are brutal, but the Aztecs refined a horrific form of 
mass religious sacrifice... practiced mostly on prisoners taken 
from other, weaker cultures. In a few decades, that sacred duty 
would annihilate the Aztec Empire. 


127 


Chapter Five: Ascension Warriors 


TN AE 


N 


| 
l 
E. 


"rtr. 


During the mid-1400s, a pair of Iberian warriormonarchs 
- King Ferdinand of Aragon and Queen Isabella of Castile - 
consolidated power, obtained aid from the Catholic Church and 
the Order of Reason, overthrew the remaining Muslim kings of 
Al-Andalus, and united a new nation: Spain. Flush with wealth, 
power, and hubris, the monarchs purged Jews, Muslims, non-Cath- 
olics, and rival mystics out of Spain. Isabella - by 1490 one of the 
most powerful members of the Cabal of Pure Thought - installed 
her “confessor,” Tomás de Torquemada, as the Throne's personal 
scourge. The Order of Reason, riding a combination of victories 
and mostly freed from the interference of the Nine Traditions, 
initiated a program of exploration, achievement, and conquest 
from Spain and Portugal. This program, in turn, initiated three 
of the bloodiest atrocities in human history: the Conquest of the 
Americas, the Spanish Inquisition, and the Triangle Trade. With 
the "helpful" rivalry of neighboring Portugal, Spain expanded 
the Ascension War into Africa and the soon-to-be Americas. 


Cannons, Chains, 
and Churches 


Thefollowingcenturies defyeasysummation. Across the globe, 
however, it was an age of Technocratic dominion. The European 
Renaissance, which began in the late 1300s, drove all traces of 
the older Pagan age into the wilderness and the flames. Science 
of all forms blossomed from the farthest reaches of Asia to the 
shores of the America. This, however, was not the secular science 
of later years but a furious blend of inquiry and piety in which a 


128 Mage: The Ascension 20" Anniversary Edition 


scientist might be lauded as a man of God one day and shoved 
into a heretic’s robe the next. The Order of Reason, deprived of 
its two greatest enemies, began to devour its own children. 


The High Guild, enriched beyond the wildest dreams 
of an earlier age, began its transformation into the corrupt 
Syndicate it would become. Slavery, conquest, opium, and 
gold became foundations of its power... and of its eventual 
damnation. In the emerging era of vast nations, gold trumped 
all borders and funded all endeavors. The Celestial Masters, 
the Gabrielites, and the Explorators who dominated the Void 
Seeker Convention all relied upon the High Guild’s favor, so 
they repaid it by pouring gold into the Guild’s growing network 
of international trading companies. The Craftmasons, who 
spoke for the common folk, got marginalized “in the name of 
progress.” Quiet threats, silent knives, and grotesque executions 
became standard practice within the Order of Reason. Machines 
that had been considered crimes against reality soon became 
common tools of mortal kings. Across the world, cultures fell 
to the guns, chains, and treacheries of European dominance. 


For a time, a Technocratic rival expanded its influence 
throughout the Muslim world. The Mübarek Maharet Meclisi (or 
Court of Sacred Sciences) consolidated elements of the Mokteshaf 
Al-Hour and newer disciplines of the Ottoman Turks. Pounding 
against both the Christian European and Muslim Persian borders, 
the vigorous Turks devised technologies that even Daedaleans 
envied. Just as Europe conducted a perpetual state of war 
between its various empires, so Islam followed the division of 


seculartendingSunni and religiously orthodox Shi'a into several 
empires: the Ottomans, the Iranians (Persians), the Songhai, and the 
Mughals, who expanded into India and Asia during the 1500s. 
For centuries, the rival technocracies traded cannon volleys, 
plagues, innovations of strategy, and occasional alliances of trade 
and technologies. Only the divisions of religious orthodoxy kept 
these groups from utterly dominating the globe... a factor that 
got purged by the Technocratic Union a few centuries later. 


The “New World's" Order 


Inthe Americas, European invaders demolished the Aztec, 
Mayan, and Incan cultures, burning almost everything that 
would burn. Shipping African captives over to work in their 
South American “possessions,” Spain and Portugal inspired a 
similar race from Upper European cultures. Within decades, 
England, France, Holland, and the Germanic states would 
initiate their own colonial programs in North America. A 
combination of disease, technology, and strategic division 
of ancestral enemies tore through the American cultures, 
weakening or destroying tribes and nations that had been 
evolving for thousands of years. Isolated from the cross-cultural 
exchanges between Europe, Africa, and Asia, the civilizations 
of Oceana and the Americas put up a fight but eventually 
collapsed in the face of European and Muslim-Asian expansion. 


China, whose explorations reached as far as the North 
American coast, withdrew into itself as Japan surged into a 
powerful new and united era, led in part by Buddhist and Shinto 
mystics whose spiritual creeds did not oppose technology. “Zen 
science” refined devastating techniques of civil, mystic, and 
military technology outside the Order of Reason’s influence. 
Again, the budding Technocracy found a rival with enviable 
creations. Enriched by the monumental resources of European 
conquest, the Order of Reason reached into China, Japan, 
Siam, and Korea from beyond the eastern horizon. By the 


mid-1600s, the Order of Reason extended around the world. 


Unity, however, was still a long way off. National rivalries 
between the European powers, plus the bloody schisms between 
various Catholic and Protestant creeds, kept Europe in a perpetual 
state of war. The constant battle with Muslim and Chinese Artisans 
drove innovations in all three technocratic factions... and, over 
time, inspired a growing sense of “big picture” thinking. “Wouldn’t 
it make more sense,” the High Guild inquired, “to unite all of 
these marvelous thinkers into one magnificent Union?” Through 
interplays of force, temptation, bribery, and diplomacy, the 
European Order moved toward global consolidation, reform, and 
control. It’s not surprising, really, that a Union forged from stolen 
gold, slavery, genocide, and conquest would be so easily corrupted... 


The Burning Times 


Mystic sects suffered a long and ugly tribulation in which 
words like “witch” or “heretic” could send anyone to the 
flames. Nursing wounds from the Great Betrayal and resulting 
schisms, the Council found itself reduced to eight Traditions, 
all of them divided by secular events. As the Europeans pushed 
into the Americas, the Native Americans belonging to the 
Dream-Speaker Tradition demanded intervention from their 


European counterparts... and were often refused. The growing 
slave trade split African Traditionalists between the “civilized” 
African wizard-priests from Upper Africa and the Ivory Coast, 
and their “tribal” neighbors from the cultures being pillaged. 


European mages struggled with similar divisions, especially 
between Catholic Choristers and the ones who considered 
Protestantism to bea truer faith. The Houses of Hermes, in contrast, 
enjoyed enormous wealth. Most rulers in this period either were 
mages (like Isabella) or, like Queen Elizabeth I, had mages on their 
payroll. An Age of Secret Societies began, propagating lodges, sects, 
temples, and orders filled with mages and their Sleeper acolytes. 
But despite Awakened influence (or perhaps because of it), wars 
between their various nations kept those mages dueling in both 
the Awakened and unAwakened realms. Meanwhile, the Muslim 
Batini and the Christians of other sects drew further and further 
apart. The Muslim conquests in India, Greece, and Eastern 
Europe kept tensions high between the Chakravanti and Batini 
too, and the witch-hunts throughout Europe kept the Verbenae 
in a constant state of war with almost everyone else. 


An odd division split the Council: the more traditional 
mages from oppressed cultures drew closer to one another, 
while the so-called civilized wizards and clergy looked down 
their collective nose at those barbarians. A rough confederation 
of Dreamspeakers (the hyphen dropped out of use during the 
1600s), Verbenae, and Chakravanti-Euthanatos aligned itself 
against the Hermetics and Choristers, many of whom prospered 
from the Age of Conquest. In this tension, the Sahajiya - by this 
time favoring the title Seers of Chronos or simply the Seers - often 
played mediator between the other two groups. The Akashayana 
and Batini removed themselves further from the conflict. 
Theoretically, both favored Unity, but the warfare between 
Christendom, Islam, and the divided lands of Asia made that 
seem like a very unlikely ideal. In short, the Council was a mess. 


The presence of slave-owning Hermetics almost destroyed 
the Council of Traditions, for although slavery had been part 
of the human experience since time began, the Triangle Trade 
provided an industrialized form of cultural extinction. Ethnic 
tensions, always high within the Traditions, reached a new peak 
when the concept of “whiteness” - a state of skin-colorbased 
superiority - began to take hold. As Hermetics and Choristers, 
many of whom embraced the concept of personal and cultural 
superiority, enjoyed personaland political fortune throughoutthe 
era, the “mongrel” Verbena (whose Latinate plural ae dropped out 
in favor ofa simpler a), the "disreputable" Seers and Thanatoics, 
and especially the "racially inferior" Dreamspeakers, Batini, and 
Akashics all drew further away from their aristocratic cousins. 
Over a third of the Dreamspeakers left the Council during this 
period, further marginalizing the Tradition. The remaining 
shamans drew closer to the Ecstatics and witch-folk... but not 
without huge misgivings and deepening suspicions. 

In a way, these divisions created a vibrant age of 
Otherworldly magick. Each faction shaped Horizon Realms for 
its own purposes, and some of those Realms helped preserve 
their vanishing cultures. The price, however, was a period of 
stagnation and dissent within the Council of Eight. 


And in that void, an age of Reason and Madness grew... 


Chapter Five: Ascension Warriors 129 


. 


TN AE 


~~ eo 


A 


P 
J 


/ i 
r a 
- E^ 
“ea a 
oy ok 


EL Pal 


Chaos and Transgression 

Corruption and insanity, like slavery, are nothing new. 
Before the Light and Order existed, after all, there were endless 
Voidand Chaos. The Nephandi - who draw their collective name 
from the Latin word nefas (“transgression”) and the ancient 
Mesopotamian sect called the Nif ur ‘en Daah (“Eaters of the 
Dead") had existed for millennia by the Age of Conquest. That 
age, however, gave them a deep hold on power. Pride breeds 
hubris; wealth breeds iniquity. The callousness that came from 
enslavingor destroying the people of whole continents provided 
a fertile ground for Nephandic influence. By the time mortal 
authorities detected the cults and Black Masses in their midst, 
it was far too late to dig out their fangs. 


Madness prospered too, in the cracks of civilization. The 
Marauders (named from maraud, a French word for a high- 
spirited tomcat), who’ve always been present at the edges of 
civilization, began to make their presence more widely known. 
Once solitary, these demented enchanters now clustered into 
groups of shared insanity. In the madness of the age, these 
entities seemed strangely appropriate; what better mascot 
could there be, after all, for nations that burned people alive 
for entertainment while proclaiming themselves the pinnacle 
of civilization? 

In the seas and forests of the new world, European nations 
and their cast-offs jockeyed for accomplishment. Pirates and 
privateers filled the oceans; scouts and outlaws plumbed the 
wilderness. Native cultures dug in and fought hard for their 
vanishing lands; the rush of guns, germs, and steel, however, 
drove them further toward near-extinction. Forests once held 
sacred by the Druids got cut down and turned into ships. A 
new magickal lineage, often called the Bata’a, came together 
from the fusion of African captives, European masters, and 
Native American medicine-folk. Older groups, like the Ngoma, 
seemed to disappear into the grinder - sometimes assimilated, 
like the Madzimbabwe, into other sects, other times vanishing 
in the headlong rush toward a more civilized world. 


Sorcerers, Tinkers, and Heretics 

Meanwhile, the centuries of religious warfare and 
persecution finally began to wind down. Such carnage was, 
of course, unreasonable in the eyes of enlightened (and 
Enlightened) men. Science, philosophy, and the arts had more 
to offer, they insisted, than weekly burnings in the city square. 
As innovations like the printing press spread literacy across 
Europe and its colonies, the Order of Reason began to move 
itself - and its influence - from sacred fervor to worldly logic. 
The fiery Renaissance became an Enlightenment... at least as 
far as white, European males were concerned, anyway. 


As the witch-fires dwindled across the continent, secret 
societies flourished: the Rosicrucians, Freemasons, the Poro Society, 
and far, far more. Most of them remained in unAwakened 
hands, but a few harbored Awakened mages and Enlightened 
craftsmen. In the shadow of a dawning Age of Reason, occult 
fascinations bloomed. Every court, it seemed, had sorcerers 
and tinkers and heretics to spare. 


Mage: The Ascension 20" Anniversary Edition 


These societies presented a perfect harbor for Crafts: disparate 
sects that resisted consolidation into either the Traditions or 
the Order of Reason. The rolls of such groups ranged from a 
handful of members (like the Sisters of Hippolyta, who preserved 
the ancient Goddess ways) to hundreds of members scattered 
throughout loose networks (like the Children of Knowledge, who 
thrived in their secret prosperity). In later days, the mighty Wu 
Lung will be considered such a group; at this time, though, they 
still retained Imperial favor and an apparent mandate from the 
Sons of Heaven. Their power, though, was ebbing as a result of 
their endless conflict with the Metal Dragons, who would soon 
replace them in the seats of power. 


Throughout the Muslim world, the Ottomans and their 
Court of Sacred Sciences overtook their Iranian and Mughal 
rivals. Like the spreading Christian empires, the Ottomans 
employed a mixture of technology, religion, philosophy, and 
brute force to absorb or conquer everyone in their path. Even 
so, the riches plundered from the Americas (and the ships built 
from American forests) gave the Christian powers an edge. 
As the 1600s gave way to the 1700s, England, France, Spain, 
Portugal, Belgium, Holland, and the rising powers of Russia 
and Germany planted their flags across the world. 


There was opposition, of course. The Zulu, the Cherokee, 
the Iroquois Confederacy (inspired, in part, by the First Cabal’s 
Dream-Speaker, Walking Hawk), and the Hindu Maratha 
Empire that finally displaced the Indian Mughal dynasties... 
these cultures, and others, gave the larger empires pause. China 
declined, but Japan prospered, becoming powerful enough to 
shut itself off from the “great game” that was swallowing the 
rest of the world. In time, these cultures will become fodder 
for boys’ adventure tales, wherein supposedly brave white men 
subdue so-called barbaric foreigners. Between the early 1700s 
and early 1900s, though, they were powerful forces that slowed, 
if not stopped, the raging tide of empires. 


Meanwhile, the Guild, Artificers, Cosians, and Explorators 
dominated the Order of Reason. Everywhere, it seemed, 
needed their gold, swords, ships, medicines, and guns. More 
subtle methods demanded the soft words and sharp knives of 
Guildsmen and Ksirafai. High adventure and treachery defined 
the age. The Craftmasons and Cabal of Pure Thought had their 
influence, but that power had begun to wane. The Celestial 
Masters had shown just how vast our world truly is, and the 
medieval ideals behind the Gabrielites and Crafters began to 
seem rather quaint... and ultimately obsolete. 


Perhaps the American Revolution - a sure display of 
Craftmason power backed by Gabrielite fervor - was meant 
to send a message to the Order of Reason as a whole. If so, its 
sequels in Haiti and France a few years later provided the Order 
with an excuse for drastic renovation. By the 1800s, the Order 
had instituted a Time Table of progress and innovation. World 
dominion seemed notonlydesirable butpossible. Medieval names 
gave way to industrial titles: Artificers became Mechanicians; the 
High Guild became an array of incorporated Proctor Houses; an 
eclectic fraternity of inventors and theorists took up the name 
Voltarians, and an Ivory Tower began to form within the Order... 
with ominous results for several Daedalean factions. 


And through it all, the Council floundered, making 
impressive Horizon Realms but losing ground on Earth. 
Frustrated Batini declared the Council an obstacle to unity. 
Dreamspeakers defected to join groups like the Cherokee 
Fellowship of the Oath, the Zulu Lion Masters, and the growing 
Bata'a. The Akashic Brotherhood, depleted after centuries 
of persecution, seemed too remote for practical matters, and 
Germanic Verbena left the Council in order to enjoy the 
surging power of their home culture. The Seers - now often 
dismissed as mere Cultists of Ecstasy - flourished in Europe's 
occult underground, but they also joined their Hindu brethren 
in groups like the Grand Tiger Society, the Kalika Rajas, and the 
frightening Aghoris. Once moderators, these Cultists attained 
a shocking militaristic edge... an edge matched by their 
disgusted allies in the Chakravanti, now favoring their Greek 
name Euthanatos and a bloody approach to defiant magick. 
Puzzled Hermetics and distressed Choristers dismissed their 
fellow Traditions as hotblooded amateurs. The stage was set 
for catastrophe. 


The Triumph of 
Steam and Steel 


The purge began with an Industrial Revolution; it picked up 
speed with the revolts in America, Haiti, France, and elsewhere. 
It spun through the conquests of Napoleon - a technocrat in 
method if not Enlightenment, who refined technologies of war 
and government - and ascended a throne in the form of Queen 
Victoria: another technocrat whose influence defined an age. 


Both the Traditions and Technocracy considered Victoria a 
Daedalean Master. Mortal histories presented her asa melancholy 
moralist with devastating civil acumen. Under her governance, 
England became the most powerful nation on Earth - rarely 
rivaled on the battlefield and commanding respect in every sphere 
of human achievement. Victoria’s England spanned the globe, 
nurturing factories, armies, and international corporations that 
every other nation emulated. This was not, of course, the pinnacle 
of civilization - it was a filthy, polluted realm of horrific poverty 
and seething oppression. Victoria’s age, though, defined a new 
prosperity: a triumph of steam and steel. 


Brilliance and Betrayal 


Three new technocratic sects defined this era: from within 
the Voltarian group came a wild hybrid of Hermetic mysteries, 
Muslim scholarship, European ingenuity, and defiant hubris 
called the Electrodyne Engineers; a quiet but visionary association 
of mathematical malcontents begat the Difference Engineers; anda 
globetrotting pack of rowdy aristocrats who called themselves the 
` Skeleton Keys joined the nascent Ivory Tower faction. Between 
. the three of them, these fellowships embodied the spirit 
of wild invention, calculating foresight, and righteous 
fisticuffs. Compared to them, the grumbling Gabrielites 
T and indignant Craftmasons felt like embarrassing 
throwbacks from a less-Enlightened age. 


Even as it pushed its mystic rivals toward the edge 
of insignificance, the Order of Reason was showing its 


TN AE 


"rtr. 


~~ eo 


Czar Var$o's Crusade 


It almost worked. It might have worked. If the Etherite idealist called Czar Vargo had not dared too much and gone too 
far in his attempt to stop the First World War, the 20" century might have been a very different place. But when Vargo's 
airship armada darkened skies across the world in 1914, armed with devices that could theoretically deactivate every 
modern weapon on Earth, he stepped over reality's threshold... and disappeared over it as well. 


After a huge flash, the entire armada vanished. Every man, woman, and device went elsewhere. Czar Vargo, his 
followers, and whatever technologies they had planned to employ all ceased to exist. Most records and memories of 
that event disappeared as well; the few that remained behind were inconclusive, contradictory, and often absurd. It's 
as if the entire day had rewound itself, producing faint ghosts of its events but obliterating the actual parties involved. 


The Society of Ether maintains that Czar Vargo was destroyed by the Technocracy, with all accounts of his adventures 
written out of existence by the New World Order. Such an event, however, seems beyond the reach of even the greatest 
Technocratic influence. It's more likely that Reality itself swallowed Czar Vargo. And ifthat's true, then perhaps the entire 


century that followed has been the greatest Paradox backlash in history. 


Talk about good intentions leading to hell. 


age. The reigning Masters were centuries old - aberrations to 
their own sense of logical propriety. The religious zealots had 
become tiresome, and the blood they'd spilled over the lastsix or 
seven centuries seemed, at best, counterproductive to the cause 
of Reason. Money and trade appeared to be the true measures of 
realityin this expanding world - truer than God, more productive 
than dogma, able to build empires in the image of Man, building 
over the bones of supposedly more primitive cultures. 


The Order of Reason was done with quaintsuperstitions and 
divisive religious nonsense. It had had enough of rival empires and 
technologies. The last few centuries had shown that unity could 
be imposed through force... and so, in the shadows of Victoria’s 
influence, the Order of Reason became the Technocratic Union. 


Aseries of meetings andalliances linked the European Order, 
the Chinese Dragons, and rising technocratic sects in the new- 
formed United States. The Ottomans were invited to the table as 
well, buta schism between secular Muslim technocrats and pious 
Muslim artisans cracked the Court of Sacred Sciences... which, 
of course, was exactly what the European Guildsmen intended. 
As this effort came together, the Proctor House Coalition led the 
revolution. Wielding a potent form of the Art of Desire, these 
money men made secret deals for the Order’s future: global 
wealth, global influence, global power... and an end to those 
annoying religious zealots who'd held back progress for so long. 


All the records of the meetings wound up “lost” or 
"revised." All the parties involved were soon dead or deeply 
hidden. But in a series of quick strokes, the Craftmasons, 
Gabrielites, and other "superstitionists" were deposed. Outside 
historians called this the Lightning Purge: a quick, brutal war 
between technocratic factions. As the 20^ century began, the 
Lightning Purge illuminated a New World Order. Science, not 
faith, determined its path from then on. 


In place of the old Daedalean Conventions, a new array 
of groups took up the Technocratic mantle: Iteration X, a 
computerized refinement of the Mechanicians; the Progenitors, 
who melded the Cosian explorations in biological life with the 
potential for advanced evolution; the Void Engineers, who forged 


1332 Ma$e: The Ascension 20^ Anniversary Edition 


theold Explorators and Celestial Masters into asingle pioneering 
entity; the New World Order that consolidated apparentleadership 
under Reason and Control; the Electrodyne and Difference 
Engineers; and the Syndicate - the syndics (“ones who represent”) 
of these new Technocratic interests — who, behind a screen of 
money and indulgence, formed the new Order's true leadership. 
The Ivory Tower replaced the sinister, outmoded Ksirafai. That 
last group disappeared, its apparent purpose finally fulfilled. 


How did itall happen so quickly? Howwere the Craftmasons 
and Gabrielites virtually exterminated? When did the Cabal 
of Pure Thought - a group dedicated to religious orthodoxy - 
drive God out of the Machine? And how, folks wondered, did 
a group of atheistic European upstarts turn Muslim, Taoist, 
and Confucian Masters to their cause? 


Such radical transitions could almost be considered... 
magical. 


End of an Age 


Asindustrial empires ground the common people between 
the gears, flickers of defiance ignited a new fascination with 
occult pursuits. Mystic orders suddenly seemed to be everywhere. 
Could this have been the Order of Hermes playing a long 
game throughout the various secret societies? They'll certainly 
take credit for doing so. Ecstatic artists danced through the 
bohemian bacchanals of Europe's fin de siécle (“end of the 
century”), or else fought on the edges of the American frontier 
as Los Sabios Locos ("the Crazy Wise Ones"). The sickening 
pollution and crushing despair of this industrial victory fed 
Thanatoic fervor... especially once the Great War and the 
Great Influenza Epidemic initiated the monumental death tolls 
of the budding century. The Akashayana found a new sense 
of purpose in a Boxer Rebellion that recalled their Red Turban 
victories, and the Celestial Chorus recruited new devotees in 
North and South America. The Verbena, too, thrived in the 
occult revival and artistic rebellions of the time, as the term 
neo-pagan - originally an insult - became a mark of honor. 
Appalled by the destructions of African and Native American 
cultures, the Dreamspeakers adopted a quietly evangelical 


defiance; though many folks - their allies included - took 
this pose as some form of "noble savage" serenity, it masked a 
powerful, subversive Will. Only the Batini seemed to give up 
hope; disgusted with the Council's divisive stagnation, that 
Tradition walked out shortly after the turn of the century. By 
then, however, another group had joined the ranks. 


The Electrodyne Engineers played a vital role in the 
Lightning Purge, their machines crushing Gabrielite resistance and 
Craftmason Arts. Soon afterward, though, the Technocratic Inner 
Circle tried to rein in the proud inventors. Announcing that the 
Ether - a foundation element to Electrodyne High Science - did 
not actually exist, the Inner Circle used new mass-communication 
technology to put the Etherites in their place. As a result, the 
Engineers quit the new Technocratic Union in 1904 and joined 
the Traditions under their old nickname, the Sons of Ether. 


To say that this didn’t go over well is an understatement. 


For decades, the industrial powers and their associated 
Technocrats had tested their deadliest devices on people they called 
primitive savages and rebellious country boys. Every so often, an 
army would toss some new innovation at a rival’s troops to see 
what it might do. No one, however, was ready for what happened 
when two Union-backed superpowers hauled out their biggest 
guns. It started when a newly-industrialized Japan crossed guns 
with Tsarist Russia in the Russo-Japanese prelude to the coming 
horror show. A few years later, Victoria’s house of cards collapsed 
in the grind of the First World War. By the time it ended... and 
that influenza pandemic racked up another 20 million dead... the 
true scope of Technocratic atrocity had been revealed. 


The Sorcerers Crusade had been wild. The Lighting 
Purge had been incredible. The various plagues and wars 
and collapsing empires and civil wars brought their share of 


misery. No one, however, had seen anything like the mechanized 
genocide surrounding the Great War: tanks, planes, poison 
gas, machine guns, cannons that could pound a city from an 
entire county away, and a generation of men and women whose 
minds and bodies had been shattered even when their bodies 
had not quite died. It seems as though some epic, awful magic 
had taken hold of humanity. And the worst was still to come... 


Roar 


In the wake of global war and plague, the so-called Lost 
Generation dove into the occult revival. Spiritualism, secret 
orders, radical art movements, Pagan reclamation, and militant 
atheism all provided willing initiates for cults both Awakened 
and otherwise. The Technocracy shook itself off and sorted 
through the carnage, often missing the rising power of Hermetics, 
Choristers, Ecstatics, Thanatoics, and even Akashics. There 
were, after all, plenty of distractions in this “roaring” era, most 
obviously the Russian Revolution, the collapse of Imperial China, 
the rapid rise of Imperial Japan, and the anti-German backlash 
in Europe... a backlash that inspired the horrors to come. 


As Technocratic experiments in Italy, the United States 
and Russia took hold, growing numbers of Hollow Ones swelled 
the ranks of the Awakened. Forsaking all forms of old wisdom, 
these people slipped between the cracks of both Traditions and 
Technocracy. Although they would be seen in later years as bored 
Goth kids, the orphaned Hollowers were a true 20*-century 
mystic tradition... a fact the Council would ignore at great cost 
later. Disdained by lofty mystics as “selfAwakened rabble,” 
the Hollowers found themselves treated as recruiting stock 
and cannon fodder. The treatment didn’t sit well with them. 


Throughoutthe Roaring ‘20s, mages ofall factions built their 
influence. New mass-media technologies helped smart mages 


The Rise of the Extraordinary Citizen 


Mages of all factions who expected to lead a sheeplike humanity toward their pasture of choice have been shaken by 
what the New World Order calls the rise of the extraordinary citizen: a revolution in capability, conviction, and belief 


among the Masses. 


Whereas the fashionable apathy of the 1990s suggests a stagnation of human potential, the literally explosive events at 
the turn of the new millennium spotlight the very opposite idea. Although certain elements of consumeristic society scarf 
down Happy Meals and junk culture, the combination of political unrest, technological savvy, mystic romanticism, and 
religious convictionsignite worldwide upheavals. Acrossthe world, unprecedented numbers of people employ technology 
and yet believe in magic. This apparent small-p paradox has shifted the tide of the Ascension War. At the same time 
that longtime mystics incorporate computer-tech into their lives and rituals, idealistic Technocrats find themselves craving 
spiritual fulfillment. The so-called Sleepers, meanwhile, have proved themselves to be active agents of both sides, using 
over-the-counter technology to craft magical visions. From boy wizards to romantic Night-Folk, apocalyptic sagas and CGI 
superheroism, the pop-culture stew of this millennium fusion represents an embrace of all sides of the Ascension conflict. 


In short, no one side is winning, but all of them — the Marauders included — have a chance at capturing a worldwide 


Consensus. 


The extraordinary citizens of the new millennium are neither the trembling peasants of medieval legend nor the conforming 
Masses of Technocratic ideals. Instead, they... or, to be more accurate, WE... embrace a vibrant era in which technology, 
faith, and imagination coexist. The shadow of that era, though, is the potential for global madness and self-inflicted 
annihilation. 


And that choice, ultimately, lies not with one Awakened faction or the other, but with the extraordinary citizens of the 


21* century. 


Chapter Five: Ascension Warriors 133 


spread beliefs and shape realities. The Etherites might have 
been the most astute students of film, magazines, newspapers, 
sound recordings, and radio, but they weren't the only ones. 
Even the Great Beast, Aleister Crowley, experimented with 
recorded rituals, somehow managing to be considered a member 
of almost every mystic group while never definitively appearing 
in a single Awakened Tradition. 


The ugly aftermath of war... and the even uglier global 
Great Depression... divided both the Council and the Union. 
The post-War disintegration of the Ottoman Empire and the 
technological hunger of a dozen imperial powers - combined 
with social upheavals and the partitioning of Africa and Asia 
into European "possessions" - kept tensions rising in this 
volatile age. Was the American dust bowl a legacy of magickal 
war? Were the many strikes and riots instigated by Awakened 
factions? Who was really running the organized crime families 
sweeping across the USA... and whatwas the truth behind those 
rumors about the KKK hunting Dreamspeakers and Bata'a? 
Where did the Subtle Ones go, and was the world headed 
toward a dreadful Age of Iron? As the '20s and '30s lurched 


toward another World War, mysteries were everywhere. 


One thing, in hindsight, is obvious: the Fallen are playing 
chess with our world. 


The Crucible 


From the newsreels, it looked marvelous: Germany, Italy, 
and the newcomers in Japan all seemed vital and full of hope. 
Their machines were among the finest on Earth, their people 
well-fed and disciplined. Eloquent leaders inspired grand 
devotion. It looked like a Technocratic dream come true - the 
shining face of Tomorrow. 


We all know what happened next. 


World War II split the Traditions and Technocracy; mages 
on both sides joined the Axis or the Allies. Although a few 
mystics ran and hid, most folks understood just how high the 
stakes were. As atrocities came to light and proud, supposedly 
Enlightened Axis leaders were revealed as monsters, the truth 
became obvious: the Nephandi had gone for all the marbles, 
and they very well might have won. 


It was an age of Paradox - a cosmic Armageddon of mythic 
proportions. Magick and machines clashed from one end of 
Earth to another. Only South America was truly spared. German 
mystics of the Thule Gesellschaft clashed with Doc Eon’s Terrific 
Trio. The Japanese Bloody Pillar and Fiery Wind Brigade battled the 
Thanatoic/ Dreamspeaker/ Ecstatic sect called the Ghost Tigers 
and the Akashic Whispering Fists. The Difference Engineers - by 
this time called the Virtual Adepts - broke Technocratic ranks 
and helped the British High Command crack mystic German 
codes. A different sort of code came from the American Wind 
Talkers, whose ties to the Dreamspeakers were obvious from their 
name. Perhaps the bitterest divide pitted the Verbena Tradition 
against itself; for a Tradition whose founding members were 
a British witch and a Germanic runesman, that split held the 
tragedy of Wagnerian opera. 


Mage: The Ascension 20" Anniversary Edition 


For a time, the Technocratic leadership stood behind the 
Axis war machine. As the extent and nature of the horrors 
became unavoidable, however, the Inner Circle joined the 
rank-and-file Technocrats who'd turned against the Axis. The 
technical acumen behind the Allied powers, most especially 
Russia and the U.S., shifted the balance of power. Hitler’s 
forces found their gadgets malfunctioning, their proud machine 
sputtering, their innovations stagnating or exploding in bright 
flashes of Paradox. In an unprecedented move, high-ranking 
Technocrats met with Council Masters in late 1943; now united, 
the two factions crushed the Thule Society, the Midnight Wolves 
(a remnant of the Daedalean Wolf Guild), and the Shadowed 
Sun Society - Nephandic cores of Nazi power. Although certain 
Technocrats and Tradition mages hung on until the end, that 
end was almost certain. 


In retrospect, the detonations at Hiroshima and Nagasaki 
could be seen as titanic Paradox backlashes. But perhaps they 
were the opening volleys of a terrifying endgame... 


To Dream Impossible Things 


Like the alliance between the Soviet Union and the Anglo- 
American west, the truce between Technocrats and Traditions 
soon became a ferocious standoff. World War II had given 
both sides plenty of new toys and reasons to use them. The 
Traditions, energized for the first time in centuries, expanded 
into the post-War vacuum. The Technocracy seized upon the 
Atom Age asa chance to take its ideals worldwide. The defection 
of the Virtual Adepts in 1961 brought the Council back to its 
original count of nine; the Adepts also brought with them a 
welcome burst of futuristic inspiration. Combined with the 
Sons of Ether, the new Tradition brought the Council firmly 
into this wild century. 


As the counterculture blazed up in the 1960s, the Traditions 
seized their place in popular culture. War-weary Sleepers craved 
rebellion, spirituality, and wonder; the Traditions were happy to 
provide such things. Long-oppressed people and cultures threw 
off their colonial chains, bringing lost Arts back to the global 
stage. And so, despite a growing Pogrom from the Technocratic 
Union, mystic mages built a power base through pop culture, 
the civil rights push, imaginative technology, and various spiritual 
and religious movements. Throughout the coming decades, 
the Traditions and Technocracy faced off in bloody struggles 
for supremacy - each side driven to fulfill Ascension, both too 
proud to see their own damnation. 


Folly and pride have shaped a World of Darkness. Instead of 
Ascending, the people suffer. Despite magnificent achievements, 
the human animal is a caged beast at war with itself. The 
monsters moving through the night are mere reflections of 
the human heart, and as a Reckoning draws close, the true 
winners of this Ascension War become clear to everyone except 
the mages fighting it. 

The 1990s foretell an Apocalypse - a Reckoning of sin, 
destiny, and punishment. Forces gather and converge in 
monumental showdowns. Strongholds fall. Masters perish. 


Future Fates: The Reckoning and Sixth Age 


The late 1990s prove disastrous for the Traditions. In the metaplot between the Mage 2nd and Revised Editions: 


Hermetic rivalries tear Doissetep apart, the Thanatoic Master Voormas goes rogue, and the Ascension Warrior leads 
an army of angry young mages into Horizon and essentially levels the place during the Horizon War. 


In a Second Massassa War, the Order of Hermes goes to war with vampires, to the vast expense of all parties. 


During a Week of Nightmares in early June, 1999, some sort of godlike monster rises in Bangladesh; the Technocracy nukes 
the Indian subcontinent, and the spirit nukes (see Chapter Four) unleash the Avatar Storm and other metaphysical disasters. 


Not long after that, a Technocratic force wipes out what's left of Horizon, killing most of the surviving elders and 
obliterating the Council’s home. The Council Primi disappear, leaving the Traditions leaderless. Those combined 
catastrophes set the Nine Traditions reeling. The Technocracy intensifies its Pogrom, and - by the opening of the new 
millennium — the Ascension War is declared over. The Disparate Crafts are hunted down and supposedly destroyed, 
their few survivors fleeing to what's left of the Traditions. The Technocracy, also in disarray as Earthbound Technocrats 
get cut off from their Deep Universe Constructs by the Avatar Storm’s Dimensional Anomaly, winds up presiding over 
an apparently apathetic human race. 


Following the cataclysms of 9/11/ 2001, humanity appears to go insane. Religious fantatics spark wars on every 
continent. Defiant Tradition mages soon discover an enigmatic Rogue Council, but they cannot decipher or trust its 
source. The Reckoning arrives, and a final Sixth Age is underway. 


Given this literally game-changing metaplot, a Mage Storyteller has three options: 


* Things are now as they'd been in Mage Revised: The Technocracy commands the world. Sleepers just want 
Big Macs and TV shows. The Disparates are gone and the Traditions remain a small, defiant force. The Avatar Storm’s 
still in effect, confining most activity to Earth. The Sixth Age continues to rain blood and misery, and mystic magick 
draws Paradox by default. 


The Technocracy's victory party was premature: Sure, the Union got the upper hand, but the Traditions and 
Disparates have survived worse. Hubris leads most Technocrats to consider the fight more or less over... and to miss 
the Nephandic leadership now governing their every move. The Masses surprise everyone with their combination 
of self-indulgence, fanaticism, and hope for a better tomorrow. The Traditions rally once again, and the Disparates 
band together to take back their world. Loyal Technocrats who've discovered the Inner Circle's corruption stage a 
shadow-war within the Union, possibly allying with Tradition and Disparate sects in an effort to rescue the ideals of 
science from Nephandic infiltration. At the moment, though, the Fallen are winning what's left of the Ascension War. 
It’s like WWII all over again, with even higher stakes. 


None of that ever happened: As in the mid- 1990s, the Technocracy and Traditions are more or less equal, with the 
Nephandi mostly banished from Earth and the Marauders too scattered to provide much threat. The Disparates have 
their own territory, but the cataclysms that pushed Ascension to the edge have not occurred and probably never will. 


Mage 20 assumes the second scenario. The final choice, however, is yours to make. Who knows? Perhaps the Sixth 
Age did occur, the old world did end, and the current world is just one alternate reality of many. Reality's a funny thing, 
especially in the world of Mage, and it’s often not what you'd expect... 


Technocratic agents spot deep corruption in their ranks - a 
Nephandic poison that infects the Inner Circle itself. As wars 
destroy Horizon Realms, their echoes shake things back on 
Earth. Fanatics and madmen rape the world with fire. Magic 
is as close as the nearest Internet connection, but its miracles 
seem petty, small, and mean. And so, as the Twin Towers burn 
and fall, a bright Dark Age begins - a wonderland of impossible 
things bent on self-destruction. 


Mages, however, have always specialized in doing the 
impossible. Ascension, though delayed, cannot be denied. 
Horizons might burn and Crafts might shatter, but True Magick 
never dies. The new millennium ushers in a culture-jam. Tech, 
religion, and mystic fantasy remix one another’s elements until 
no preconception remains intact. There’s hope in the wind 
and revolution in the air again. 


In an age of revelations, the Ascension War goes on. 


Chapter Five: Ascension Warriors 1335 


INK 
Vi 


Ev Zr 


Part Il: The Council of 
Nine Mystiek Traditions 


Oh, Porthos — you glorious old fool. 


The fragments from Doissetep rest in gold-embroidered 
silk, setin the center of a pentacular design of intricacy 
that would make King Solomon weep with confusion. 
My throat aches from six straight hours of chanting 
in three separate tongues: Hebrew, Old Nubian, and 
— of course — Enochian, the Renaissance forgery that 
nevertheless contains power its con-man architect never 
recognized. Worn loose in the old style, my dreadlocks 
hang thick and heavy beside my face. 


His own face freezes with indecision, then relaxes into a martyr’s 
reverie. 


That’s the moment he decided. The moment that saved us all. 


In the center of my pentacle, the spectre of that long-lost moment 
flickers, freed from the constraints of time and space. Ectoplasmic tendrils 
recreate the scene. Although no camera captured that penultimate 
decision, my Arts have freed it from the void. These fragments — precious 
beyond measure — echo back their memories. Although I know that 
I see only what I may expect to see, there's truth behind that vision. 
The spirits have told me so, and they know better than to lie to me. 


I'm weary, yet fascinated. That so much depended on one man's 
resolve is awful in its implications. 


He looks weary too. I hope to never live so long as to doubt my 
own sanity, as he so often did. 


Archmaster Porthos of the Thousand Honorific Titles We Had 
To Memorize In Training hovers for a moment, a mad prophet face 
to face with destiny. He licks his lips for just a moment — such a 
human gesture! — before the mask of command slides down across his 
features. His skin takes on the solemnity of stone, like some ageless 
idol of bygone majesty. And then he opens his mouth to pour out the 
words of majesty, sealing the portals and letting Doissetep implode. 


For an eternal breath, I stop speaking. Let the scene hover frozen, 
etching itself into my bones. 


Perhaps it’s my imagination, but I’d swear I see the face of Hermes’ 
ghost itself over Porthos’ features. Man, God, and Magus become one- 
in-three — a single entity, Thrice-Great squared. And then the image 
brightens to a blinding sun, and the moment disappears in flame. 


I'd say that my tears come from that blinding flash, but I'd be 
lying if I did. 

This is the moment we were reborn — the thunderbolt that lit the 
skies of Heaven and remade our universe anew. 


A Legacy of Challenge 


Ah, for the Age of Magick! A wondrous time with miracles 
close at hand! A smart, ambitious mage could do great things with 
his Arts - call storms, conjure spirits, raise castles out of stony 
ground, and shatter opposing armies with a wave of his mighty 
hand! That’s the vision of the Nine Tradition mages... or of some 


136 Mage: The Ascension 20" Anniversary Edition 


of them, at least: a return to that bygone age when magick was 
a force of elemental change, and a mage could command Arts 
that would make the bravest men cry out in terror and lay still. 


It’s awonderful dream - one that’s kept the Nine Traditions 
going for over 500 years. The pride in their personal vision 
and ancestral Arts energizes these mages long past the point 
at which lesser souls would have given up. In many ways, these 
are the guardians of wonder, holding on to the best aspects 
of their history in order to give tomorrow a fighting chance. 
And yet, it’s also a selfish vision, so bound by its own glory that 
its keepers often miss the cost of that dream to other people. 


So are the Traditions brave saviors of a bygone wonderage... 
or a misbegotten experiment led by throwbacks with selfish 
agendas and careless behavior? Honestly, both are true. Though it's 
accurate to say that Tradition mages fight the good fight against 
the Technocracy’s stifling imperialism, it’s just as accurate to call 
them reckless nutjobs who prefer candles to halogen lamps. The 
Nine Traditions’ mystics have suffered appalling crackdowns at 
the hands of mortal witch-hunters and the Technocratic Union... 
and yet, two of their greatest disasters - the betrayal of the 
First Cabal and the fall of Doissetep - were both self inflicted. 
Technocratic Explorators might have plundered the Americas 
while the High Guild ran the slave trade, but it was Hermetic 
Masters who marginalized the Dreamspeakers, pooh-poohed 
Akashic sages, and shattered a centuries-old alliance with the 
AhLi-Batin over the “white man’s burden” in Africa and India. 
The Traditions make a lot of mistakes, have committed their 
share of atrocities, and hold a vision of Ascension that would 
leave most human beings screaming in terror. Are they the good 
guys, then? In the treacherous Awakened world, no mage is truly 
innocent and no faction is truly good. At best, they can live their 
lives by high ideals and use their powers to advance humanity as 
a whole without grinding human beings into the dirt. 


That, then, is the challenge of a Tradition mage: to hold 
onto the best your group has to offer and make tomorrow 
better than yesterday has been. 


A Proud Heritage 


Despite their many mistakes, the Traditions have plenty 
to be proud of. For over half a millennium, the Council has 
championed diversity, cooperation, and mutual respect across 
cultural divides. This might not seem like much these days, 
especially not given the Council’s many lapses when it comes to 
the Dreamspeakers in particular. Still, the wide range of people 
who've earned the title Master among the Traditions hasn’t been 
limited by race or creed - only by accomplishment. During eras 
when witches were considered more suitable for kindling than 
companionship, when Catholics burned Protestants and both 
burned Jews, when white governments considered non-whites 
to be less than human (and women often even less than that), 


the Council held every Tradition mage to the same standard: 
be good at what you do, and do it well. 


Earth and Fire 


Though it originated with nine auspicious members, the 
Council has spent most of its existence with eight Traditions. 
Considering that the number 8 signifies the mundane world (as 
opposed to the perfection of mind and spirit that 9 represents), 
it’s understandable that the Traditions have so often fallen one 
step short of perfection. Still, 8 has cosmic significance too. 
There are eight paths to spiritual attainment, eight spokes in 
the Buddhist wheel, and eight petals in the lotus flower. 2 + 2 
+ 2 equals perfection in its third iteration and symbolizes the 
element of Earth. Perhaps the Council needed to be grounded 
before it could return to the bright significance of nine, whose 
third iteration, 3 + 3 + 3, equals the element of Fire. 


Fire has certainly symbolized the Council since the Virtual 
Adepts joined in 1961. The infernos of the Firstand Second World 
Wars brought the Traditions back from the brink of stagnation, 
and the fires of rebellion heated their countercultural revolution. 
The explosive end of Doissetep, the ruin of Horizon, and the 
fires of the Technocratic purge all burned the fat away from 
the Nine Traditions. Hermetic mages equate the Tarot’s Tower 
card with the destruction of Horizon and the self-immolation 
of Doissetep - all of them signifying the collapse of secure but 
stifling institutions. Going into the new millennium, the Nine 
Traditions are lean, mean, and ready to excel. 


Although they’ve preserved some of the old formalities of their 
Renaissance origins, the Traditions prefer to live in today. Their 
rituals and tools might seem archaic at times, but their sensibilities 
are more modern than most folks realize. Despite a reputation for 
being cranky throwbacks (an accusation true of the oldest Masters 
but perhaps not of the current membership), Tradition mages are 
more dynamic than their Technocratic rivals. Their approach, too, 


is more classical and romantic. For better and worse, when you 
say “mage,” most people think of the Traditions. 


Common Goals and Ideals 


Through centuries of conflict, certain principles have kept 
Tradition mages going. A Hermetic might snarl at the Cultist, 
fidget through Akashic meditations, roll his eyes whenever the 
Chorister starts sermonizing, and wonder what the hell that 
Adept sees in her stupid-ass computer. All five mages, though, 
probably share the following ideals: 


Excellence 

There’s a reason the Council chose the word aréte to 
represent a mage’s highest quality. It means “excellence,” and 
that’s what the Council prizes most. Anyone can be a Tradition 
Master if she, he, or occasionally the gender-neutral pronoun 
ze works hard, strives to perfect the Arts, and stands by oaths, 
promises, and honor. Yes, Tradition mages lie, scheme, and fall 
short of their lofty goals; still, as far as the Council is concerned, 
the goal of excellence is the highest mortal aspiration. And so, 
Tradition members seek knowledge and endure hardships so 
that they might become more worthy of the title mage. 


Diversity 

From its inception onward, the Council of Traditions 
has held room for anyone who can meet those standards of 
excellence. Neither gender nor creed nor ethnicity has prevented 
the Traditions from accepting worthy Adepts. That's not to say 
they haven't been... well, racist, to be honest; especially with 
regards to the Dreamspeakers, they have been and in some 
regards still are. Considering the group's origins in medieval 
Europe, however, it has remained surprisingly diverse. 


Unlike the monolithic Technocratic Union, the 
Traditions find strength in flexibility. They're the reed 


Future Fates:-Fhe Traditions 


Between Mage 2"! and Mage Revised, the Council goes from a powerful entity with Otherworldly strongholds and 
godlike Masters to a struggling collection of survivors whose greatest assets have been lost. Thus, the status of Tradition 
characters and their groups will depend enormously on the option you choose to employ: 


* Defiant survivors: The Technocracy won, Horizon is lost, and the few remaining Tradition mages keep their heads 
down and hide amongst the Sleepers. Even so, the Sphinx's Rogue Council (see below) has taken the fight back to 
the Technocracy. Though seriously outgunned, these defiant survivors continue to wage a guerilla war against the 


Technocratic monolith. 


e The Council transforms: In a new-millennium chronicle, this Rogue Council has been around for about 10 years, 
granting the Traditions a significant comeback. Horizon and Doissetep are distant memories, but new strongholds have 
replaced them. The Rogue Council has inspired (perhaps even created) the New Horizon Council (again, see below), 
and several Traditions — notably the Akashics, Dreamspeakers, Ecstatics, Etherites, and Thanatoics — have assumed 
new identities that reflect their renewed sense of purpose. Mage 20 assumes this option in the following entries. 


Metaplot? What metaplot?: None of that stuff happens, Horizon and Doissetep remain vital, and the Traditions 
can go toe-to-toe with the Technocracy and even possibly win. The chronicle follows Mage sourcebooks published 
between 1993 and 1998, with a "Mage 2" Default” sort of tone. Alternately, it simply ignores all of the metaplot, 
leaving the Traditions the floating powers that they are in Mage 1* Edition. The Traditions remain unchanged and 


will probably stay that way. 


Chapter Five: Ascension Warriors 137 


bundle, not the oak. A diverse approach to life and magick 
has kept the Traditions supple... which might be why the 
group has endured its many challenges. When one mage or 
Tradition falters, the others take up the strain; when one 
prospers, the rest often share the benefits. That heterodox 
approach to magick has allowed the 

Council to thrive in the modern 
era, too. Though many of 
the Disparate Crafts had 
stagnated, the Council 
has gone with the 


138 Mage: The Ascension 20" Anniversary Edition 


changing spirit of the times, riding the 20" century into a 
powerful... if precarious... state of the Art. 


These days, the Traditions are more diverse than ever. As the 
older wizards die off, their colonial legacy fades as well. Other mages, 
meanwhile, have refused to take any further shit from musty old 
white boys and now take their issues to the table... or the certámen 
field... when necessary. There are still problems, of course - that's 
inevitable. Even so, the principle of Valemus ex pluribus - “From 
Many, We are Strong” - is a long-standing Council tradition. 


Respect 

Shared power demands mutual respect... especially when 
the power in question can literally turn people inside out. The 
formalities between Council members (see Ranks and Titles, 
below) reflect the respect each member has earned. Unlike the 
hereditary or purchased ranks so common in the mortal realm, 
Council titles are earned through accomplishment. A Tradition 
mage must pass certain tests and master certain Arts before 
she'll be afforded a formal title. Even now, when so many old 
institutions have been discarded due to progress or necessity, 
formal titles must be earned, not assumed. 


Even the lowest Council ranks, however, are due a certain 
amount of respect under Council law. Sure, an arrogant 
Master treats his companions like shit - from a certain 
perspective, he's earned the right to do so. Thatsaid, even 
the most condescending wizard tends to grant more 
respect to his fellow mages or loyal acolytes than he 
gives to other mere mortals. The label "Sleepers" 
separates a Tradition member from the mass 
of unAwakened humanity, and although that's 
pretty dismissive of the masses, it also reflects the 
principle of respect within the Council itself. 


The Sleepers 

Enlightenment's a funny thing: it 
can blind you to so-called little things 
like human suffering, yet it can also 
open your eyes and heart so wide that 
every bitofsuffering becomes an affront 
to life itself. And so, Council mages range 
from incredibly compassionate people who'll 
risk everything to soothe a stranger's pain, 
to war-machines who'll grind through an 
entire neighborhood because the residents 

will just get reincarnated anyway. 


Ideally, the Council was formed to 
protect the common people from rival 
sorcerers. To a point, that ideal involves 
more marketing than reality. Protocol 
declares, "Protect the Sleepers," so most 
Tradition members do. Beyond that, 
though, there's asense of responsibility 

to the unAwakened world, if only 
because the Council knows how much 
magick depends on people and their 
belief in it. 


Fallen Traditions? 


Although the Traditions stand firm in their apparent integrity, a persistent rumor has latched onto the group as a whole, 
making occasional rounds late at night, when inhibitionsloosen and secrets spill out: the Council Masters were Nephandi... 
and maybe they still ARE. 


Is it true? Probably not, but one never knows. It would certainly explain a few things: 


* The implosion of Doissetep, which certain mages (Hermetic and otherwise) believe came about when Master 
Porthos discovered proof of the Fallen infestation and so wiped the entire Chantry out of existence. Or maybe he was 
corrupt and someone ELSE took Porthos out. The muddled records leave too many questions and too few answers. 


The Ascension Warrior, who's often considered. a. Nephandus but who might, instead, have recognized the Fallen 
infiltration of Horizon and its Council and thus led an army against it. 


The betrayal of Horizon, which might or might not have been committed by an ambassador of the Hollow Ones. 
(See the sidebar Hollow Treachery? in Part IV, p. 201.) Perhaps he knew something that the Traditions refused 
to recognize. Maybe that "Technocratic invasion" was actually a purge. Stranger things have happened... 


The Helekar affair, for obvious reasons. Sure, the Chakravanti claim that Voormas was simply corrupt, not Fallen, 
but why trust them...? 


The Avatar Storm, because it would explain so much ifta bunch of Archmages had decided to cover their tracks by 
causing the greatest metaphysical cataclysm since the Great Flood. 


* The Second Massassa War, because damn, wasn't that convenient? 


And even if only some, or none, of these events happened in your chronicle, the various abuses for which Tradition 
Masters are infamous could certainly point to some degree of corruption at the Council's upper echelons. | mean, doesn't 
it seem odd that a pack of demigods with aspirations of greatness would throw lives and power at a futile crusade to 
bring back the Dark Ages? 


The lower levels are clearly not immune, either. Maybe it's the new Tradition membership that's riddled with corruption. 
After all, when someone takes everything you've ever believed in and then throws it in a shredder and tells you to just 
fucking DEAL with it, wouldn't you look for help and comfort anywhere you could find it? Desperate situations call for 
desperate measures, and the Devil doesn't look so bad when he offers you a leg up from the Abyss. 


It might be possible within your chronicle that the Nine Traditions are shot through with Nephandic corruption. A 
Technocracy-based chronicle could certainly work from that assumption, and a Disparate one could as well. An intriguing 
chronicle could be built from a joint venture between Tradition, Technocracy, and Disparate mages all working to root 
out Nephandic overlords within the Council of Nine. What sort of evidence could facilitate such an alliance, anyway... 
and how trustworthy could it be? Maybe the rumor of Nephandic infiltration is itself a Fallen tactic, meant to turn the 
Traditions against themselves. So many possibilities, so few definite answers... 


A theme of Nephandic corruption within the Nine Traditions takes expectations and drops them on their collective head. 
Even if the rumors are wrong, the very idea could have massive implications. As Part V of this chapter reveals, such 
machinations are certainly appropriate for the Fallen. And although Mage has always assumed that the Traditions were 
the good guys, since when has Mage ever been about taking things at face value? 


The Council generally frowns on coercion, too. Sleepers 
should be allowed to make their own decisions and find their 
own ways toward spiritual fulfillment. In the past, Tradition 
Masters have used their powers to compel belief or punish 
disobedience... and that past shames the Council as a whole. 
Especially for mages who come from cultures that have been 
oppressed and enslaved, the principle of free choice - even when 
that choice puts the Traditions on the wrong side of reality - is 
unshakable. "If we just forced the Sleepers to go along with 
us," goes the reasoning, "or simply drugged them until they 
followed our lead, we'd be no better than the Technocrats.” 


Magick 
Even though certain technomancers have issues with the 
term, the idea of magick forms one of the Council’s foundation 


principles. To most Traditionalists, magick is the Artand Science 
of transforming reality through Will and understanding. Though 
they often disagree about specific methods (in game terms, the 
focus; see the Tradition entries below, plus Chapters Six, (pp. 256- 
259), and Ten, (pp. 565-600), Tradition mages share a common 
belief: you change reality because you know you CAN. 


For want of a better term, they agree to call this belief 
“magick.” 


This belief has carried the Council through its many trials 
and divisions. Even now, when advanced technology rules the 
world, Tradition mages retain their faith in magick. Sure, they'll 
use their own conflicting terms to define it... or even, in the 
case of the Etherites and Virtual Adepts, shake their collective 
heads at such a ridiculous term. Still, magick is the Council’s 
core, the faith that unites it even beyond disaster. 


Chapter Five: Ascension Warriors 139 


Dv 7T 
f 


Ascension 

All those other elements lead to the bedrock upon which the 
Traditions stand: the ideal of Ascension. Though they all have 
different ideas about the specifics, Council members agree that 
an intersection of personal transcendence and the development 
of humanity is the highest aspiration of a mage. People deserve 
better than some wretched World of Darkness - more than 
sedation or oblivion. According to the Council, this broken 
shell of Creation cannot be the best we can achieve. And so - 
even when that ideal seems further away than ever before - the 
Traditions seek personal perfection and the betterment of man. 


Organization and Law 


Magick has laws. So do the Traditions. You can’t have a 
collection of nigh-on demigods working together for 500 years 
without some serious organization. And although many of the 
older customs have fallen by the wayside - some from disuse, 
others from necessity, and still others because they were relics 
that needed to get tossed - the Council still maintains a code 
of respect, cooperation, and - when necessary - consequences. 


For centuries, the Council operated along top-down lines: 


* Nine Primi- personal representatives for the Traditions 
- met in Horizon, the Council stronghold, providing 
the official governance for the Council as a whole. 


* Chantries and Horizon Realms provided homes for 
the various mages and acolytes within the Traditions. 
Some, like Doissetep, were ancient and powerful, and 
others, like the Spy's Demise, provided new blood. Each 
Chantry had at least one cabal or council that ran the 
place, although some of the larger ones were plagued 
with vicious rivalries for the leadership position. Most 
Chantries had at least a tangential connection to Nodes 
and Realms, and although many favored a particular 
environment, group, or viewpoint, the vast majority of 
them provided common ground for members of various 
Traditions. 


e Cabals formed within those Chantries, united by 
friendship, oaths, or common cause. Each cabal became 
aself-contained unit but usually answered - in turn - to 
the leaders of its Chantry, the Traditions of its members, 
and the Horizon Council that governed them all. 


When (and if...) Horizon and the powerful Chantries fell, 
the smaller Chantries and cabals were left largely to their own 
discretion. For better and worse, each cabal or Chantry wound 
up governing itself. With each mage and cabal becoming a law 
unto itself, the old hierarchies became meaningless. Only ideals 
and, yes, traditions kept the entire concept alive. 


As one might expect, the old hierarchies featured plenty 
of abuse. Powerful wizards literally got away with murder, and 
their younger or less powerful compatriots caught the brunt 
of punishment. However, the democratic ideals of the 19% 
and 20" centuries (along with the abuses that fostered them) 
undermine a lot of those original hierarchies, and the Council's 


140 Ma$e: The Ascension 20^ Anniversary Edition 


setbacks around the turn of the millennium took out most 
of the rest. During the early 2000s, the Traditions operated 
in a state of nearanarchy, observing the old protocols only as 
far as individual mages or cabals could enforce them. After a 
rather internecine period, the surviving mages pulled together 
a structure that, in theory, mixes the best elements of the old 
Council with necessary reforms and an eye toward the future, 
rather than old burdens from the past. 


Honorifics 


It’s an unwritten but understood law among Tradition 
mages: give the respect that your fellows have earned. This was 
especially important in the early days, when strangers from 
around the world forged an alliance despite rifts of sex, culture, 
creed, and language. In this new millennium, few mages 
care about such formality unless you’re a Hermetic magus, a 
Chorister, an Akashic, or somebody dealing with one of them. 
Still, it’s good idea to at least understand the established pecking 
order, especially when tradition is part of your identity. 


During the Grand Convocation of the 1400s, the Traditions 
established a number of shared ranks and titles. Like negotiating 
enemies, these founders bestowed honorifics upon one another 
and then respected those titles, and the people who'd earned 
them, accordingly. A man might speak a strange language, have 
a different skin color, and worship gods that seem like devils 
to you, but that man was still Master So-and-So, bani Such-and- 
Such. Your culture might notacceptwomen as equals, but if that 
woman was an Adept or Master of her Tradition, then she had 
earned the right to be your peer - possibly even your superior. 


In the days of colonial oppression, these titles, and the 
honors attached to them, allowed mages to work together 
without killing one another... most of the time, anyway. As a 
result, although those titles have fallen out of favor in recent 
years, Tradition members still use them in formal settings or 
when settling disputes. Even in this democratic age, there are 
practical reasons to ritualize respect. 


The Protocols and the Rule of Shade 


Magick without conscience is a terrible thing. In order 
to sidestep the worst excesses of wizard-tyrants (and to punish 
them when necessary), the Convocation established Tradition 
Protocols that would apply to all members equally. As with 
any set of laws, the “equally” part has turned out to be rather 
flexible over the years. Even so, the following rules have lasted 
over five centuries. Younger mages might snicker at the archaic 
verbiage, but the principles behind these laws are clear enough. 


Tradition mages who break minor Protocols are usually 
dealt with by their group’s elders. Serious violations, however, 
may be brought before a formal Tribunal. In the absence of strong 
organization and Master mages, such Tribunals are pretty rare, 
so serious offenders might simply be killed by their cabalmates 
if they step too far out of line. 


Respect those of Greater Knowledge. 


Considered to be common sense, this Protocol is based 
on the idea that knowledge is both value and power. 


Although many individual mages, and even some Traditions, treatthesetitles as optional formalities, the following honorifics 
provide an essential legacy of status and respect within the group as a whole. 


sion 


Primus: “First One;" refers both to the original founders of the Nine Traditions and the living representatives of those 
groups today. 


zr. 


Master: An accomplished magus whose skill, Arts, and perseverance have earned great respect among that mage's 
peers. Depending upon your metaplot, Masters might be few and far between these days. In Etherite terminology, a 
Doctor. 


Disciple: An established Tradition member who's demonstrated magickal skill. Known among Etherites as a capital-S 
Scientist. 


Apprentice: An aspiring mage who has not yet been accepted into a Tradition. 


acolyte: A loyal and appreciated mortal; also called an ally by mages who dislike the religious overtones of the 
formal rank. 
li 


The following titles don’t fit into the official hierarchy but describe a mage's status — or lack of same — within the Traditions. 
Because most of these terms are archaic, dismissive, or both, lots of mages don't use them at all. 


council, Council of Nir 
iva PET the faci 


cabal: A little Council — that is, a small group of mages who work together. 


Deacon: The founding member of a Chantry. Only Choristers and Hermetics employ this title, because its Christian 
tone makes it especially inappropriate for Traditions like the Verbena and Dreamspeakers. 


Sentinel: An allied mage who works around, and helps protect, a Chantry to which she doesn't officially belong. 


rogue: A former member of the Traditions or Technocracy who's turned mercenary. 


an insult (IT means | lesser and separare part j 


Orphan: Someone who appears to have Awakened on their own, has refused to join an established sect, or both. 
Often capitalized by Council members, the term's considered rather insulting among both ihe Traditions and the orphans 
themselves... especially if the orphan in question is actually a member of a Disparate sect. | pp. 214-21 


A Tutor's debt must be repaid. it, that student has his Avatar Branded. From that point onward, 
In the Hermetic Tradition, teachers expect regular tuition no reputable Tradition mage will teach the former pupil. 

in exchange for their time and expertise. Other groups handle 

things differently, but any student is expected to pay his or 

her debts. A pupil or apprentice who doesn’t honor those 

agreements is suspended from the program; if he ditches out Yes, wizards lie. Breaking formal oaths, however, is a serious 

without paying for the things he’s gained and gets caught doing matter. Without a stern Protocol to enforce such agreements, 


A mage’s Word is his Honor; 
break not a sworn Vow. 


Chapter Five: Ascension Warriors 


the Traditions would've fallen apart ages ago. More importantly, 
an oath is considered an act of magick in itself; to violate one 
disrespects the Arts. Liars tend to be shunned if and when they 
get caught. Oathbreakers are often Branded, even in the more 
permissive new millennium. 


The Will of an Oracle must always be obeyed. 
Yeah, right. Beyond the fact that few modern mages even 
believe that Oracles exist, this Protocol begs a simple question: 
what if that Oracle's an asshole? The Hermetic records clearly state 
that Oracular commands must be followed, but that law seems 
outdated - even dangerous - in the currentage. Although Censure 
is the official punishment for disloyalty, it's been over a century 
since the last recorded punishment for this sort of disobedience. 


Betray not your Cabal or Chantry. 
This might be the Council’s most unforgiveable sin. A 
mage who betrays her fellows is Branded, Ostracized, and very 


often killed. 


Conspire not with the enemies of Ascension. 

This is perhaps the second most serious offense, although 
“conspiring” and “enemy” are open to interpretation. Crisis 
makes for strange bedfellows, especially considering that the 
Sons of Ether and Virtual Adepts owe their membership to such 
conspiracies. Still, a mage who knowingly puts his companions 
at risk by dealing with the enemy can be Censured, Branded, 


142 Ma$e: The Ascension 20^ Anniversary Edition 


and even Ostracized. If the enemy in question is a Nephandus, 
the penalty could be Gilgul, death, or occasionally both. 


Protect the Sleepers; they know not what they do. 


As far as many Tradition members are concerned, this is 
the whole point of their organization. If every wizard has free 
rein to exploit the Sleepers, the Council's ideals are a sham. 
Most Council mages protect innocent people; those who don't 
do so... or who actively endanger them... tend to be shunned, 
Censured, or possibly worse. 


Be subtle in your Arts, lest others know you for 
what you are. 

This Rule ofShade isn'tone of the original Protocols; since the 
Burning Times, though, it’s been common sense. Some folks obey 
thisonemorethan others do, butgiven the prevalence of monitoring 
technology, video cameras, cell phones, and the dreaded YouTube 
post, a flashy wizard’s basically writing her own death warrant. 


Crimes and Punishments 

For centuries, the Council has employed a graduated scale of 
crimesand punishments. Low Crimes involve minor social infractions 
(cowardice, deceit, laziness, lechery, disrespect, and online Lameness) 
and acts of petty theft, assault, or damage. High Crimes deal with 
serious offenses against Sleepers, the Council, or both: murder, 
sexual abuse or violation, betrayal, oathbreaking, Infernalism, and 
major cases of cruelty, theft, or property destruction. 


The first category tends to be enforced by individuals within 
a cabal, Chantry, or Tradition, usually with compensation 
(fines and favors), minor mystic Branding, Censure (a stern 
official reprimand), social shunning, ordeals, or perhaps a 
simple but memorable beatdown from one's fellow wizards - 
see Certámen, below. 


High Crimes warrant formal Tribunals, serious legal 
procedures, and severe punishments like Indenture (forced 
servitude), Ostracism (exile), lasting Brands, death, Gilgul (the 
destruction of the Avatar), and - at worst - a combination of 
those punishments. 


Especially in the expanded role of laws within the new 
millennium, the many levels of Tradition justice reach far 
beyond the scope of this book. The Book of Secrets sourcebook 
features a more detailed treatment of crimes and punishments 
under Council law. 


Certamen: 
The Wizards’ Duel 


To sort out differences between Council mages, there’s 
certámen: a formal mystic duel in which disputing mages work 
out their conflicts through ritualized battle. A custom dating 
back to medieval Hermetic traditions, certámen provided an 
honorable method for resolving problems with minimal damage. 
Sadly, the old, classical form of certamen (described in Chapter 
Nine) was rendered more or less unworkable around the turn 
of the millennium. Between the loss of Horizon Realms and 
the disappearance or death of the old Masters, that form of 
dueling has had to change. 


Drawn from the Latin word for “duel,” certamen remains 
an accepted method for resolving the Tradition equivalent of 
lawsuits. In the mortal realm, however, the old, high-magick 
style of ritual combat has given way to riddle contests; non-fatal 
physical sparring matches; occult trivia contests; tests of strength, 
endurance, or focus; and other competitions that avoid both 
bodily harm and magickal pyrotechnics. Subtle, mystic contests 
like lighting a candle or ringing a bell with concentration rather 
than technology remain popular as well. The old-school wizard 
duels, though, are just too vulgar for Earthly use. 


During the Council's wild years, certámen was as much 
a sport as a legal procedure. Depending upon your chosen 
metaplot's events, such vulgar contests might not be possible 
these days. Regardless of the metaplots, however, new 
millennium certámen duels tend to be more subtle - and more 
dangerous - than the vulgar spectacles of old. 


Ideally, a certámen match resolves disputes without 
physical injury, mental illness, or collateral damage. The two 
disputing parties step into the ritual space after wagering 
certain stakes or concessions on the outcome. In most cases 
involving a legal challenge (as opposed to a match done for 
sport or practice), the losing party issues a formal apology 
to the victor, pays out reparations, or performs some agreed- 
upon service for the winning party. In extreme cases, the 
loser may be exiled from her Chantry, though this happens 
in only the most severe disputes. As a matter of etiquette, 


the victor keeps whatever Quintessence she has absorbed in 
the duel. The loser, of course, loses whatever Quintessence 
she had staked on the outcome. 


For serious disputes, a certámen match might be fought 
"to the pain" or even - rarely - to the death. In such duels, all 
parties agree to hold the winner blameless of Assault, Cruelty, 
or Murder, so long as those crimes are committed only during 
the duel itself. A cheater, however, could be held accountable 
for Betrayal, especially if said cheating results in injury or death. 
Such intense certámen matches are rare, especially in the new 
millennium. Doissetep used to host deadly duels quite often, 
but those excesses are now considered yet another symptom 
of that Chantry's corruption. 


Various Traditions have their own forms of certámen, too: 
prayer or singing contests for the Celestial Chorus, flame wars for 
the Virtual Adepts, ordeals for shamans and witches, martial arts 
battles for Akashics and other fightertypes, tests ofscholasticism and 
knowledge for the academic set, and so on. Certain Ecstastics have 
even been known to have Truth or Dare sessions that really test the 
limits of each participant. Most of these methods lack the spectacle 
of a serious certámen match; that said, they're also far less likely to 
attract Paradox, Technocrats, or other kinds of cops. 


(For the game systems involved in wizard duels and old- 
form certámen matches, see the Magickal Duels section in 
Chapter Nine, pp. 430-434.) 


A Vibrant Future? 


Despite their name, the Traditions adapt to circumstances. 
In the wake of the 1990s, the Council has been forced to adapt 
once again. 


The Sphinx 


Shortly after Horizon’s devastation (again, assuming that 
it happened to begin with), the Traditions fall into disarray. 
With most Masters vanished or fled to seclusion, the younger 
mages find themselves stranded without leadership or direction. 
Ascension, then, seems like a cruel joke, and the remaining 
Tradition mages aren’t laughing. 


And then the transmissions begin. 


Enigma takes you where dogma cannot. We do not create the 
Path to Ascension; we explore it. 


In a flurry of communications, this message starts 
appearing, usually linked to some mysterious clues about 
secretive matters. Manifesting in various forms - graffiti, tape 
recordings, letters, emails, billboards, overheard whispers, TV 
commercials, newscasts, even commercials no one sees except 
the intended recipient - these transmissions originate around 
2002. Most, if not all, of these transmissions feature the image 
of a sphinx: the hybrid riddle-maker of Greek mythology and 
Egyptian statuary. Shortly after each transmission is received, 
the image begins to disappear. As for the messages themselves, 
they arrive clean, untraceable by any method of technology or 
magick. Each transmission seems to be tailored to its original 
recipient, peppered with riddles, hints, and the apparently 
universal message about enigma, dogma, and the exploration 


Chapter Five: Ascension Warriors 43 


B No 7^: 


a 


A 


ak 


Future Fates: The. Sphinx 


As portrayed in the sourcebook Transmissions from the Rogue Council, the Sphinx and its origins are intentional 
mysteries, meant to remain unsolved. In that spirit, Mage 20 does not provide an official solution to the riddle. Thus, a 


Mage Storyteller has the following options: 


* The Sphinx abides: It’s still out there, still sending transmissions, and still unknown. Your players might receive 
transmissions from the entity called the Sphinx, but its ultimate nature — though obviously helpful — remains mysterious. 


As before, it is whatever you want it to be. 


The Sphinx has been revealed: The party or parties behind the transmissions has been discovered or has revealed 
itself. Maybe it was the old Council, an Umbral entity, or whatever else you want it to have been. Or perhaps the 
transmissions simply stopped, and this riddle of the Sphinx remains unsolved. Either way, the Sphinx and its messages 
are past history by 2014, though they might have laid the groundwork for the renewed Council of Nine Traditions. 


WhatSphinx? Whether because Horizon neverfell or becausethe transmissions neverappeared, the Sphinx metaplot 
never occurred. Maybe it'll show up in later adventures or remain a rumor in certain corners of the Awakened world. 
The game-changing elements of the transmissions and their source, however, have no effect upon your chronicle. 


Mage 20's New Horizon Council assumes the firstor second options. Although the Sphinx itself might remain mysterious, 
its influence has nurtured the formation of a new Council to replace the old, theoretically retaining its strengths and 
avoiding the previous flaws. In option #3, of course, the Rogue Council never formed, so the Traditions could maintain 
their old Horizon-led form, remain divided and besieged, or have transitioned to a newer state thanks to other guiding 
circumstances. Either way, the Traditions, in some form or other, endure. 


of Ascension. Thanks to the sphinx design, the sender of these 
transmissions is quickly dubbed the Sphinx. 


Who is, or was, the Sphinx? More than a decade after the 
transmissions first appeared, no one really knows. 


Because those transmissions favor the Nine Traditions, 
recipients assume that the Sphinx is a Tradition Archmaster, 
a collection of Masters, one or more Oracles, the lost Horizon 
Council, or some entitysympathetic to the Traditions as a whole. 
Not all of the recipients, though, are Tradition mages. Certain 
transmissions are sent to Technocrats, orphans, or Disparates, 
and a few manifest to Sleepers. All of them contain a certain 
degree of helpful information, but they suggest courses of action 
thatoften seem dangerous, radical, destructive, or even suicidal. 


The Rogue Council and Panopticon 

The faceless nature of the Sphinxand its concealed motivations, 
lead certain mages to distrust its influence. Other mages, cheered 
by its hopeful attitude, embrace the Sphinx with nearfanatical 
devotion. The majorityof Tradition mages takeaskeptically optimistic 
approach, following the Sphinx’s guidance but watching for traps 
and hidden agendas. The phrase Rogue Council starts to make the 
rounds, possibly inspired by the idea that a cabal of the old Masters 
or a new group is taking charge of the Traditions again. 


Given the old Council’s excesses and stagnation, certain 
parties are less than thrilled with the idea of some shadowy 
council returning to the old ways. A Technocratic group called 
Panopticon forms in an effort to track down and stamp out the 
Sphinx and its devotees. Within the Traditions, three groups 
come together to support the Rogue Council, oppose it, or 
continue a wait-and-see attitude until more data appears: 


* The Emissaries craft a Rogue Council Manifesto that 
affirms the old Council’s ideals while embracing new 


144 Mage: The Ascension 20" Anniversary Edition 


levels of freedom, greater diversity, and an acceptance of 
technology as a valid tool in Ascension’s quest. Picking 
up the militant elements of the Ascension War, these 
Emissaries follow the Sphinx’s directions and begin 
attacking Technocracy strongholds, undermining 
Nephandi schemes, and uniting Tradition cabals under 
the banner of the New Horizon Council. Roughly 
a decade after the Manifesto’s publication, the new 
Council is up and running, its agendas guided by, but 
not dependent upon, the Sphinx and its transmissions. 


The Guardians remain skeptical about, or downright 
hostile toward, the Sphinx and its covert agenda. 
Protecting what little they have left and dedicated to 
their individual priorities, these mages take a wary 
view of the Emissaries and their Manifesto. Some have 
lost friends to the Sphinx’s machinations, and others 
see an ominous mystery behind the entire ruse. These 
willworkers refuse to join the New Horizon Council, 
either out of loyalty to the “true Horizon” or from sheer 
suspicion about the Rogue Council’s aims. 


The Fencers mediate between both extremes, keeping 
an eye out for traps while accepting the helpful nature 
of the Sphinx. These mages might join the New Horizon 
group, but they remain cautious about the ultimate 
source of its inspiration. 


Meanwhile, Panopticon continues to chase the Sphinx 
and its devotees, without firm or conclusive victories. Using 
old-school Ascension War tactics, this group devotes itself to 
wipingsuch residual Reality Deviance off the books, clearing 
the way for a new and more efficient future. (For details, see 
the Technocratic Union section, later in this chapter.) 


Ss 


re 
T 


Is the Sphinx a holdover from the Ascension War? Could 
it be leading the way toward a fresh approach to Ascension, 
without the clutter of past ages? Is the whole thing a trap for the 
Traditions, or has the lost Horizon Council found a way to defy 
entropy in its quest to create a vibrant new age for Ascension? 


As its name suggests, the Sphinx affair is a riddle whose 
ultimate solution has yet to be revealed... 


The New Horizon Council? 


Thoseoriginal Traditionswerea Eurocentricconglomeration 
of forced identities and awkward compromises. Following the 
collapse of the old Council's stronghold in Horizon (assuming 
thatthe collapse occurred), the Traditions scattered, regrouped, 
and staged a “New Horizon Convocation” in Los Angeles toward 
the end of 2001 as a trap to catch and butcher their opponents. 
(See the Revised-edition Book of Madness, Mage Storyteller's 
Handbook, and Ascension). In the aftermath, the revitalized 
Traditions elected new leaders and began establishing new 
Protocols and a fresh start. 


As the Council strides into the second decade of the 
new millennium, its Traditions follow the dynamic spirit of 
the times, perhaps forging a New Horizon Council that reflects 
the current era. Certain changes have already taken hold, and 
others shift in accord with work and circumstance. 


Ultimately, this New Horizon Council is an optional 
metaplot development. Certain changes have already been 
incorporated into Mage 20's treatment of the Traditions, and 
others are still pending. If you choose to stick with a "classic- 
style" Mage chronicle, you can either ignore the New Horizon 
elements or use, change, or discard them as you see fit. If, 
however, you want to bring Mage into the new millennium, 
the following changes reflect the Council's adjustments in this 
dynamic and unpredictable age. 


* TheAkashayana: Renouncing the innate chauvinism of 
its westernized name, the Akashic Brotherhood formally 
adopts its insider name as the default form of address. AII 
references to "brothers" are purged in favor of the name 
Akashayana, which also acknowledges the group's pan- 
Asian elements over its previous China-centric veneer. 


* TheCelestial Chorus: In the new millennium, the Chorus 
focuses on righteous deeds rather than religious adherence. 
Shaking free of corrupt religious institutions, Choristers 
embrace the more nomadic role of kind pilgrims in the 
mode of Jesus and his followers. Despite this Christian 
influence, however, the Chorus embraces monotheists 
from every spiritual path... up to and including certain 
Divinity-isOne neopagans. 


The Chakravanti: Striking the entire notion of death from 
theirname, this revitalized Tradition returns to its Sanskrit 
roots. Once again, the Tradition defines itself by the Great 
Cycle, or Wheel - not by mortality but by renewal. In 
place of their previous morbidity, many Chakravanti favor 
bright colors that combine Indian dye-work and Mexican 
Día de los Muertos decorations, balancing the recognition 


of death with the vitality of life. 


The Kha'vadi: Abandoning its "slave name," the 
Dreamspeaker Tradition assumes its longtime "spirit 
title" as the group's official honorific. No longer 
"dreamers" but "speakers," the Kha'vadi position 
themselves as the collective voice of oppressed cultures 
and forgotten spirits, bringing new visions to a 
contaminated world. 


The Order of Hermes: Trusting the stability of their 
venerable Arts, the Hermetics retain that Tradition's 
emphasis on discipline, merit, and excellence. Even so, 
the new Masters avoid the stifling hubris of the previous 
generation, preferring Hermes the Wise Trickster over 
Hermes the Revered Master. 


Mercury/ Hermes as the God of All-Space, the Elite 
shuck old-school cyberpunk in favor of being everywhere 
at once and yet nowhere for long. 


The Sahajiya: Realizing that a "Cult of Ecstasy" is not 
being taken seriously, the Ecstatic Tradition reverts 
to its older name, whose meaning - "the Naturals" - 
reflects the group's embrace of human passions, natural 
cycles, postmodern neotribalism, and rejection of the 
Technocratic civilization process. 


The Society of Ether: It finally happens! With many of 
its old Masters dead, the Etherian Tradition dumps its 
sexist name to pursue a romantic futurism for everyone. 


The Verbenae: The witch-folk remain perhaps the 
most militant Tradition, combining their romantic 
primitivism with urbanized technopaganism. Revitalized 
by the popularity of fantasy and neotribal subcultures, 
the group tightens its alliance with the Kha’vadi and 
Sahajiya, crafting a global network of activist "tribes" 
that undermines the Technocratic hold. 


The Colony 

This New Horizon Council has been shaping a stronghold 
in the Southern Alps of New Zealand's wilderness - close 
enough to civilization to be accessible to mages from around 


* The Mercurial Elite: The outdated concept of being 
"virtual" makes way for the changeable technomysticism 
of the Mercurials. Adopting a play on words that reflects 


capriciousness, mutability, and the recognition of 


Mage: The Ascension 20" Anniversary Edition 


= 4 


the world, yet remote enough to stay under the Technocratic 
radar. Disguised as a movie studio called Colony Filmworks, this 
"new Horizon" is gradually being shaped from a combination 
of natural materials, high-tech capabilities, and Quintessence 
drawn froma series of natural Nodes that have remained largely 
untapped. Even so, the Colony (as it's often known) is still a 
work in progress, its materials and support carefully filtered in 
so as not to catch the Technocratic gaze. 


Connected to other Chantries across the world, the 
Colony has portals to several Earthly and Otherworldly 
locations, as well as a backdoor into the Digital Web. This 
effort, however, is far less grand than either Horizon or 
Doissetep. The New Horizon Council has learned its lesson. If 
and when the Traditions regain their old power, this council 
intends that said power will be used more wisely than it had 
been before. 


Nineseats have been setaside for new Primi representatives 
when the time is right. As of 2014, however, those seats remain 
unfilled. The elections that decide the Council's fresh leadership 
have yet to be decided. Who stands to represent the New 
Horizon Council, then? 


As with so many elements of Mage 20, that decision rests 
with you... 


Tradition Descriptions 


The following two-page spreads present the Traditions in an 
easy to follow format. The sections dealing with the Technocracy 
and Disparates feature the same type of organization, with a 
few obvious differences. 


* Overview: An overall impression of the group, its history, 
and the sort of person who’s drawn to this sect. 


ERES: 


Organization: A brief look at the sect's overall 
organization. 


Initiation: A glance at the hoops a new member must 
jump through in order to join the sect. 


Affinity Spheres: TheSphere mostoften associated with 
the group's training and specialization. In the Council's 
old days, each Tradition held a seat based on that 
Sphere; given recent, intervening events, however, this 
may not be true anymore. Training in the 21* century 
is more eclectic and personalized than it used to be, 
so the secondary Spheres are also available as Affinity 
Spheres. In any case, a new character gets only one of 
these Spheres as his Affinity Sphere. (For further details 
about character creation, see Chapter Six.) 


Focus: The group's overall approach to magickal beliefs, 
practices, and tools. These paradigms and practices, however, 
are NOT exclusive. Many mages within a group pursue 
a mixture of different beliefs, practices, and tools that 
suit each individual’s beliefs. For details, see Focus and 
the Arts, Chapter Ten, (pp. 565-600). 


Stereotypes: Every group assumes it holds the keys to 
the One True Way. This entry shows what a typical 
member of the group might say about other Awakened 
sects. Assume that all factions share a reflexive hatred 
and fear of the Fallen and the Mad. That doesn’t 
mean that every mage within a given group will flee or 
attack Nephandi or Marauders on sight, though; some 
individuals might find those mages quite attractive, or 
at the very least sympathetic. The official word on both 
groups, however, is simple: stay away when possible, and 
kill whenever necessary. 


Our eng strive to &eoA]] thé hapon 


Harmory is found in the flow of What Is. To 
attune one’s self to that flow is so simple 
that it can take lifetimes to master. It is, 
perhaps, the lot of man to strive against that 
flow; certainly, the modern world is filled 

with distractions from such purposes. And 

so, the Akashayana, commonly known as the 
Akashic Brotherhood, seek harmony in a world 
filled with chaos. 


Deeply misunderstood among the Council as “peaceful 
warriors,” devotees of the Akashayana Sangha ("Order ofthe Vehicle 
of Akasha”) strengthen their bodies to cultivate their minds - and, 
by extension, the Sphere of Mind - in their pursuit of harmony. 
And yet, harmony often demands conflict. Just as the strings ofan 
instrument must be struck before they can vibrate harmoniously, 
so too has the Brotherhood endured millennia of war. In the 
process, the Akashayana refined Do (“the Way," pronounced doe), 
the primal martial art from which all others descend. 


es 


Do, however, ismore than merewar techniques. Encompassing 
arange of spiritual practices from tea ceremonies to Tantric union, 
Do focuses a person’s essence, form, and intentions. Through 
relentless training, thestudent (or Akashi) develops the concentration 
he needs in order to discern the essential dissatisfaction of Samsara, 
the perpetual cycle or flow of existence. A Harmonious Brother (an 
honorific used regardless of the mage’s gender) strives to help all 
beings realize samadhi (enlightenment, Ascension) and liberate each 
Bodhicitta (Avatar) from the cycle of rebirth. 


Despite some misperceptions, the Akashayana did not 
originate in China. In a Time Before Time, humanity’s world 
was a single Mount Meru; there, the Meru’ai people lived in 
harmony. It’s been said that the Celestines Dragon, Tiger, 
and Phoenix taught the Meru’ai the disciplines that would 
become Do. Eventually, however, the imperfections of this 
world sundered Mount Meru from its celestial foundations, 
scattering the Meru’ai throughout the mountainous region 


Mage: The Ascension 20" Anniversary Edition 


i ouk souls lu ey before we weke born 


later called Tibet. From there, they supposedly brought their 
language and ways to India, Nepal, China, and points east. 
Those origins have followed them wherever they go. 


Over the millennia, countless teachers - notably Gautama 
Buddha, “the Awakened One” - have incorporated elements 
of Do into Buddhism, Taoism, Shinto, hatha yoga, and folk 
medicine. Akashi helped build Shaolin Temple and Angkor 
Wat; they overthrew tyrants, and their monasteries reached 
across Asia from Nepal to the Ryukyu Islands. In modern times, 
echoes of their teachings have spread worldwide. 


Today, any mindful Brother can relive this entire history 
to better understand the cycle of continual remanifestation. 
The shunyata (primal emptiness) that underlies all things holds 
karmic traces of all past thoughts and actions. This imprint 
has several names -Merumandala, Akashakarma, the Universal 
Consciousness, shared memory, and more; modern Brothers, 
though, call it the Akashic Record. A quiet mind, freed of 
ego, can sense the Record, in which all consciousness joins 
in a single stream. Once immersed in Akashic mindspace, a 
seeker's awareness helps him parse the collective memories of 
Akashayana throughout history. 


That history includes awful times: the Himalayan Wars 
against the early Chakravanti; conquests and revolutions; the 
sect’s murderous rivalries with the Wu Lung, Dalou-aoshi, 
and rival Akashic groups; the Boxer Rebellion and its opium- 
trade beginnings; Mongol invasions and Kamikaze Wars; the 
Screaming Ghost Purge and Mao Zedong's Great Leap Forward. 
Akashics have trained samurai and disemboweled themselves 
for honor; they've raised katars with the Rajput, stormed the 
Forbidden City, starved in Pol Pot's Killing Fields, and turned 
to ash at Hiroshima. The outer calm of an Akashic masks deep 
pains and passions from every age and every conflict, and the 
dreadful karma from those times lingers even now. 


Several constants link all Akashi, regardless of culture: 
discipline, which the study of Do demands; empathy, nurtured 


by connection with the Akashic Record; fitness, honed by the body, andsubdue emotional confusion. Asian alchemy, craftwork, 
pursuit of Do; respect, sharpened by intense apprenticeships; faith, yoga, social dominion, and martial arts training allow a 
and focus, without which one cannot attain even the most Brother to channel life energy (chi) toward astounding feats of 
limited understanding of Do. Across the globe, they share the physical, mental, and energetic achievement. Asa result, common 
same terminology even when divided into different groups. The paradigms include Bring Back the Golden Age, Everything's an 
popularity of martial arts culture has brought many initiates Illusion, It's All Good, and occasionally Might is Right. 

to the Akashic Path; sadly, the modern world's 
various distractions make this a difficult Path 
for all but the most dedicated aspirants. 


Today, the Akashayana face a bizarre & 
challenge: theirancientenemies, the Wu 
Lung, seem to have chosen the Akashic 
way. Although the Brotherhood remains 
wary aboutthis alliance, the Tradition's 
compassionate ethic encourages the 
Akashayana to give their old rivals a 
chance. To cope with that decision, 
though, some folks say today’s Akashics 
will need what their Tradition has 
seldom prized and rarely cultivated: 
imagination. 


Organization: The Brotherhood 
is essentially led by the Kannagara, 
monastic ascetics of the Phoenix Robe 
sect. Today, however, lots of power 
resides with the Shi-Ren (“Benevolent 
Aristocracy’), a faction of politically active 
traditionalists who want to expand Akashic 
influence in world affairs. Tradition mages 
in the West most often encounter warriors of 
the Vajrapani (derisively called “Warring Fists”) 
and the eclectic iconoclasts of the Li-Hai, who 
seek enlightenment through heroic experience. 


Initiation: At temples, ashrams, and dojos 
across the world, Sifus (Masters) and Sihings (Adepts) 
accept disciples who display open minds and serious 
purpose. Each teacher typically teaches only one 
pupilatatime. Akashic doctrine maintains that every 
person must find his or her way to enlightenment; 
as a result, Akashayana receive very little guidance or 
encouragement. Many frustrated pupils give up on this 
Path; those who persist, however, cultivate impeccable 
fitness of mind, heart, and body. 


Affinity Spheres: Mind or Life 


Focus: “Magick” is actually selfperfection and cosmic 
harmony. To master such Arts in the proper Way (Do), a person 
must expand awareness in all things, clarify thoughts, focus the 


Stereotypes Lu 
Fellow Traditions: The engaging illusions they construct distract them from the transcendence they strive to achieve. | 


The Technocracy: Metal dragons in a stifling box. 


The Disparates: Lost children and broken relations... yet there's more to them than there might seem. 


Chapter Five: Ascension Warriors 149 


DISSONANCE IS NOT THE ABSENCE OF HARMONY, MERELY A HARMONY 


THAT NEEDS TO BE ADJUSTED UNTIL THESONG RINGS TRUE. 


Heretics and idealists from the world's 

monotheistic creeds, the embattled Celestial 

Chorus heeds thevoice ofthe Divine. Allliving 

beings, conjured and animated by the One - 

bywhatever name that One is known - can join 

that Song and shape Creation. Defying their 

varied orthodoxies, Choristers teach thattheSong 

has many harmonies. À person of faith can hear itand approach 

the One through different creeds. And for their tolerance, the 
Singers have endured a bloodied history of martyrdom. 


Chorister liturgies tell of unity and division, triumph and 
heartbreak. The oldest plainsongs recount the First Age, the 
Shattering, when the One's pure unity was broken, and the First 
Singers, mortal heroes of boundless faith, who confronted and 
subdued the broken spirits of flawed entities. Pentatonic chants 
resurrected from Egypt's 18th Dynasty recall the blind priest Mentu- 
hetep, who brought Pharaoh Amenhotep IV to the worship of 
the Sun god, Aton. The Pharaoh’s city, Akhetaten; his new name, 
Ikhnaton; his fellow worshippers, the Sacred Congregation, of 
disparate lands yet living in harmony - of all these things and more 
the Chorus sings. Then their chant becomes a dirge: jealous priests 
of the old faith destroyed Ikhnaton’s city and tried to wipe him 
from history. The Congregation dispersed across the Middle East. 


And then, a rising melody, its counterpoint low and dark: 
For 16 centuries, diverse and fractious groups of Congregants 


grew in strength. First came Mithraic mystery cultists, guarded by 
Roman shields; later, after the Christ’s Ascension, a sect called 
the Messianic Voices. To suppress corruption in the nascent 
Roman Church, Messianic mage Claudius Dediticius founded 
his Knights of Archangel Gabriel, Messenger of God. He could 
not have imagined that the Gabrielites would eventually become 
the Cabal of Pure Thought, forerunners of the Technocracy’s 


New World Order. 


Discordant notes herald the War Song: through simony and 
indulgences, king-making and cruelty, the Cabal amassed temporal 
power. Its rigid ways and rampant abuses, such as the barbarous 
Albigensian Crusade, drove away “heretical” magi. During the 
Western Schism, these Antinomians fostered new movements: 
Waldensians, Hussites, and the Heresy of the Free Spirit. They reached 
out to like-minded spirits in Isma ‘ili Islam and the Bektashi Order; 
to the Majestic Kings of the Zoroastrians; even to the Hindu 
nationalist scholar-warriors, the Vishnudharadhara (“Vishnu’s 
Sword”). Such ecumenism was heretical, but Antinomians knelt 
to no Earthly authority, whether Church or State. And for this, 
they were hunted. The flames of the Inquisition burned hot. 
Meanwhile, in wars of words among themselves and of magick 
against Hermetics and the witch-folk, the Congregants faltered... 
if never in devotion, then certainly in progress. 


A new harmony: Valoran, a French bishop hiding from the 
Inquisition, reunited the Messianic Voices and made peace with 


Stereotypes 


Fellow Traditions: “My Father’s home hath many chambers.” Though | might not understand them all... might even, 


God forgive me, hate a few... | choose to remember that we all receive Divinely guided grace. 


The Technocracy: Traitors to Grace who imprison the world with mechanical cacophony. 


The Disparates: Lost souls, one and all. 


150 Ma$e: The Ascension 20^ Anniversary Edition 


the Pagans. In 1461, with their gravest breaches healed, Congregants from every 
( A monotheistic faith presented a unified face to the Council of Nine as the Cheeur Céleste. 


Slow descending chords: as the Order of Reason rose, the new Chorus declined 
through persecution, massacres, and intolerance. To divide and conquer, the Cabal 
- and later the NWO and Syndicate - fostered centuries of culture war among the 
Fe westernfaiths. And though fundamentalism strengthens the Chorus’ paradigm (many 
Sleepers still believe in miracles), it also destroys the message of divine unity. 


vont (br 


AY estates of 


\ 


at 
An no ui 
NS 


P" Even so, Choristers still preach that message. More to the point, they live it. Among the 
Traditions, the Chorus is perhaps the most compassionate... and it certainly speaks loudest, 
as a whole, for the welfare of the Masses. Although certain members can be fanatical, not 
even the primitivist Singers are religious fundamentalists in the way Sleepers understand 
that term. To hear more than the simplest notes of the Song - and then survive within 
the Council - a Chorister must transcend dogma and embrace faith. With regards to 

stickier theological nuances (the gender of Divinity, the limits of tolerance, the roles 

of Christ and the Prophet in the Divine plan, that sort of thing), modern Choristers 
À deliberately avoid taking an official stance. There's plenty of tension in the ranks as a 
DE Y -^ result, but at least no one's getting burned alive over it anymore! 


It's not all peace and love, of course. Old wounds linger between this 

group and its companions. Out of necessity and faith, the Chorus still 

wrangles with this tricky alliance, debating where and when to draw 

lines with "friends" who practice loathsome Arts. Still, che Tradition's 

visionaries present the Council with proof of what united 

tolerance can bring. "We Sing in harmony," they insist, "and 
so might we all." 


Organization: Hierarchical since the Roman Republic, 
the Chorus is led by its Curia, a 17-member synod of 
Chancellors and associated finance officers, tribunes, 
notaries, and liturgical commissioners. The most respected 
(orbestconnected) Chancellor holdsthe ceremonial position 

1. of Pontifex Maximus. Each Chancellor commands a 

) N territorial staff of Exarchs, sometimes called bishops. 

LI V Exarchs supervise local leaders called Presbyters (priests 
or elders), who present this Tradition's human face. 


Initiation: Presbyters seek recruits through social 
outreach in church organizations. Some worshippers 
spontaneously Awaken through powerful religious 
experiences, particularly those involving music. Each new 
apprentice, or Catechumen, undertakes rigorous instruction from 
an experienced mage called a Praecept. Like many forms of 
religious training, this instruction involves matters of doctrine, 
personal discipline, and - obviously - lots of singing lessons. 


Affinity Spheres: Prime; Forces or Spirit. 


Focus: TheArtsflownotfrom personalachievementor 
intent but from faith, unity, and harmony with the Divine 
Will. Singing - especially many voices joined in harmony 
- provides this Tradition's oldest and most important 
instrument. Chorister magick tends to manifest in light, 
fire, warmth, harmonic vibrations, and sublime music. 
Faith and High Ritual form the core of Celestial Chorus 
practices, so the group’s paradigms include Creation 
is Divine and Alive, Divine Order and Earthly Chaos, 
and, of course, It's All Good — Have Faith. 


Chapter Five: Ascension Warriors ISI 


LIES J GET, BUT MOST POOR Bis 


NEVER GET DIST THE WRAPPING PAPER. 


p 


Consciousness is both a playground and 
a trap. Infinite in possiblity yet limited 
by necessity, the human mind is the seat 
of everything real... at least as far as human 
beings are concerned, anyway. And so, the 
Ecstatic Tradition expands reality by expanding 
consciousness. If you rearrange perceptions, they 
believe, you also rearrange potential. 


To members of this “cult,” magick flows from altered 
consciousness. A mind unfettered is a mind released from limitations 
and thus capable of anything. Because consciousness depends upon 
limitations in order to function, though, a mage must be able to 
slide in and out of an open state. Thus, Ecstatics have crazy eyes and 
eccentric manners that seem compelling yet frightening. 


Despite their image as snuggly hippie-kids, Ecstatics can 

be the scariest mages around. For starters, they're intense and 

| unpredictable. Many are not, as the saying goes, good with 

| 7 | boundaries, and they tend to say and do inappropriate things, 

—3*' | like kissing enemies and laughing at pain. They're reckless 

by normal standards and often pull stunts that unAwakened 

| ! folks could not survive. Passion is a sacrament they indulge 

| to exciting and often uncomfortable extremes. “Extreme,” 

| in fact, is a good way to sum these mages up. They are, by 

| definition, ex: outside, beyond, no longer a part of what has 
| come before or after. 


Often linked with the 1960s - perhaps the high point of this 
group sinfluence- ecstasyisamongtheoldestPaths on Earth. Primal 
humans, according to Cult lore, ate psychedelic mushrooms and 
thus opened the conflux between spirit, animal, and Homo sapiens. 
Even now, Ecstatics see themselves as living gateways between flesh, 
spirit, and imagination, bound to all three and transcending each; in 
honor oftheir ancestors, many employ entheogens - drugs that "open 
the god within" - not as vices but as tools of sacred illumination. 


Since those origins, Ecstatic mages have lived beyond the 
boundsofrespectability, devotees ofa Left-Hand Path thatembraces 
sex, drugs, music, dance, pain, pleasure, risk, and even death in 
the name of divine madness. Seers and shamans, rake-hells and 
prophets, these mages run with Sleepers who aren't afraid to go 
beyond. And yet, largely thanks to their reliance on extremity, 
Council Ecstatics have powerful ethics. The Code of Ananda - the 
Cult's commandments - forbids these mages from forcing their 
Path on unwilling partners. “Passions,” the Code declares, "are the 
seat of the Self, and if they bleed, so too does the Soul." 


More than their esoteric peers, Ecstatics enjoy the company 
of unAwakened folks. Challenging Sleepers to shake off that 
sleep, these mages favor art, music, and bohemian and neotribal 
subcultures - environments where they can reward courage and 
inspire creativity. For a while, especially during its psychedelic 
heyday, this Tradition wore its "cult" monikerwith pride. Recently, 
though, many Ecstatics have begun to feel limited by that flippant 


Stereotypes 


Fellow Traditions: A bunch of tight-assed academics who're often scared to push beyond the obvious limits of their 
disciplines and embrace everything they could be on the other side of those expectations. 


The Technocracy: Abominations of the human condition, and the source of almost everything wrong today. 


The Disparates: | don’t blame them for wanting their freedom. Too bad it’s cost them almost everything else... 


152 Ma$e: The Ascension 20^ Anniversary Edition 


name. Cults have deluded, sinister implications in the popular 
imagination, so the group starts to favor its old title, Sahajiya (sa- a 
HA-jee-AH, or “the Naturals”), as the new millennium dawns. P 


Organization: Informal and nomadic, this Tradition’s 
loose structure reflects its focus on individual transcendence. 
It has several subsects but few leaders as such. Cultists tend 4 
to congregate at festivals, raves, concerts, and other tribal 
gatherings, mingling with “sleepwalkers” who tread the line 
between Sleeper culture and full Awakening. For the most part, 
this group favors influence over organization. Each Ecstatic is 
encouraged to follow his or her own Path, so long as that Path 
doesn’t violate the sacred nature of other people. The only rigid 
element in the Sahajiya Path is the Code of Ananda and its emphasis 
on compassionate respect. Everything else is negotiable. 


Initiation: Five Steps to Ecstasy: 1: Surrender your fear; 2: Focus 
your intentions; 3. Open yourself; 4. Attune yourself; 5: Repeat 
Step 1. To help a new Ecstatic into Step 1, a mentor challenges 
that person to leap beyond his fears and then use his intentions 
to fly instead of fall. Diksham - the mentor/ student covenant - 
provides a safe space for the initiate to learn magick and control. 
Often, mentors and students become lovers, opening a channel of 
intimacyand trustthat goes beyond mere sex. That’s notarule, though, 
and compulsion is considered the worst sin an Ecstatic can commit. 


After initiation and initial training, a mentor often 
pulls away from her student, trusting him to find his own 
way. She'll provide advice or secondary helpers, but she 
refuses to become a crutch. In order to grow along this 
Path, amage mustshape his own triumphs and mistakes. 


Affinity Spheres: Time; Life or Mind. 


Focus: “Get out ofyourown way" sums up the Ecstatic 
paradigm. To touch the Lakashim (“Divine Pulse”), a person 
must blow open the doors of inhibition and fear. Magick is 
the communion between a focused mind and the Lakashim 
- a dance of possibilities directed by crazy wisdom. To perform 
it, an Ecstatic guides Ojas (life force) energy with conscious but 
flexible intentions. Ideally, a mage operates in a flux state in which 
neither time nor inhibitions block the life force - aware of what 
she’s doing and yet open enough to do anything. 


The Cult’s infamous substances and stimulations 
are meant to blow open mental doors and blast away 
obstacles to Enlightenment. That’s the theory, 
anyway. In reality, those same tools can become 
obstacles in their own right. Smart Ecstatics, 
then, keep shifting their tools around to 
avoid stagnation and dependence on 
“the same old shit.” Crazy wisdom is 
the core of this group’s many practices, 
which include everything from 
gutter magick, yoga, and martial 
arts to cybernetic hypertech. And 
so, paradigms include Creation’s 
Divine and Alive, Everything is 
Chaos, It’s All Good, and quite 
often Everything’s an Illusion. 


Chapter Five: Ascension Warriors 153 


A 


eee SS 4 


H 


d 
t 


| Pees 


La 


3 


READ Ape ATIKER 


I'M SPEAKING TO THE END OF SILENCE. 
CAN YOU HEAR THE THUNDER YET? 


Earth has a voice. Not many folks can still hear it. 
Long ago, all people listened to that voice - the 
beatofLifeand thesongofSpirit. Pride, however, 
has driven wedges between our world and the 
spirit realm. It takes strength and vision to hold 
on to that primal connection in spite of all the 
distractions of modern life... even more so when 
that modern world has tried everything in its power to break 
you. And yet, this Tradition and its people refuse to be broken. 


Endurance is perhaps the best word to summarize the Society 
of Dreams. Its vision has endured. Its people have endured. The 
Tradition itselfhas endured ignorance, slavery, division, oppression, 
betrayal, marginalization, stereotyping, and a simplistic view 
from outsiders that has likewise endured long past all reasonable 
expectations. Aside from the group’s staunch allies in the Verbena 
and Ecstatic Traditions (and often including them as well), the 
Council’s view of the Dreamers has remained paternalistic and 
patronizing for over 500 years. And yet, they endure. 


It’s appropriate that this Tradition had not one founder but 
two. Naioba and Star-of-Eagles both heard the call of their spirits 
in very different lands, yet they transcended their differences to 
fall in love with one another. The sacred marriage between these 
female and male devotees inspired a diverse confederation of 
African, Native American, and Asian visionaries, for while that 
marriage was a ritual, the love involved was real. Although their 


N 
Z 


romance ended with Naioba’s assassination by a Vision-Mocker, 
that love, with its many symbolic ties, still holds the group together. 


With few exceptions, the Kha’vadi (“those whose vision 
shapes the world") come from indigenous cultures or their 
technological descendants. Some embrace modern fashions 
and technologies, whereas others favor their ancestral ways. 
Though the Tradition holds a handful of European, Oceanic, 
and Asiatic spirit-workers, the vast majority of the group hails 
from Africa or the Americas. Often referred to by the Siberian 
word shaman, they’re more properly thought of as medicine-people: 
folks who use natural healing gifts rather than selfish magick. 
Instead of bending reality to their will, the Kha’vadi work with 
reality... not the twisted reality of the Technocratic world but 
the deeper reality of the World Spirit in its many forms. 


Thanks in part to its healer nature, this Tradition gets 
stereotyped as a bunch of bongo-beating throwbacks. That 
impression is absurd. Kha’vadi are spirit warriors fighting to save a 
sick world from itself. Especially in recentyears, the Dreamers have 
become more militant than they've been for centuries. Groups like 
the Red Spear and the Ghost Wheel Society defy the Tradition’s 
“stoic savage” image, with a newer faction, the Akinkanju 
(“Unbroken”) even lobbying to toss outthe Council's “slavename” 
and replace it with a selfdetermined title. This age, after all, is a 
"W/hite-mare," and the Speakers have had enough of it. Some 
wounds need to be cleansed with fire. 


Stereotypes 


Fellow Traditions: Despite all their admirable qualities, | trust the ones | must, consider a rare few of them my friends, 


and keep eyes in the back of my head open for the next inevitable failure. 


The Technocracy: The living essence of the White-mare. 
The Disparates: | sense a trick here, and | think | like it... 


154. Mage: The Ascension 20" Anniversary Edition 


These days, a new vista offers fresh hope: the Internet - a global 
connection network with its own spiritual aspect. Computer-minded 
Kha'vadi realize that the Digital Web has a consciousness... and by extension, 
a soul. The practical tools of social media allow Dreamspeakers from 
across the world to meet up and reconstruct their roots, and the spiritual 
side of the Digital Web nurtures a growing technoshamanic movement 

whose possibilities and repercussions reach further than anyone, even the 

"Speakers themselves, can imagine... 


Organization: Although the shamanic Path tends to 
Ieee solitary, medicinepeople can be quite social. And so, 
this Tradition combines a respect for autonomy with 
the supportive network of a tribe. For centuries, many 
À Dreamspeakers preferred to wander their own roads; 


in recent years, however, the group has returned to the 

community-centered focus of many preimperial cultures. 

Separation, after all, has been a liability. With stronger bonds 
between them, the 'Speakers share a greater voice. 


In previous ages, Dreamspeakers met in distant corners 
of the spirit world - even forming Realms where the Old Ways 
remained untouched. Recently, however, the Unbroken Folk 
have turned their focus to the material world, meeting in both 

rural and urban settings, often gathering at powwows, hip-hop 
shows, block parties, and neotribal festivals. Social media groups, 
too, provide meeting grounds for the new breed of Dreamspeakers. In 
all cases, the previous solitude has shifted toward a more social focus. 


Even so, Kha'vadi remain distinctly informal. Elders are 

respected by their younger peers, but youthful vigor feeds 

the future and earns its own sort of respect. The long- 
winded titles favored by "the White Council" sound 

® stupid tothe average Speaker. Deeds and wisdom 
speak louder than laws. 


Initiation: Like his Tradition, a Dreamspeaker 
survives apparent death. Part of his initiation 
involves ritual (sometimes literal) demise; that passing 
brings the shaman into the spirit realm, where he faces 
trials and challenges. Assuming he survives that ordeal, the 
kaimi (“initiate”) becomes a socha (“disciple”) and returns 

to the mortal world with fresh insight and greater vision. 


Affinity Spheres: Spirit; Force, Life, or Matter. 


Focus: Medicine, not magick, is the essence of 

Dreamspeaker Arts. An avatar is Howahkan: the 
mysterious voice that speaks to those who are ready 
to hear it. Sorcery is an egotistical and ultimately 
destructive Path that leads people away from the 
Good Road of harmony with the World Spirit. To 
reach past the illusions of mortal life, one must listen 
to Creation’s heartbeat, face death, and remain open 
to the voice through which all life speaks. 


Practice-wise, "Speakers favor medicine-work, 
craftwork, shamanism, crazy wisdom, and faith. A few 
pursue cybernetics, yoga, Voudoun, and witchcraft, 
but their companions often shun them. Common 
paradigms include A World of Gods and Monsters, 
Creation’s Divine and Alive, Bring Back the Golden Age, 
and sometimes Might is Right. 


Chapter Five: Ascension Warriors 155 


I 
I 


DEATH ISN'T JUST A WORD TO ME 


IT'S GENESIS. 


Death is not an end but simply part of a 
larger cycle. Life picks up where death 
leaves off, and death finishes what life 
begins, bringing it back around for 
another go at things. Sometimes, a life 
becomes toxic to everything nearby. At 
that point, death becomes a blessing... 
a blessing the Euthanatos Tradition is ready to bestow. 


The Euthanatos... or, more correctly, Euthanatoi... see 
themselves as keepers of the Wheel. That's a problematic duty, 
with fear and corruption its perpetual companions. The will 
to live is strong, and so the "good death" mages often find 
themselves cast in the murderer's role. Even the kindest of 
them - the ones who become medical professionals, priests, 
grief counselors, and so forth - spend mostoftheir time around 
death and its complex passions. Each member of the group has 
himself died and been reborn. In a literal sense, the Euthanatoi 
carry a bit of death everywhere they go. 


The group's name itself has been problematic. Aside 
from the mangled Greek in its common form, that "good 
death" title has defined the Tradition in murderous terms. 
Many Thanatoics prefer the old name, Chakravanti, or “people 
of the Wheel." As the Council moves toward its new form, 
the pressure to return to that name - or to choose another, 
Niyamavanti, "people of our Rule," that lacks the baggage 


of those old names - increases. After all, if individuals can 
reincarnate themselves, why shouldn't the Tradition based 
around reincarnation do the same? 


Reincarnation forms avital part ofthis Tradition. These mages 
don't just believe in it - they know from personal experience that 
reincarnation exists. Rooted in a fusion of reincarnationist creeds 
from India, Greece, Africa, Tibet, and elsewhere, the group keeps 
the Great Wheel spinning. In the old days, this was easier. People 
lived, they died, they joined the Wheel and returned to live new 
lives. But between the spread of oneJife creeds, materialist atheism, 
resuscitation techniques, titanic wars, and the sheer number of living 
and dying people, the Great Cycle has been jammed. Abominations 
likevampiresand otherundead things have multiplied. The material 
and spiritual realms have been packed with ghosts of many kinds, 
and although the Avatar Storm might have offered a housecleaning 
of sorts, the Wheel has required... shall we say, more direct forms 
of maintenance. And so, reincarnationists have, all too often, been 
forced to become killers. Even so, life, not death, is the true heart 
of this Tradition. Above all things, the Wheel must be maintained. 


Organization: Like their Verbena and Ecstatic allies, the 
Chakravanti pursueasometimessinister Path thatother mages often 
fear and rarely understand. Yet among the Traditions, this group is 
perhaps the mostethical. Theirawful responsibility demands no less. 
Thegroup'sstrictcode - the Dharmachakra, or "Eight-Spoked Wheel 
of the Law" - emphasizes the Cycle (Samsara); unity of all things 


Stereotypes 


Fellow Traditions: The most fascinating parade of visionaries, misfits, bastards, and heroes ever to walk the Earth and 


survive the experience for long. 


The Technocracy: Slick pride-monsters taking a metallic dump on the Great Wheel. 


The Disparates: Conventional wisdom says they're dead... but dead things have a way of coming back around. 


156 Ma$e: The Ascension 20^ Anniversary Edition 


(Aduaita); acceptance of mortality(Kala); responsible 
guardianship (Pravitra); self-control (Dama); 
compassion (Daya); avoidance of temptation 
(Tapas); and the personal experience of 
death and rebirth (Punarjanman). Although 

the group itself lacks rigid hierarchies, all 
members of this Tradition are expected to 

know and follow this code, on pain of final 


death and removal from the Wheel. 


This strict code requires strong bonds 
between mentors and initiates. As a result, 
although the death-Tradition contains 
many different sects, the relationship 
between a teacher (Acarya) and her student 
(Chatra) is essential. The Chatra swears a 
Vrata (“life-oath”) to both his mentor and 
to the Tradition as a whole. Breaking that 
oath disgraces not only the student but the 
teacher as well... and compels the Acarya to 
hunt her student down for punishment. 


Sage 


Initiation: Each Thanatoic mage 
undergoes the Diksha: a ritualized 
physical death. Returning from the 
Shadowlands, that person undergoes 
a long apprenticeship that includes 
memorizing the Niyama and learning i A ; 
the many arts of healing, fate, and Jw T) 
murder. Such apprenticeships can ZE Fhia 
last for years and typically involve 4 
quests, tests, and challenges in Y 
which the student confronts the 
awful implications of his Path. 
Without that awareness, after 
all, a “death-mage” is exactly 
what people think he is: a monster 
who's everything this Tradition has 
sworn to destroy. 


Affinity Spheres: Entropy; Life 
or Spirit. 

Focus: As masters of life, death, 
Fate, and Fortune, the Euthanatoi view 
magick as an extension of the Cycle. By 
turning the Wheel, these mages control 
probability as well as the forces of mortality. 
That turning focuses on the cyclical nature 
of existence, and so a Chakravat uses practices 
and instruments like crazy wisdom, faith, High 
Ritual, medicine-work, reality hacking, martial arts, 
shamanism, and occasionally Voudoun to direct 
those energies toward the desired end. Yoga 
hasan essential place in this Tradition's Arts. 
Divine Order and Earthly Chaos might be the 
groups most common paradigm; others 
include Everything’s an Illusion, Creation's 
Divine and Alive, and even, believe it or not, 
It's All Good - Have Faith. 


T 


IDO NOT “MANIFEST” CHANGE - 1 BECOME CHANG. 


Justas Solomon bound spirits to his bidding, as Merlin 

raised a stable boy to kingship, as John Dee named 

Elizabeth’s realm an Empire and then anchored 

it in time and space at Greenwich, so too do 

the Houses of Hermes turn the hidden wheels 

of the world. Their Arts are the most refined, 

their knowledge the most exhaustive, their Wills 

the most dedicated to excellence. In many minds (most 

especially their own), the Order of Hermes defines the word mage. 


As the largest and most organized Tradition, the Order of 
Hermes has influenced - they would say “defined” - the Western 
experience of magick. Hermetics command a huge range of 
secrets and wards. Their wealth is vast, their Wonders potent, 
their libraries breathtaking. The Order boasts the greatestnumber 
of Chantries, Masters, and Archmages. Its achievements include 
the first codification of magickal study, the formulation of the 
Spheres, and, indeed, the formation of the Traditions themselves. 


Still, the Order has faced setbacks and catastrophes: the 
loss of both its greatest Chantry, Doissetep, and its leading 
Master, Porthos FitzEmpress; the extermination (some say "self- 
destruction”) of its most powerful luminaries; the devastation 
of priceless archives. Yet the reaction from other Traditions 
appears to be a collective sigh of relief. Why? 


Because Hermetic wizards are, to a one (and to a fault), 
meticulous, pedantic, majestic, and haughty. The Preface to 


the venerable Hornbook - a thick volume presented to each new 
apprentice - captures this attitude in one paragraph: "What 
mage in any rival Tradition, of whatever skill, can boast the 
comprehensive knowledge of our least Adept? What other 
mage can offer any shred of theory to support his magick? The 
aboriginal shaman with his drums and rattle gives over his body 
toa spirit he knows not. The cleric with his song begs like a child 
for the favor of deities. The Ecstatic with his vice burns like a 
meteor and vanishes, and the witch with her blood-rites aspires 
only to procreate. Even the Akashic with his meditation and 
exercise seeks passive contentment in false belief. Meanwhile, 
the Hermetic with firm Will commands, ‘Do!’ And it is done.” 


Thisbombastreveals the Order's obnoxious confidence; the 
average Hermetic can back itup, too. Among the Traditions, only 
the Verbena and Dreamspeakers have as violent a history with 
the hated Technocracy. It’s no accident that the Craftmasons 
(themselves formed from a renegade Hermetic sect) chose to 
initiate hostilities by blowing up one Hermetic citadel and to 
stage the Convention of the White Tower in another. Nor is itan 
accident that Master Baldric LaSalle chose to host the Mistridge 
Tribunal - the first step toward the Grand Convocation - in 
the ruins of that first attack. An Ecstatic might have provided 
the inspiration, and the Verbena might have secured new allies, 
but the Order of Hermes forged the foundation upon which 
the Traditions have been built. 


Stereotypes 


Fellow Traditions: Despite venerable practices and occasional insights, our allies lack the discipline to achieve lasting 
power or control. Even so, they have stood with us for centuries, so they remain worthy companions. 


The Technocracy: In the end, only one of us will survive. 


The Disparates: Talented amateurs, lost to their own separation. 


158 Ma$e: The Ascension 20^ Anniversary Edition 


Even rival Traditions accept the Order's vast and 
spectacular history. In ancient Egypt, two auspicious 
precursors invented the alphabet. Archmagus Solomon 
bound many spirits thatstill serve the Order today. Pythagoras 
founded the cult of Hermes in Greece. The Corpus Hermeticum, 
attributed to Hermes Trismegistus ("Thrice-Great Hermes"), 
forms the basis of the modern Tradition. Even Sleepers recall a 
few Hermetics from those storied times: Merlin. Paracelsus. Saint- 
Germain. Cagliostro. From Gandalf to Crowley to Potter, the popular 
acceptance of magick has arisen from Hermetic archetypes. In the new 
millennium, the group enjoys more popular acceptance than ever before. 
The Masses might not pursue the Hermetic Arts, but in a subconscious 
sort of belief, they accept the Order's ways as the face of Western wizardry. 


And so, though their various setbacks have cost the Order dearly, 
Hermetic mages greet this age with renewed vitality. The loss of the Archmages, 
the destruction of Doissetep, the war against vampires, the purge of corrupt 
House Janissary... they’re all like the collapsing Tarot Tower: the shattering 
of bondage that compels transformation. This age’s Hermetics are rolling up 
their sleeves and remaking the Order from its foundations while keeping 
those foundations - confidence, knowledge, excellence, and Will - 
intact. Guided by a vision of the City of Pymander - the ideal of 
global Ascension under Mystic Will - Hermetics remain committed 
to perfection. Given their high purpose, they can accept no less. 


Organization: The Order is rigidly hierarchical, disciplinarian, 
and regulated. The Code of Hermes and its Peripheral Corrigenda 
dictate behavior, protocol, rules for certamen challenges, and the 
proper inscriptions for Chantry doorways. Thirteen Houses still 
exist as factions in the Order’s endless, brutal infighting. Some 
Houses predate the Norman Conquest (Bonisagus, Flambeau, 
Quaesitor, Tytalus, Verditius, and the catch-all Ex Miscellanea); 
others are newer, even quite recent (Fortunae, Hong Lei, Ngoma, 
Shaea, Skopos, Solificati, and Xaos). 


Initiation: Recruited from academia, esoteric religious 
orders, science, or the military, a student must survive a punishing 
apprenticeship under an unforgiving mentor (a mater or pater). The 
Order recognizes nine Degrees of mystic advancement: Neophyte, 
Zelator, Practicus, Initiate, Initiate Exemptus, Adept, Adept Major, Magister 
Scholae, and Magister Mundi. The training aims to provoke, by the 
conclusion of the Third Degree, a gradual Awakening more akin to a 
process than to a single jolting moment. 


Affinity Sphere: Forces provides the core of Hermetic training. 
Certain Houses favor Life, Matter, Mind, and Spirit as secondary pursuits, 
but Forces is always essential. 


Focus: A Hermetic mage commands nothing less than the keys to the 
universe. And so, these consummate scholars master ancient and arcane rituals 
through constant study and intense practice. Tapping elemental currents through ( 
incantations, signs, seals, paraphernalia, and secret languages, the Hermetics are - by 
necessity - secretive and suspicious. They command tremendous power, after all, and 
their rivals lurk everywhere. 


Alchemy, dominion, and High Ritual form core practices within the Order's ranks. 
No Hermetic mage lacks such training. Certain Hermetics add chaos magick, the 
Art of Desire, hypertech, craftwork, weird science, yoga, and occasional malficia 
to that core, pursuing such paradigms as A Mechanistic Cosmos, Divine Order , 


and. Earthly Chaos, Might is Right, Tech Holds All Answers and, naturally, ` 
Bring Back the Golden Age. [| 25 


Chapter Five: Ascension Warriors 159 


ONWARDS AND UPWARDS - ALLOR Fone! 


The only thing holding humanity back 

from achieving its yearned-for Utopia is 

the smallness of its imagination. So long as 

individuals allow society and its rulers to 

dictate the size and extent of their dreams, 

mundane boredom and all its attendant 

suffering shall persist. Even the magickal 

imaginations of most of the Nine Traditions are 

hampered bywhat was allowed them in times past by the Powers 

That Be, whether those powers were shamans, pharaohs, or 

priests. Only the future is free of these chains, unset and as yet 

undreamt of. Only the truly bold can make the future real in 
the present, and the Etherites are nothing if not bold! 


A society of radical technomantic dreamers, the original 
Sons of Ether proved unfit for the confined and suffocating 
paradigm of the Technocracy. Although they adopted their 
current name at the turn of the 20" century, these Enlightened 
Scientists are both sons and daughters of their rallying theory: 
that of Ether, that subtle substance that lies behind the guise of 
all phenomena in the universe. Long criticized as a boys' club 
due to its early Victorian customs, the Etherites have progressed 
over the years. Although hardliners still insist upon propriety, 
the term Society of Ether has largely replaced the shopworn 
masculinity of the group's original name. 


The Etherites trace their lineage back to ancient Troy, 
although few outside the Tradition accept this claim. Their 


foundation of natural philosophy was reputedly established 
among the preSocratic thinkers of Greece and the Mediterranean, 
recorded in a book titled (by its Islamic translators) the Kitabal- 
Alacir, or Book of Ether. As the first Inspired (that is, Awakened) 
attempt at a systemic natural philosophy, the Kitab is revered by 
Etherites, many of whom Awakened when reading it. 


From a loose intellectual tradition practiced by disparate 
individuals, the group finally gained a societal foundation with 
the establishment of Hermetic House Golo in Medieval Italy. This 
eventually became the Natural Philosophers Guild, and then, in the 
Victorian Era, the Electrodyne Engineers, whose fascination with the 
novel power of electricity promised to liberate the common man 
from physical and metaphysical darkness. Such idealism remains 
the heart of this Tradition. The Technocracy could not crush it. 
World wars could not purge it. Neither skepticism nor failure nor 
claims that Etherites are all mad and reckless can prevent these 
luminaries from bringing their magnificent Science to the world. 


Yes, by the standards of most people (even those lunatics with 
whom they share company), most Etherites are eccentric. Bizarre. 
Perhaps even mad. But such madness is the flare of a nova encased 
by an all too human shell. In a world determined to be small, the 
Society of Ether breeds heroes. If those heroes demolish labs, 
companions, even... um, cities... upon occasion, such casualties are 
the cost of true Enlightenment. And the world is improved thereby. 
Is not the current age proof of this? Flying machines! Recording 
technology! People no longer die by the thousands from plagues 


Stereotypes 


Fellow Traditions: Fascinating allies, | suppose... but they call us mad? 


The Technocracy: Obscenities to the name of Science, perverting wonder into control. 


The Disparates: Footdraggers. Mysterious footdraggers, though. Certainly worthy of further study... 


160 Ma$e: The Ascension 20^ Anniversary Edition 


or starvation! (Well, perhaps except in those lands without much Science... a pity, 
that.) And so, despite its costs and obstacles, the Sons and Daughters of Ether 
remain dedicated to the advancement of wondrous Science! 


In the 21* century, this Tradition has come into its own. The influence 
of science fiction - especially its Etherian offshoot, steampunk - in popular 
culture allows them to stand proudly at the forefront of human endeavors. 
Among all Traditions, only the Virtual Adepts (and sometimes the 
Akashayana) enjoysimilar allowances from Paradox. Modern 
reality favors this weird Science, and although Etherites 
occasionally overreach themselves and suffer the 
Paradox Effect anyway, the Society of Ether manages 
to get away with... well, *murder" is such an 
ugly term. Let us say, instead, magnificence. 


As far as their fellow Traditions are 
concerned, most Etherites seem like selfish 
egotists, pushing paradigms wherein 
individuals can excel while leaving the Masses 
behind. The Etherites, however, strive to give 
the benefits of Awakened Science to everyone. 
"All, or none!" is their creed. As a result, they 
strive for recognition - not only from their 
Enlightened peers but from the Masses most 
of all. Such acceptance, they know, reflects 
the striving human spirit - a spirit that looks 
toward Tomorrow and the many marvelous 
Things to Come. 


Organization: Etherites, despite their boisterous 
talk about society, are often fractious and competitive. 
Fellowship exists as an avenue for seeking praise; criticism 
merely prods you to go back to the lab and do better 
next time. Although many Etherites bury themselves in 
research for weeks on end with very little companionship, 
they eventually seek the company of their peers, no matter 
how obsessive their work becomes. 


Initiation: Prospective Etherites tend to be selected by true Scientists, 
based on some sign or evidence of latent genius. These prospective 
initiates receive a test designed to force them to confront the implications 
of their ideas. Most often, the would-be Scientist is left to discover a 
copy of the Kitab-al-Alacir, whose concepts often serve to Awaken the 
spark of bigger, brighter accomplishments to come. 


Affinity Spheres: Matter; Forces or Prime. 


Focus: Science! Or, more accurately, an imaginative grasp of 
natural principles channeled through established physical and 
energetic technologies. Earthier than their Virtual Adept colleagues, 
these technomancers prefer to employ Science that can be seen, held, 
demonstrated, and confirmed even bythe eyes of fools. To thatend, Etherite 
Science is showy, romantic, and gracefully futuristic, even if that future 
looks more like classic science fiction than like mundane science fact. 


Asa practice, an Etherite may use anything thatseems to work. 
Most Scientists, however, favor gloriously esoteric variations on 
alchemy, craftwork, cybernetics, hypertech, reality hacking, and, 
of course, weird science. Paradigms focus largely around concepts 
like A Mechanistic Cosmos, Everything is Data, Might is Right, and 
Everything's an Illusion, but they usually boil down to Tech Holds 
All the Answers. 


Chapter Five: Ascension Warriors 


Id 


TA 


€V€RYTHINS& IS INTERTWINED. TO UNDERSTAND 


YOUR T€ARS 15 TO UNDERSTAND TI 


Life is shit and piss and blood. 

Pain and pleasure are inevitable 

birthrights. Our spirits are not some 

transcendent separate thing but are instead 

the raw vitality of Life itself. Drawing from among the oldest 

mystic understandings, the Verbena Tradition views life as a 

wondrous, implacable cycle - a dance of elements in which a 

mage calls tunes but cannot herself resist the dance. This view 

scares the living hell out of most folks, and that’s just how many 

Verbena like it. If you can’t hang with the truth, they figure, 
just get the fuck out of the way! 


Like the herb for which they’re named, the Verbena (or, 
more correctly, Verbenae) excel at healing, divination, and 
purgation. No other Tradition understands Life magicks the 
way they do. Masters of shape-changing, animal affinities, plant 
craft, and weather work, Verbenae stay close to Nature in her 
truest forms... and some of those forms can be bloody indeed. 
Although it’s rare, the Verbenae have been known to practice 
animal and human sacrifice. More often, they carve runes in 
their own skins, endure hideous ordeals, subject themselves 
to painful deprivations, and perform other acts of self-sacrifice 
in order to avoid harming other beings. Every Verbena grove 
has a World Tree, the living symbol of Creation as a whole. 
These trees have been stained red by the rituals performed in 
those groves; the darker the red, the more powerful the grove. 


€ SKY. 


Although the Tradition itself formed in the 1400s, Verbena 
roots run far deeper. Like many mystic societies, these mages 
trace their origins to primal humanity’s beginnings... and in 
their case, they're probably correct. The primordial Wyck, 
they say, embodied the first fusions of spirit, mind, and flesh. 
Essentially gods, they soon guided the first human beings toward 
wisdom and magick. The Old Ways, say these traditionalists, are 
the inheritance left by those entities, and the Verbenae - and 
perhaps the Dreamspeakers - are its truest heirs. 


These Old Ways are, by most standards, harsh. Blood, 
sex, passion in its rawest forms - these are the tools most 
Verbenae prefer. Cold iron, worked wood, fires kindled with 
your bare hands, natural clothing, organic foods... the simpler 
it is, the more powerful its effects. Although some Verbenae 
make concessions to the modern world - cars, guns, perhaps a 
favorite TV show or two - this Tradition, by and large, remains 
stubbornly archaic. And though they can be compassionate in 
their way, Verbenae have no time or patience for weakness. To 
them, the comforts ofa technological world breed sickness and 
laziness. "Until you spend a month," they'll tell you, "in the 
wild with nothing but the clothes on your back... or better yet, 
without them... you don't know jack shit about reality." 


Organization: Covens - often numbering 13, nine, 
seven, or three - make up this group's foundation. Solitary 
Verbenae exist, but most members of this Tradition prefer 


Stereotypes 


Fellow Traditions: We're siblings of the blood — quarreling, dysfunctional, often hating one another's guts... but we'll 
kick anyone else's ass if they mess with us. One for all, for better and worse. 


The Technocracy: Plain and simple, they're a disease. 


The Disparate: In the new Burning Times, l'm afraid they've been consumed. 


162 Ma$e: The Ascension 20^ Anniversary Edition 


to work in groups. Women probably outnumber men overall, and they're granted more respect here than in most | 
other groups. Many female mages gravitate toward this Tradition for that reason. Two leaders (taking priest and 
priestess roles although both might be male, female, or transgender) govern the larger covens, with a single witch in 
charge of three-person groups. Covens tend to favor older members over younger ones, and old-school covens 
can be quite autocratic. Although disputes often get resolved through votes, those votes might involve ordeals, 
tests, or combat. 


This Tradition respects strong bloodlines. And so, whenever possible, Verbena covens 
follow family lineage. Each coven has a grove, though that grove might be a garden in the 
leader's back yard. Large meetings occur eight times a year, during the two equinoxes, 
the two solstices, and on Imbolc (Feb. 2), Beltane (May 1), Lammas (Aug. 1), and hi | 
Samhain (Oct. 31). Plenty of Verbenae also gather at Christmas (Dec. 25) f | 
and on July 1, especially as shifts of climate and culture blur 
the distinction between Nature’s seasonal cycles. 


Initiation: Verbena newcomers undergo a ritual 
death and rebirth. An intense period of study, testing, 
and meditation climaxes in a distressing ordeal - sometimes 
illusionary, often real. If and when the coven members are 
satisfied with the initiate’s trustworthiness and dedication, they call the 
elements as witnesses. As they were during the Burning Times, most 
Verbenae remain loyal unto death. W 


Affinity Spheres: Life; Forces. 


Focus: Verbena Arts concentrate on doing a lot with very little. 
Their tools are practical as well as symbolic, with uses that reach back 
to antiquity. “Pagan” in every sense of that word, these magicks hold 
deep ties to Nature. Shape-changing, transformation, healing and 
injury, divination, purification, growth and withering, natural cycles, 
and the tricky ways of Fate are witch-folk specialties. 


Toall Verbenae, Creation's Divine and Alive. Because Creation, life, 
and divinity aren't particularly nice, other common Verbena paradigms 
include A World of Gods and Monsters, 
Might is Right, Bring Back the Golden Age, 
and Everything is Chaos. Witchcraft is 
the group’s core practice, with certain 
individuals favoring Voudoun, dominion, 
weird science, chaos magick, yoga, martial 
arts, High Ritual, cybernetics, the Art of 
Desire, craftwork, medicine-work, and even 
organic hypertech. 


IT’S ALL IN THE CODE: 
YOU, ME, THE WORLD, EVERYTHING. 


What is real? When you see something, 
touch something, know something, is itreal, 
or is it simply a collection of signals, bits 
of information, pieces of data that come 
together in your mind and make you think 
"This is real”? To the Virtual Adepts, everything 
- buildings, tools, plants, animals, people - can 
be represented as information. Figure out the code 
behind something, the Adepts claim, and you can figure 
out how to manipulate that thing, how to change it, improve 
it, or delete it. Since information is abstract, you don't even 
need to touch the thing you want to change. If you know it, you 
can adjust it just by changing the code. And you can change 
the code from anywhere. 


Theyoungest Tradition began asa Technocratic Convention 
that was alienated by its former allies. Too radical for their 
peers, these Difference Engineers questioned too much and 
aspired too far. And for their presumption, they were punished; 
Alan Turing, an elite mathematician and cryptographer, was 
disgraced and destroyed. His death created a martyr, and that 
martyrdom - combined with other persecutions - led to the 
Engineers' defection and their rebirth as the Virtual Adepts. 


That Technocratic past left a stigma that many mages remain 
unwilling to ignore. In return, most Adepts scorn the primitive 


methods of the other Traditions. Humanity, the Adepts believe, 
should not be subjected to limiting philosophies like religion, 
government, or nature. Instead, the Adepts strive toward a 
technological singularity in which humanity’s limitations get 
dumped as people remake themselves into something better, 
brighter, and post-human. Why focus on getting back to nature 
or praying to absentee gods, after all, when you can change the 
world - and yourself - so that you no longer need nature and 
can become a god? 


As their moniker implies, Virtual Adepts spend lots of time 
in a virtual world. If you can interact with other people or even 
control objects of the real world from your online telepresence, then 
why bother with the dismal reality of a leaky apartment building 
and a body made of limited, mortal meat? Even in this banal 
Meatspace, however, Virtual Adepts surround themselves with 
computers, monitors, digital notepads, smart phones, and all the 
latest technological toys. The most elite among them, though, have 
learned to manipulate reality without tech... a feat that highlights 
the group’s command of the God Code inside Creation. 


For all their futuristic acumen, these Adepts still consider 
themselves mages in the classic sense. Their Arts remake reality 
through vision, technique, and Will. A modern Adept might 
not call what she does magick (though many of them do), 
but she regards herself as a child of Mercury, the Trickster/ 


Fellow Traditions: Ghosts in the machine — noisy, cranky, old as fuck, but haunting nevertheless. There’s so much they 


have to teach, and so much more they have to learn. 


The Technocracy: We're at war for the heart of this world... and the next. So respect the allies but take no prisoners. 


The Disparates: * singsong* | know a see-cret... 


Messenger God in the Machine. Like the Adepts, Mercury is everywhere at 
once, undermining assumptions with the audacity of his Arts. Especially in 
this era, when technology is both a road to freedom and an instrument 
of oppression, the world needs audacious tricksters. And so, the Adepts 
of the 21* century are growing far less virtual and far more real. 


Organization: Merit-respecting anarchists, Adepts avoid standard 
organization and loathe conventional hierarchies. In the '90s, they 
based respect on eliteness: a form of peer recognition won through 
attitude and accomplishment. Though the tradition has matured 
and diversified since then, an Adept's personal achievements - rather 
than titles or seniority - still mean everything in this group's esteem. 
Cleverness, wit, technological creativity, and an astute sense 
of sociological reform mean more than a snappy handle "^ - 
or a keen online icon. There's a special reverence for 
Adepts who tear down oppressive social structures... 
and a vituperative loathing for ones who support 
such structures in Meatspace or the online world. 


Initiation: Virtual Adepts have a socially 
brutal initiation process. The idea of physical 
deprivation, masterapprentice challenges, 
or meditative spirit quests strikes them as 
absurd. Instead, Adepts typically give their 
aspirants and initiates cryptic missions 
to sabotage authoritarian structures, 
steal classified data, and create amusing 
pranks that undermine corrupt bastards 
and expose pompous windbags. At some 
critical juncture, the initiate gets left to 
fend for herself; a suitably imaginative 
(and hopefully stylish) resolution to the 
problem earns the accolades of peers and 
a place among the Adepts. In short, then, 
most Adepts enter the group through the grand 
Internet tradition of trolling. 


Affinity Spheres: Correspondence/ Data; 
Forces. 


Focus: Everything is Data. Thus, in this Mechanistic 
Cosmos, every tool or practice an Adept employs focuses 
on shaping, altering, manipulating, gathering, storing, 
collating, influencing, or destroying information. Such 
tools range from the obvious computer gear (generations 
ahead of conventionally available tech), clouds, holograms, 
implants, nanotech, energy drinks, and sense-altering stimuli to 
the understated chic of dark hoodies, manga-influenced haircuts, 
fashionable androgyny, and provocative masks. All Adepts, however, keep 
the implements oftheir technomagick handy. For many Adepts, computers 
are a more important part of one's identity than any attire or accessory. Àn 
Adept's personal devices are almost always the most heavily customized and 
stylized elements of that Adept's ensemble. 


Perhaps the most accomplished reality hackers alive, this Mercurial Elite 
also employs various forms of cybernetics, hypertech, weird science, martial arts, 
chaos magick, gutter magick, and sometimes shamanism, Voudoun, crazy wisdom, 
or witchcraft with a technological flair. 


"Again?" 

DV4631, a.k.a. Daniel, nods. Outside 
his cop car, the flickering red and 
blue strobes toss shadows across my 
sleeping neighborhood. 3:21 is too 
damned early for this shit. 

“Why the lights? Isn’t that kind of 
conspicuous?” 

“Playing the role,” he says, 
gesturing me inside. “Your neighbors 
know you're a cop, so they're more 
likely to accept you getting into a car with a strange 
man if they see a cop car in emergency mode.” 

"I'm an admin." Shutting my eyes against the 
&lare, I open the door and slide in. 

"They don't know that." 

"It's late." 

“The world is full of eyes." 

“Don’t I fucking know it.” 

“Nice place,” he says as I buckle in and sit 
tight. Daniel’s car shoots out into the empty street. 
Residential zone, my ass. No wonder he used the 
strobes. 

“We racing against Doomsday again?” I snark 
as his speedometer hits 50 and the tires squeal 
around a turn. 

"Aren't we always?" 

"True enough." I nod while the familiar streets 
flash past in a pre-dawn blur. I let myself smile - 
that high-grade grin that gets me whatever I want. 

Daniel allows a slight smile to crease his own 
tight features. Behind his eyes, the green-light 
pinpricks shine. Night vision. Makes sense, even 
with the headlights and strobes. He'll see further 
than a normal driver could, and his reflexes trump 
anything else on the road at this hour. "It's good to 
see you again, Kevin," he says, not looking in my 
direction. 

*Youtoo,"Iadmitasweroarotftoward whatever 
Apocalypse we're off to stop this time... 


WARNING, CITIZEN! 


The Following data is highly classified and restricted to 
members of the Technocratic Union. Very little of this material 
isknown outside the Union, and that whichhas beentransmitted 
beyond the halls of this august institution is inevitably 
misunderstoodbyparties without the properlevelsof clearance 
and training. Employing such data without such training is 
extremelyunmutual. Worse, it might compromisethe principles 
nFaprevinusly heldreality paradigm, engendering a divergence 
of sympathies and distorting Future transmissions. 


Mage: The Ascension 20" Anniversary Edition 


166 


Part Ill: The Technocratic Onion 


In plain English, this section reveals things that very Few 
people outside the Technocratic ranks know. Unless you're a 
player or Storyteller who's involved with the Technocracy, 
this sectionis optional. Its secrets shouldnever comeinto your 
chronicleas character knowledge. Oh, andif you wereexpecting 
Faceless bad guys here, get ready to have those expectations 
Shredded. The Technocracy is a complex entity, as heroic and 
Flawed as the Traditions themselves. 


Enlightened Potential 


The future is here, whether we want it to be or not. 
Technology continually tests and redefines the boundaries of 
what it is to be human, recreating our culture for the sake of 
progress. The Masses of humanity continually contend with 
the same two questions. Is technology changing to create the world 
that we want? Or is our world changing in ways we don’t want for the 
sake of technology? In other words, do we control technology, or 
does it control us? That issue of control might very well define 
the future of the human race. 


Despite the acceleration of technology worldwide, the 
disparity between the Haves and the Have Nots remains a serious 
problem. Although cell phones and computers can be found 
throughout the so-called developing nations, those cultures 
still tend to become the dumping grounds and starvation- 
wage labor pools of the technological elite. As a result, the 
“insurgents” and “terrorists” who oppose that elite employ 
asymmetrical warfare, turning the elite’s weapons against 
them. The Powers That Be respond with an unprecedented 
campaign of surveillance, redefining legality to monitor the 
Masses through cameras, intercept their emails, and listen in 
on cell-phone conversations. Before the end of the first decade 
of the 21* century, the option of drone strikes becomes an 
alternative to putting boots on the ground - that is, marching 
on enemy soil with conventional armies. For the sake of words 
like "safety" and "security," lawenforcementagencies adoptnew 
standards for search and seizure, as travelers on airlines line 
up for full-body scans. Although the necessity and expediency 
of these measures are up for debate, consider this: all those 
innovations occur without any kind of supernatural power. 


Now imagine what's possible when that technology 
has few limits. Hidden from the Masses, a secret society has 
developed technology far beyond what the common populace 
possesses. That empowered elite uses Enlightened Procedures 
that employ technological tools; in the hands of such agents, 
experimental technology decades ahead of its time is no longer 
theoretical - it's practical. The fate of their world doesn't 
depend simply on the actions of anachronistic mages holding 
on to the Traditions of the past. It depends just as much on a 
caste of powerful technocrats working to redefine, restrict, and 
quantify the boundaries of reality. Long ago, they forged an 
alliance to multiply their technological advantage and advance 
human power against the nightmarish threats of predatory 


monsters. Unifying many different conventions of bleeding-edge 
hypertech, these technocrats further their agenda through a 
global organization known as the Technocracy. 


A Matter of Control 


The Technocratic Union is the name given to a hypertech 
collective that advances technology as an alternative to 
anachronistic traditions of magick. Practitioners of those rival 
Traditions see this Technocracy as a restrictive society that 
eliminates anyone who won’t conform to its practices... and 
with good reason. Just as the Nine Traditions conflict with one 
other, they remain perpetually in conflict with the Technocracy. 
At its worst, this clash breeds a battle in the shadows called the 
Ascension War - and like many wars, its victory is up for debate. 
The Nine Traditions have diversity but not unity. Anyone can 
Awaken to the limitless possibility of magick, butits unrestrained 
practice can have unforeseen consequences. The Technocracy 
fights to limit those possibilities, reshaping the world in its 
own image by opposing all alternatives. 


Of course, these Technocratic methods may seem extreme. 
Consider, though, the horrors of a world truly without enforced 
boundaries. Imagine, if you will, a freeway without speed limits 
- the high-octane chaos of metal and momentum. Wouldn’t 
you want a police officer to pull over that reckless driver who’s 
speeding in the wrong direction, weaving in and out of trafficand 
probably headed straight toward you? And what would happen if 
a driver's license weren't required... or insurance... or knowledge 
of the law? Even with all of these restrictions, speed kills and 
humans complain endlessly about everyone else's actions. That's 
human nature, after all. But human nature demands authority, 
both to comfort its hurts and to control its extremes. 


And that's especially true when it comes to magick. 


Just look at the damage caused by cars, guns, or careless 
words. Now multiply that by the potential to call storms down or 
throw mountains around. If each human held the potential to 
mold reality, that reality would be hell for everything on Earth. 
Beyond the passions and stupidities of the human condition, 
reality itself craves structure. Just as physical laws channel and 
limit the forces of nature, so must metaphysical laws channel 
and limit the forces of reality. Without a standardized set of 
rules and principles, after all, endless variations of magickal 
practice become a series of disasters waiting to happen. Someone 
must attempt to police that reality. 


For over a century and counting, the Technocracy has 
accepted that challenge. Despite popular misconceptions, 
they're the good guys in a world gone mad. 


Oh, it's true that they've been known to breed monsters. 
Cyborgs, HIT Marks, clone warriors and bat-winged Chihuahuas 
occasionally make the rounds when the Union goes to war. 
But then, war is always ugly, and every veteran gets his or her 
hands bloody doing things that would give nightmares to the 
folks back home. It's the guardian's burden to perform duties 
most people cannot do, and it's his glory to do so with honor 
and skill. And so the Technocratic Union, far from being the 
soulless monolith portrayed in Tradition propaganda, becomes 
the necessary evil in a World of Darkness. Without its agents, 


f 


N | 
I~ 
SN C 
CNN 
X 

NS N 


after all, the Reality Deviants - vampires, beast-men, demonic 
forces, and gore-handed sorcerers - would run rampant, as they 
did long ago. Peace, comfort, and stability would still be dreams. 
Control, then, is the price of keeping the human dream alive. 


Intheaftermath of World War II, the Technocracy enacted a 
Pogrom against RD influence. Named fora Russian word meaning 
"through thunder," this Pogrom was intended to wipe out the 
last vestiges of Nazi, Fascist, and Imperial Japanese occultism. 
Given the large numbers of Tradition and Technocracy members 
who'd joined the Axis powers, it’s not surprising that the Pogrom 
began purging dissidents from all factions, The Traditions, of 
course, protested the Pogrom with martial intensity. Soon the 
purge was aimed not only at former Nazis and Fascists but at 
any Reality Deviant unlucky enough to attract its attention. 
Eventually, “Pogrom” became the official name for all operations 
aimed at dangerous superstitionists, renegade Technocrats, and 
other enemies of the Union. And as in every crusade, questions 
about morality and viciousness were silenced with appeals to the 
greater good. Tough jobs, after all, demand dirty hands. 


It’s so easy to view such actions as unmitigated evil. How 
high a price would you be willing to pay, though, in order to save 
humanity from threats you knewwere there... especially ifsomeone 
else were picking up the tab? To keep this safe little world intact, 
the Technocracy pays that price each day in blood, sweat, toil, 
and tears. Yes, they do cry... and bleed... and sweat. Unlike the 
automatons they occasionally employ, Enlightened Technocrats are 
essentially human beings - “mages,” if you must use that term, in 
the classical sense, though not ones who would call what they do 
“magick.” When you get behind the black hats and mirrorshades, 
a Technocracy agent is a painfully and magnificently aware human 
being who is dedicated to the greater cause of orderly control. And 
if that control means that some spellslinging voodoo hippie has to 
have his face kicked in or his mind rearranged... well, then, that’s 
a small price tag on the greater good. Those who cannot abide by 
the rules have to suffer the consequences, and ifa Technocrat must 
surrender his personal wishes in order to shoulder the burden of 
payment, he'll accept that duty with a smile. 


The Oplift Ideal 


Beyond the need to protect humanity from the many 
horrors of its world, the Technocracy has a grander purpose: 
to uplift us to a greater state, purging the animal flaws that 
chain us to a world of hate, fear, and ignorance. That, truly, is 
the foundation of the Technocratic ideal, and it's a vision that 
the group's rivals refuse to see. 


The average Technocrat does not view himself as a fascist 
monstrosity but as a savior working for the common good. The 
undeniable benefits of technological uplift - running water, 
antibiotics, reliable supplies of food and other necessities, 
increased equality, and many other things - prove the rightness 
of the Technocratic cause. The Technocracy exists not to oppress 
humanity but to elevate it. Yes, that process can be grueling. Yes, 
it demands unpalatable methods. Yes, it requires sacrifices from 
the Union as well as from its enemies. But really - the ideal of a 
better, brighter, moreenlightened world ISthe Union's motivation. 
Behind the mechanisms of command and control stand human 


168 Mage: The Ascension 20" Anniversary Edition 


beings dedicated to (and even, dare we say it, compassionate about) 
the human spirit and the boundless potential it displays. 


Goals and Ideals: 
The Precepts of Damian 


Although the Technocracy can trace its origins back to 
the Order of Reason in the 14^ century - and if Technocratic 
scholars are correct, even to the dawn of human civilization - its 
formal foundation began in the late 19" century. According to 
Technocratic history, a diplomatnamed Professor Damian satin 
the drawing room of Queen Victoria and meticulously detailed 
the ideals of his secret society. Damian was the representative 
of a secretive cabal of ancient masters, Enlightened scholars 
who debated its ideals while secluded in the rarefied isolation 
of their own Horizon Realm... or, as the Technocrats call such 
places, a Colony or Horizon Construct. 


That organization took on the name of the Inner Circle; its 
plan for the new Technocracy was called the Time Table, and 
the list of its collective ideals became known as The Precepts of 
Damian. These six Precepts summarize the foundation of the 
Technocratic ethic - and, as with many static organizations, 
those rules haven't changed much since their inception. Every 
Technocratic operative memorizes the Precepts and can recite 
the party line... even if he might want to debate the particulars 
in private. Where and when he has those debates - and who 
hears them - can shape an agent’s career; after all, in even the 
most idealistic of organizations, individuals have their doubts. 


Order, Stasis, and Consensus 


Bring Stasis and order to the Universe. Predictability 
brings safety. Once all is discovered and all is known, 


Unity will be won. 


Magick, by its very nature, is unpredictable and capricious. 
Elite Technocrats work with experimental and unpredictable 
technology, but their ultimate goal is to standardize that tech. 
Their futuristic innovations are tested and iterated until those 
inventions become safe and predictable tools that can benefit 
humanity. Think ofthe Technocrats, if you will, as the ultimate 
alpha testers - the earliest of early adopters. 


Instead of "spells," "talismans" and "rituals," Technocrats 
develop Procedures, Adjustments, Devices, and Processes, training their 
operatives to minimize the inherent risks of Enlightened Science. 
Although vulgar willworking is possible (using what agents call 
blatant Procedures), it’s actively discouraged. Coincidentalwillworking 
(or as agents call it, subtle Procedures) is far more predictable, largely 
because italmost always appears as advanced technology or scientific 
applications. This way, the impossible becomes commonplace and 
predictable. Instead of a world of supernatural horror and endless 
mystery, the Union tamesaworld in which everythingcan bedefined, 
classified, quantified, and ultimately controlled. 


Thanks to Anthropic Field Theory (a Technocratic explanation 
for the effects of human beliefs upon reality), human consciousness 
directs the flow of Earthly phenomena. Technocrats do not program 
thatflowso muchas they direct italongthe most desirable outcomes 


According to many sources, the Technocracy rose up atthe end of the millennium, nuked the spirit world, and then cleaned 
house and drove all mystic factions skittering into the shadows. Triumphant, the Union stood like a conqueror over the 
Earth, its metallic boot heel planted firmly on humanity’s collective trachea. 


Not quite. 


Yes, the end of the 20" century sees various upheavals, the severity and effects of which depend upon your choice of 
metaplot elements. But those upheavals might also have cracked parts of the Technocracy's vaunted command. The Avatar 
Storm - known by Technocrats as the Dimensional Anomaly — disrupts access to Horizon Constructs and Colonies, cuts 
the Front Lines off from the Inner Circle, guts the ranks of the Void Engineers, and brings many Earthbound Technocrats 
face to face with the frailties of their own practices. After a briefly intensified Pogrom, the Union confronts its excesses and 
refocuses on perfecting science and technology fortheir own sakes. This redirection nurtures the Technocracy’s more human 
side (especially among the mechanized ranks of Iteration X) for good and ill. Certain “machineocrats” wind up softening 
their rigidity, but the mortal flaws of greed, selfishness, and distraction begin undermining Technocratic stability... possibly 
enhancing a Nephandic infiltration, or maybe countering, itinstead. (See the sidebar In Secrecy, This Infection...) 


Evidence ofthis Nephandic endgame canbe foundin the fracturing relationships between the five Conventions asthe new millennium 
sees a growing schism within the Union. One particular event, referred to as the Greylocke Incident of 2006, causes a major rift 
between Iteration X and the New World Order. Stories differ, of course, but the end result of a fight between Iteration X shock 
troops and the Hermetic mages of the Greylocke Chantry is a monumental explosion that kills or injures hundreds of Technocrats, 
particularly among the NWO. This, combined with the financial crash of 2008 and the rising tide of rebellion among the Masses, 
pushes the New World Order toward a defensive leadership role. The Syndicate and Progenitors grow closer, Iteration X flounders, 
and the Void Engineers = having suffered the worst losses from the Dimensional Anomaly — close ranks, adopt a military leadership 
called the Existential Threats Directorate, or ETD, and wage a determined campaign of salvage and war. 


By 2012, the Union faces a potential split down the middle with the NWO on one side, the Syndicate on the other, and 
the other three Conventions deciding which way to go if and when a civil war erupts. 


Is all of this a reflection of a supposedly infallible machine? Or are internal forces deliberately playing the Union against 
itself? The truth, like so many other elements of the Technocratic Union, remains mysterious. 


Is the Union still an implacable force of enlightened tyranny in your chronicle? Or has the Dimensional Anomaly cleaned 
house and allowed a newer breed of Technocrats to question the old order and usher in reforms... with better and worse 
results? 


That depends. Perhaps... 


Jman peliet, interna nisms, potential Nephandic corruptio Ina MNE OMINOUS 


* The Storm has faded, but the scars remain: The brief catastrophe did change the Union's tactics, priorities, and 
resources, but not quite as radically as in option #1. Many Constructs are operational, the Colonies have suffered 
losses but are rebuilding, and the potential malignancy within the Union is perhaps more intense than it had been 
before... but the Union has become more humane and is looking at long-term reform. If the Nephandi are in charge, 
however, that might not be a good thing at all... 


ANCE 


As with so many other Future Fates elements — especially ones that deal with the Technocracy — such decisions and their 
implications are best kept Classified, with players discovering the truth on a need-to-know basis only. 


for humanity at large. Thus, although a technological elite leads terminology, the Consensus, the ultimate manifestation of the 
the Technocracy, many agents believe that their Union fights fora Anthropic Field Theory. Eventually, the Masses will get to share 
world in which reality is shaped by the common populace - by the the same advanced technology that the Technocracy employs. 
Masses, not by an anachronistic alliance of mages. The world these ^ Once the Union's power becomes fully invested and integrated 
agents create is the world that humanity wants - in Technocratic into human discourse and its Consensus, such radical measures 


Chapter Five: Ascension Warriors 169 


will no longer be experimental. They will be predictable. They will ^ Procedure. Histoolsarethetoolsofscience. When the Technocracy 
be controlled. In short, they will be the very opposite of magick. acts, it acts in secret - but when the Masses see the results, the 

Technocracy's success reveals the triumph of science. Anarchists 
Technology and Training and terrorists - RDs or otherwise - get caught or destroyed by 
Convince the Masses of the benevolence of science, high-tech surveillance and firepower. Suffering and disease are 
eliminated with Progenitor medicine and Iteration X prosthetics. 
Corporations create wealth and opportunity with Syndicate 
financing. Whenever the Technocracy triumphs, the Masses witness 


commerce, and politics and of the power of Rationality. 
Conflict and suffering will be eliminated in our Utopia. 
With a handful of exceptions, such as heightened perception 
and psychic ability, a technomancer must use technological 
instruments (or more precisely, apparatus) to perform any given 


the benefits of innovative science, dedicated commerce, controlled 
politics, and reasonably manufactured consent. Advancing these 
sciences brings humanity closer to Utopia. 


As revealed in various sourcebooks — most notably Guide to the Technocracy and the original Technocracy: 
Syndicate and Void Engineers books - the Union is also infested with Nephandi and the cosmic source of corruption 
the werewolves call the Wyrm. The Sorcerers Crusade line (notably in Infernalism: The Path of Screams) suggests 
that this corruption has been going on for centuries. Despite the presence of many sincere and dedicated Technocrats, 
the Inner Circle has turned the Union into an instrument of global malignance. 


This metaplot has been an undertone since the very first sourcebooks; after all, how could places like Null-B, MECHA, 
or Research Plantation No. 4 be anything but corrupt...? Even so, certain groups might wish to give the Technocracy 
the benefit of the doubt. Thus, when looking at the truth behind its behavior, a Storyteller can choose from the following 
three options: 


if 


ina 


The Union has problems but is not metaphysically corrupt: Despite a few bad apples and a ruthless approach 


to Ascension, the Technocratic Union is not overrun with Nephandi. The corruption that does exist is an extension of 
hubris, not infiltration by the Fallen. Essentially, the Union means well but has a brutal way of taking care of business. 


More recently, the Revised Convention Book: Void Engineers postulated a similar infection: Threat Null, an 
Otherworldly reflection of Technocratic excess. According to this sourcebook — which depends heavily upon the 
Dimensional Anomaly metaplot — a deeply corrupted version of the Technocracy exists beyond the Gauntlet, possibly 
made up of lost members of the Union itself. Essentially, Threat Null consists of cruel parodies of Iteration X, the NWO, 
the Progenitors, and the Syndicate, taken to their utmost extremes. Is there a Void Engineer analogue as well? Good 
question. The VEs don't want to look too deeply into that mirror because the answers might destroy them. 


Aside from vague mutterings, the Void Engineers are keeping Threat Null very Classified with regards to their fellow 
Conventions. Afraid (and with good reason!) that exposure of Threat Null might rip aparttheir unstable Union, the Engineers 
are trying to contain that Threat and neutralize it in secret. Paradoxically, that secrecy might do even more damage if 
and when the secret slips out into the Technocracy... or worse, reaches outside of the Technocracy! The insidious agents 
of Threat Null insinuate themselves into positions of power throughout the Union, often hidden until some catastrophe 
reveals their presence. 


So, is Threat Null a Nephandic plot? Is it an independent phenomenon arising from a quirk of metaphysics? Might it be 
both, or does it exist at all? That's for your Storyteller to know and you to find out... maybe. In any case, Threat Null is 
NOT common knowledge to anyone, and the Void Engineers are working hard to keep things that way. 


Details about Threat Null can be found in Convention Book: Void Engineers, pps. 65-69. 


Important Note: Once you as the Storyteller have chosen an option, DON'T TELL YOUR PLAYERS WHAT IT IS. Let 
them discover the truth over the course of your chronicle, not through an automatic assumption of Technocratic corruption. 
It’s far more dramatic if the extent and nature of such corruption remains a mystery. 


2a SH | 


Safety and Security 


Preserve the Gauntlet and the Horizon. Chaotic 
individuals who open gateways with impunity 
threaten the stability of our world. Uncontrolled 
portals also allow outside forces, such as Nephandi, 
access to our world. This must never happen. 


Theworld is alreadya dark and dangerous place, with hazardous 
degrees of paranormal influence. Even greater dangers lurk in the 
various dimensions outside our world. No other organization on 
Earth has the talent, training, resources, and organization to stand 
against these threats. Void Engineers maintain and patrol the 
Gauntlet between our world and its limitless alternatives. The New 
World Order’s surveillance scans the planet for extradimensional 
incursions, sending teams to erase all evidence of its existence while 
also working with other dedicated teams that eradicate EDEs: Extra- 
Dimensional Entities. The Union doesn’t just watch the world on 
this side ofthe Dimensional Membrane, however. Itmustalso subject 
its own citizens to this same vigilant surveillance, looking for signs of 
Nephandic corruption, Marauder insanity, and, of course, disloyal 
collaboration with Tradition rivals. The Union must stay united; if 
it doesn’t, then those patrols of the Gauntlet and Horizons could 
lapse, and all of humanity could suffer. 


Note that the highest echelons of the Technocracy are well 
aware of the threat presented by the Marauders and Nephandi. 
The degree to which madness and corruption have infested the 
Enlightened elite remains atopic of speculation. That speculation, 
in turn, motivates vigilance, suspicion, and sometimes paranoia. 
Anyone can be corrupted by power, so even in the most esteemed 
ranks of the Union’s Inner Circle, the Enlightened watch one 
another for signs of deviance. Of course, such vigilance can turn 
to rivalry, especially if one elitist attempts to make a temporary 
alliance with a Marauder or Nephandus (or even a Traditional 
mage!) in order to conspire against his peers. 


Knowledge and Surveillance 


Define the nature of the universe. Knowledge must be 
absolute, or chaos will envelop all. The elemental forces of 
the universe must not be left to the caprices of the unknown. 


The Union seeks to analyze and evaluate all possible threats 
to humanity, most especially paranormal ones. Technocrats 
cannot oppose what they cannotunderstand, so the Technocracy 
gathers as much information as possible about everything. 
Absolute knowledge furthers absolute security. In a World of 
Darkness, privacy is a hazardous illusion. 


Of course, the Masses lack Enlightened insight (and 
magickal ability), so they remain unprepared for, and often 
undefended against, the predations of the supernatural world. 
If humanity truly understood the full extent of paranormal 
Deviance, the result would be chaos. Thus, the Technocracy 
investigates and gathers hidden lore about magickal and mystical 
activity. Contrary to the stereotype, agents don’t need to destroy 
anything that can’t be explained through science... but they do 
need to investigate and gather enough data to predict, and deal 
with, paranormal phenomena and mystical entities. 


Progress and the Pogrom 


Destroy Reality Deviants. Their recklessness threatens 
our security and our progress toward Unity. 


This is the most frequently debated Precept; the Technocracy 
can’t eliminate all possible alternatives to its society, so it has to 
prioritize the obvious threats to the Masses’ security. In theory, 
anyone who is not trained and managed by the Technocracy 
deviates from its established procedures and protocols. In practice, 
the Union doesn’t have limitless resources to fight everything 
it doesn’t understand, so it must choose when to campaign or 
crusade for reality. At some points in its history, most notably 
at the end of the 20" century, any mage who had allied with 
the Nine Traditions or the ramshackle Crafts was considered 
a Reality Deviant, marked for surveillance, indoctrination, or 
assassination - they were the “hot zones” of the Ascension War. 


This, however, isn’t a constant state of open warfare. The 
Technocracyand its rivals often exist in astate of cold war, in which 
each side watches the other, conducting minor skirmishes without 
unleashing shock-and-awe firepower. The New World Order is 
especially good at subtle indoctrination, recruitment, and Social 
Conditioning (which its detractors would call “brainwashing”) 
to convert rivals with great potential. Iteration X, meanwhile, 
develops state-ofthe-art training for the alternative to conversion: 
obliteration of anything its soldiers put in their crosshairs. 


Enlightenment and the Empowered Elite 


Shepherd the Masses; protect them from themselves 
and from others. 


Here’s another controversial Precept; when agents debate 
this point, however, they certainly don’t do it openly, because 
dissent could be considered disloyalty... or worse, treason. 
Someone needs to evaluate the threats humanity cannot detect 
or oppose; someone needs to innovate experimental technology 
and then reduce it to a fairly safe form. Someone needs to 
review and train agents and allies so they can use their power 
responsibly. That, then, is why the Technocracy evolved into the 
pyramidal structure it has today: the oldest and most powerful 
Enlightened operatives govern younger and less powerful agents. 
Humanity, on the whole, gets shepherded by a secret society 
of the technological elite, and radicals who cannot conform or 
obey its dictates are reprogrammed, repurposed, or eliminated. 


This precept provides one of the reasons the Union patrols 
so vigilantly for Reality Deviants. The worst Deviants openly 
rely on vulgar magick; when the Masses witness such excesses, 
the boundaries of reality are tested. Impossible things suddenly 
seem more possible. Paradox punishes those who deviate against 
it, of course, and the Traditions have their own methods of 
punishing their own kind, but the Technocracy takes on Reality 
Deviants who break the laws of reality again and again. In this 
way, they shepherd the Masses, because humanity is defenseless 
against wolves like magickal predators and Deviants. If a mage 
uses vulgar magick repeatedly, the Technocracy will hunt him 
down; if the offender can’t be converted, then he must be 
destroyed. Humanity can’t protect itself against these threats. 
Again, the Technocracy bravely accepts this challenge. 


Chapter Five: Ascension Warriors 


| 
| 
d 


ga Pal 


I72 


Within the Union, each Convention has its own designations of rank. The five levels, however, all correspond to one 
another in similar fashion, with supreme command vested in Control, also known as the lvory Tower, which brings all 
five Conventions together into a single unit atop the hierarchy. 


In the Dimensional Anomaly metaplot, the Avatar Storm cut that top rank off from the Earthbound Technocracy. The 
lower ranks have reorganized themselves into a five-tier hierarchy, and that top level prefers the term Managers rather 


than Masters. 


Rank Position 


Extraordinary citizens/ initiated operatives 
Supervisors 
6 Control/ The Ivory Tower 
Each Convention also has Methodologies, groupsthatpursue 
specialized work within the Union. Unlike the messily individual 


subsects within the various Traditions, these Methodologies 
all have specific duties and functions within their Convention. 


ITERATION X 
Methodologies: BioMechanics, Macrotechnicians, 
Statisticians, Time-Motion Managers (TMM) 
Rank Designation 
1 Laborers (a.k.a. Kamrads or “proles”) 
Armatures 
rmature Sp 
Comptrollers 
NWO 
Methodologies: the Feed, the Ivory Tower, the Operatives, 
Q Division, the Watchers 


Rank Designation 


jlhizer: 


Black Suits/ Extraordinary Citizens 


, Reporters, and ( 
Intelligence Analysts 


7atekeepers and 


Mage: The Ascension 20" Anniversary Edition 


PROGENITORS 


Methodologies: Applied Sciences, Damage Control, 
FACADE Engineers, Genegineers, Pharmacopeists 


Rank Designation 
Street Ops and Recruiters 
Research Associates and Primary Investigators 
SYNDICATE 
Methodologies: Disbursements, Enforcers, Financiers, 
Media Control, Special Projects Division (SPD) 


Rank Designation 
Associates (a.k.a. Magic Men) 
Chairmen (a.k.a. Vision Men) 


VOID ENGINEERS 


Methodologies: Border Corps Division (BCD), Earth 
Frontier Division (EFD), Neutralization Specialist Corps 
(NSC), Pan-Dimensional Corps (PDC), Research & 
Execution (RAE) 


Rank Designation 


2 Students 
Investigators, Security, and 


Investigators, Security, and Scientists (no formal 
title changes from Rank 3) 


A Note About Ascension 


Any one of these Precepts could be considered a goal 
for the Ascension of an individual agent. All of them must 
be upheld, of course, but a single agent is invariably more 
insightful and talented when she chooses to advance one of 
these goals. In time, such dedication can lead her to a higher 
state of consciousness. Although the word "ascension" is 
considered a regressive, superstitionist holdover, that higher 
state of consciousness is certainly an admirable goal. 


As far as the Technocracy is concerned, such ascension 
generally involves an Empowered vision of the ideal world. Even 
so, each individual Technocrat can be inspired to greater things 
by pursuing her role within that world. Higher consciousness 
provides greater service to the Union and its purposes. Although 
the ideal goal of an Enlightened Technocrat is collective, not 
bersonal, there's still room for individual transcendence and 
perfection within that ultimate ideal. (See Enlightenment and 
Empowerment: The Collective and the Individual, below.) 


Organization and Rank 


From the Union’s earliest origins as the Order of Reason, 
a Technocrat’s rank within his secret society has depended 
upon his degree of Enlightenment. Each Convention has its 
own methods for recruiting, evaluating. and promoting its 
personnel but, roughly speaking, six degrees of Enlightenment 
define rank within most of the Technocracy. (In game terms, 
Enlightenment is what mages call Arete, although - as with 
the Traditions - increasing your Enlightenment Trait doesn’t 
automatically increase your rank.) 


Despite the propagandistic image of the Technocratic 
monolith, the Union is not some featureless block of stone. 
And although the Technocracy itself refers to its leadership 
as the Ivory (or White) Tower - a reference to the Convention 
of the White Tower, where the Order of Reason began - an 
organizational chart for the Technocracy more closely resembles 
a pyramid. In that pyramid, the lowest-ranking citizens form 
a wide base for the edifice. As an Enlightened citizen ascends 
in rank, however, he finds fewer and fewer peers and rivals. 
From the apex, an all-seeing eye watches over this secret society, 
conducting surveillance for an Inner Circle of Control. In the 
middle, various levels of agents, operatives, specialists, scientists, 
researchers, managers, and executives all perform the necessary 
tasks that keep the Time Table as precise as possible. Each level 
supports the others in a designated fashion, allowing for clear 
and orderly command. 


Methodologies 


Each of the five Conventions supports a collection of 
Methodologies: departments within the convention that pursue 
specialized functions within the purview of that Convention. 
Under the departmental umbrella of the NWO, for instance, 
the Ivory Tower deals with history, leadership, and academia; 
the Operatives handle field work; and the Watchers deal with 
surveillance, reporting, and mass media. A new Methodology, 


Many situations demand expertise from several different 
Conventions. Such cross-Convention imperatives allow 
operatives and supervisorsto coordinate efforts for efficient 
solutions to a given crisis. Although specific amalgam 
teams serve most purposes, certain ongoing situations — 
notably the evolution of Information Technology among 
the Masses and [if it exists) the Rogue Council — require 
strategic initiatives to deal with the problems. 


the Feed, works with the Internet in general and social media in 
particular, and Q Division - though not a Methodology in its 
own right - crafts the advanced gear that other agents depend 
upon. Each Convention has a variety of Methodologies, and 
every Methodology has sub-departments to process specific 
duties, research, and innovations. (For details about individual 
Methodologies, see The Book of Secrets.) 


Amalgams 


When operatives work together in an action team, the 
resulting amalgam combines personal expertise with top-down 
management. Essentially, a supervisor assigns lower-ranking 
operatives to an amalgam, issues orders to that amalgam, 
and supplies its agents with essential gear, data, clearance, 
support, and other resources. (See VDAS: The Datacrawl, p. 
182) In return, the agents within a given amalgam fulfill their 
instructions and report back to their supervisor with regular 
status updates. 


Every amalgam has a stated purpose. Field teams handle 
research, intel, dirty work, and other tasks among the Masses. 
Research amalgams pursue assigned projects, providing data for 
other teams. Construction, tech, repair, and innovation teams 
handle the grimy yet essential labor that keeps the Technocratic 
Union functioning. Specialist teams address specific duties - 
infiltration, extraction, cleanup, interrogation, and so forth 
- that demand elite attention from skilled personnel. For every 
imaginable purpose, the Union assigns an amalgam. 


Agents within an amalgam must cooperate with one 
another. Renegade behavior endangers the team, its purpose, 
its supervisor, and the people who'd be affected if the mission 
were to fall through. A cleanup team, for instance, puts 
agents and innocents at risk if its integrity is compromised 
by inefficient behavior. Successful teams are rewarded, slack 
ones receive reprimands, and consistently unsuccessful ones 
are broken up and reassigned at the expense of the agents and 
the supervisor who coordinated them. Especially in the wake 
of the Dimensional Anomaly, there's no room for fuckups 
in the Technocratic Union. Whatever rivalries and failures a 
given faction or individual might suffer, an amalgam must be 
successful or it does not last. 


Chapter Five: Ascension Warriors 


173 


4 


Onenlightened Citizens/ 
Support Personnel 

Because the Union has such grand ambitions and complex 
logistics, the number of willing, loyal, sentient bodies the 
organization requires easily exceeds its supply of Enlightened 
personnel. As one would expect, many jobs and roles don'tactually 
require Enlightened Science. Asa result, unenlightened personnel 
fillawide range of mundane roles, working as technicians, security 
guards, soldiers, bureaucrats, janitors, and so on. The lowestranking 
citizens of the Union possess no Enlightenment at all (and thus, 
in game terms, don't have Arete or Enlightenment Traits). Each 
Convention has its own name for these people, whether they're 
thesympathizers ofthe New World Order or the proles of Iteration 
X. In general, though, the Union calls them citizens. 


Because genetic engineering and cloning provide two of 
the Technocracy's most useful resources, several Conventions 
use manufactured, enhanced, or artificial citizens to fill these 
low-ranking roles. (See Unconventional Operatives, below.) 
Some of these citizens seem rather impersonal - indistinct 
from one another and apparently devoid of individual 
personalities. An Iteration X Construct, for instance, might 
deploy a legion of identical, bald grunt soldiers with bar codes 
on their necks, whereas an NWO investigation team might 
send nondescript clones wearing black suits into the field to 
accompany Enlightened Black Suit Operatives. 


Other artificial citizens have been tailored to havevery specific 
appearances. The Progenitors employ FACADE Engineers who 
specialize in crafting specific clones, especially for missions to 


[74 Ma$e: The Ascension 20^ Anniversary Edition 


abduct an oblivious Sleeper and replace her with a Technocracy 
clone. For decades, stories persisted of rare robotic and artificial 
constructs working alongside Void Engineers; sadly, the vast 
majority of these citizens proved significantly less capable than 
ordinary humans. Despite the Technocracy's many advances in 
the field, all artificial citizens have flaws, and most are prone to 
the Paradox Effect, invariably dissolving or degrading over time. 


The battle for reality has high stakes. So, although 
this practice has fallen out of favor, the Technocracy does 
occasionally authorize agents to abduct and recruit ordinary 
people into its ranks... either temporarily or permanently. The 
New World Order excels at reprogramming unenlightened 
citizens through Procedures euphemistically known as Social 
Conditioning. Through such sciences, an Operative can erase 
or replace memories, instill loyalty, and reconstruct identity. 
Sleepteaching devices install crude training and indoctrination, 
and the contents of a citizen's mind can be downloaded to 
computers for later analysis and use. 


Such procedures work best with people who have very little 
willpower or resistance. Even then, reprogramming doesn't 
usually last for long unless it has been consistently reinforced 
with subtle incentives and rewards. If and when reprogramming 
fails, a kidnapped citizen might need to have his memory and 
personality permanently altered or erased - a risky procedure 
that tends to ruin a recruit's most valuable qualities. In extreme 
cases, the recruit himself might need to be cancelled... and such 
extreme actions create headaches even for the Technocracy. 
(The paperwork alone is a pain in the ass.) Whenever possible, 


the Union prefers willing and loyal citizens to brainwashed or Low-ranking Technocracy initiates fall into two categories: 


threatened abductees. 7 m : 
* The extraordinary citizens who use advanced Devices, 


receive special training, and occasionally enjoy 
enhancements - cybernetics and biomods that go beyond 
the realms of Sleeper technology. (See the Background: 


Fortunately, such extreme measures are seldom necessary. 
Throughout the industrialized world, willing citizens seek jobs 
within the Technocratic Union. Very few of these people know 
what the Union actually is or does, of course, but the promise of Enhancements in Chapter Six, pp. 312-313). In certain 
good pay, steady jobs, and fabulous opportunities provides a lure circumstances, most notably among the Void Engineers, 


that few tech-inclined people - especially in these days of shaky these citizens can achieve great rank and respect. 
economies and uncertain employment - can, or want to, resist. 

* The Enlightened operatives who enjoy the same 
Extraordinary Citizens benefits and training but who have also Awakened in 
and Initiated Operatives the Mage sense. Such personnel can employ Enlightened 
Procedures (in other words, technomagick) that 
extraordinary citizens cannot. Many of these initiatory 
Procedures involve perception and analysis. Such 
operatives can see the supernatural, but they can barely 
affect it with anything other than mundane training 
and technology. (In game terms, these operatives have 
an Enlightenment Trait of 1 or 2.) Status-wise, these 
operatives often rank slightly better than even the most 
esteemed extraordinary citizens. Enlightenment, after 
all, is the defining trait of excellence. 


A holdover from the Order of Reason, the word initiate 
is rarely, if ever, used in official terminology. Instead, each 
Convention has its own designation for citizens at the second 
Technocratic rank. These personnel have been assimilated 
into the Technocracy itself. They know what it is, they know 
what it does, and they know their place in it. Unlike lower-level 
citizens, these people recognize the Technocracy as a distinct 
entity, and they understand their duties and potential within 
that entity. And in that sense, they’ve been initiated into the 
greater mystery they serve. 


The CACS 


The global expansion of IT culture has unlocked a new Pandora's Box of horrors: extradimensional incursions through 
careless computer use. Magickal rites, after all, often depend upon complex mathematics and geometry. Up until the 
computer age, such sophisticated mathematics remained beyond the reach of all but the most brilliant sorcerers. These 
days, though, any idiot with a computer could open the gates to certain extradimensional realms with his home computer. 
It’s rare, but it happens. And so, a new corps of cross-Convention technicians — the Computational Anomaly Corrections 
Specialists (CACS) — monitors potentially dangerous computer use, particularly among the Masses. 


Given the billions of people with computers these days, the “Cacks” have an essentially infinite job. No group could possibly 
cover the entire beat. Still, CACS operatives — drawn primarily from young members of Iteration X, the Void Engineers, and 
the NWO - maintain scanning programs and sift global data for particularly dangerous keywords and operations. On a 
mundane level, these Technocrats scope out cyberterrorists and then send in strike crews to sweep-'n'-sack their operations. 
When computational anomalies indicate cross-dimensional portals, demonic summoning, or other paranormal computer 
hazards, CACS counters the operations with holistically immersed agents, sends in physical operatives to get the offending 
computer (and user) offline, or — quite often — both. Thus, while Homeland Security agents charge in to confiscate or destroy 
a potentially dangerous computer operation, online Specialists tackle the problem from within the Digital Web. 


Most Virtual Adepts know how to avoid tripping a Cacks trace. That's basic training among today’s VAs. Sleepers, though, 
might find heavily armed agents at their front door, sudden virus warnings shutting down their computers, or weird viruses 
or equipment failures giving them the Blue Screen of Death treatment. So if you suffer an unexpected malfunction or 
Distributed Denial of Service attack, it might not be a bad thing. Perhaps the vigilant Cacks just prevented you from opening 
up a doorway to cosmic horror or forestalled an incursion from a hypermath dimension you'd never even dreamed of... 


Panopticon 


Also known as the Panopticon, Panopticon comes together during early 2002 in the wake of the Rogue Council and 
increasing anti-Technocracy violence across the globe. Security, espionage, infiltration, data consolidation, counterterrorism, 
and occasional acts of reven... excuse us, retribution... are the chief purposes behind this group, whose existence is 
optional within a given Mage chronicle. Unlike most imperatives, Panopticon has its own internal rank structure that 
supersedes the usual Convention/ Methodology structure. The group employs the dreaded HIT Mark cybernetic killing 
machines (see Appendix I) that have fallen largely out of favor in the 21* century Union and often displays an impatient 
disregard for other, more official considerations within the Union. Essentially, Panopticon is a Methodology in its own right, 
answering to a command cell that remains Classified even by the Technocracy's usual standards of secrecy. And though 
other Technocrats appear to be shifting toward a less militant attitude, Panopticon ops are hardcore Ascension Warriors. 


Chapter Five: Ascension Warriors I75 


Centuries ago, in the Order of Reason, these visionaries 
were considered part of the Outer Circle of their secret society. 
Many of them didn't believe that they practiced Enlightened 
Science at all, and the thought of performing what a mage 
would call “vulgar magick” seemed downright impossible. 
Such people were just incredibly talented, achieving results 
with technology that went beyond what ordinary people could 
achieve. In today’s Technocracy, however, modern-day initiates 
know that they use Enlightened Science. Theoretically, they can 
use blatant Procedures too, but they’re strongly discouraged from 
doing so. Like their historical counterparts, the vast majority of 
these initiates are more proficient at using technology than the 
average unenlightened citizen among the Masses, but they’re 
not yet proficient enough to bend the laws of reality with it. 


Oldlife and Newlife 


Ifandwhena Technocrat passes from the support personnel 
stage into a deeper level of understanding and responsibility, the 
Technocracy divides that agent’s life into two distinct phases: 


e Theoldlife - a state of ignorant bliss that a person moves 
through among the Masses before she’s initiated into the 
greater reality of the Technocracy and its affairs; and... 


* Thenewlife - the initiated stage wherein the Technocrat 
learns about her place in that greater reality. 


Traditionally, an agent leaves behind her oldlife when 
she achieves initiation. The risks and responsibilities of that 
Technocratic mission turn her oldlife into an inconvenient liability. 
With a few exceptions (usually among the Syndicate Convention, 
where those old ties often aid the social element of their missions), 
an initiated Technocrat disappears from her oldlife, receivinga fresh 


identity, home, resources, and communitywithin the Technocratic 
Union. From that point onward, she stops being the person she 
once was and starts being a part of a bigger plan. 


Like boot camp, the early stages of newlife tend to be harsh, 
Spartan, and dehumanizing. This barracks phase removes the 
initiate to a Construct far away from her previous home, bunks 
her with other initiates, and puts her under a strictly managed 
regimen of training, study, and indoctrination. In time, she 
earns duties and privileges within the barracks; if she misbehaves 
or fails in her duties, those benefits are suspended or revoked. 


Gradually, an accomplished Technocrat graduates from that 
phase into a broader, more individual life. Certain Technocrats, 
of course, prefer the comfort of that simple existence and 
choose to remain within the barracks phase. Others - too 
unpredictable or incompetent to move forward on schedule - 
remain at that beginning stage for a while. In time, however, 
such agents become a liability. Unless she remains a barracks 
bum by choice, an agent who seems stuck in the early phase 
of newlife gets sent on suicide missions, relegated to simple 
tasks, reprogrammed into a walking husk, or simply terminated. 


If and when she proves herself worthy of advancement, 
the agent receives perks of that expanded newlife: money, 
status, and increased responsibilities combined with greater 
freedom of expression. In certain cases (especially among the 
NWO, Progenitors, and Syndicate), she might receive a new 
home, persona, and social network outside the Technocracy 
itself. Although she’s monitored by her superiors (for obvious 
reasons), she can begin to build something like a normal life; 
if she screws up, however, that newlife and its perks can be 
withheld, removed, or even - in extreme cases - destroyed. This 
all presents a powerful carrot-and-stick motivation for loyalty 


Teehnocratic Dissidents 


The harsh methods that the Union occasionally employs, and the potential corruption within the Technocracy itself, have 
inspired a number of dissident initiatives within the Union. These small but determined networks of Technocratic idealists 
wage a covert and exceedingly dangerous shadow war in order to save the Technocracy from itself. Although the 
mortality rate is hellishly high and the penalties of exposure are nightmarish even by the standards of Room 101 (see 
that sidebar, p. 182), these devoted operatives have not yet given up on the Technocracy’s salvation. 


* The Cassandra Complex: An informational network that prefers to be called the Strategic Prognostications and 
Data Dispersal Unit, the Cassandra Complex compiles helpful data and observations, then disperses that information 


to the other underground groups. 


The Harbingers of Avalon: Once a small group dedicated to the ideals of Camelot, the Harbingers have grown 
into-a sizable contingent despite the hideous fates inflicted upon all but one of the group's original members. These 
days, the group is a half-step away from leaving the Technocracy and reforming under a new name: Navalon. (See 
Potential Recruits in the Disparate Alliance section, on p. 200) 


The Friends of Courage: Named for the renegade hero of many idealistic Technocrats, the Friends of Courage 
remain as secretive as they were almost 20 years ago, when Secret Agent John Courage first noted corruption within 
the Inner Circle. Unlike their flamboyant inspiration, these agents act carefully. Many members have been converted 
or cancelled over the years, but the Friends remain a potent force of internal dissent. 


Project Invictus: The most notorious covert sect within the Technocracy, Invictus has waged a surgically accurate 
crusade for over a decade. Unlike the other groups, it’s both militant enough to strike directly at its targets and yet 
dedicated enough to stay with the Technocracy until the bitter end. 


(For greater details about these groups, see The Book of Secrets.) 


176 Mage: The Ascension 20" Anniversary Edition 


and achievement. Serve the Union, and you prosper; harm it, 
and you harm yourself. 


Agents or Operatives 

The general terms agent and operative describe the most 
versatile type of Technocrat. For the most part, those terms 
remain interchangeable. An agent or operative works as a 
soldier, scientist, explorer, facilitator, or visionary for the Union. 
Again, each Convention has its own language for describing 
these individuals; the Progenitors, for example, depend upon 
an array of Students who work in laboratories, attend classes, 
collaborate with agents from other Conventions, and eventually 
defend a thesis before they can be promoted. (In game terms, 
an agent-level Technocrat typically has an Enlightenment Trait 


of 3 to 5.) 


After the barracks stage of their newlives, most agents spend 
the majority of their time in what we would call the real world. 
Because the Earthly realm has been infested with paranormal 
activity, Earth-space is also referred to as the Front Lines. At the 
height of the Ascension War, it’s one big battlefield, where 
teams of agents work together to investigate, recruit, abduct, or 
eliminate rival mages and other Reality Deviants. Earthbound 
agents have also been entrusted with Procedures and Devices 
that allow them to generate revenue, create innovations, 
modify technologies, adjust probabilities, destroy enemies, and 
transform reality (as the Masses understand it). 


Each team of agents is assigned to one or more fronts: 
mundane-appearing bases that the Technocracy uses as factories, 
strongholds, workshops, business ventures, and other centers 
of operation. The most useful fronts - and therefore the 
most heavily defended ones - contain the Nodes that serve as 
sources of Quintessence. Successful agents are authorized to 
use the resources from those fronts, and successful teams get 
to use specially prepared laboratories and research facilities 
(where the chances of the Paradox Effect have been reduced), 
surveillance equipment, Social Conditioning equipment, and 
of course, backup assistance from initiates and citizens. Very 
successful Technocrats enjoy one of the most valuable rewards 
an agent can receive: free time and a life outside the Union. 
This potent incentive gives Technocratic operatives a serious 
boost to morale and motivation. 


Supervisors and Amalgams 


Someone needs to manage teams of agents. That’s what 
supervisors do. Every team of agents reports to one (or, insome 
cases, more than one) assigned supervisor. That supervisor 
provides the team with missions and logistics support and then 
evaluates its failure or success. (In game terms, a supervisor has 
an Enlightenment Trait of 4 to 6.) 


If an amalgam of agents represents several different 
Conventions, the amalgam might need to carry out different 
types of missions for different supervisors. In the most dangerous 
missions, asupervisor deploys a team of agents to investigate another 
supervisor, front, Construct, or amalgam. It’s vital, after all, to 
assure compliance and efficiency among other groups, so paranoia, 
rivalries, and politics invariably affect each supervisor’s career. 


Lowerlevel supervisors answer to their higher-echelon 
bosses. During the 20 century, these upper-level supervisors 
watched the Ascension War from the Horizon, evaluating 
the success or failure of Technocratic missions across large 
geographic areas. During the 21* century, however, that lofty 
element has largely been replaced by Earthbound supervision 
instead. (For details, see the Horizon Constructs sidebar.) Even 
on Earth, however, senior supervisors work far from the Front 
Lines, often in luxuriously appointed headquarters in the cities, 
oceans, wilderness, or deep underground. Telepresence gear 
facilitates constant communication, and occasional visits from 
the top office keep subordinates on their toes. 


The Schism 


Generally, this split-perspective approach provides asmooth 
chain of command between the higher and lower supervisory 
ranks. Even so, the division produces problems too. One of the 
Union's biggest internal problems within the last halfcentury 
involves a division between the idealistic theories developed 
by remote supervisors, and the practical needs of operatives 
and supervisors on the Front Lines. This disparity - sometimes 
referred to as the Schism - causes many of the moral and ethical 
challenges that agents and supervisors must face. 


Essentially, the Schism comes down to the difference 
between abstract theories and messy realities. A Front Line 
supervisor recognizes the necessity of compromise (say, an 
alliance with an influential pack of vampires), whereas the 
distant perfectionist tolerates no such thing. The breakdown 
between those perspectives fuels rivalry, intrigue, and occasional 
hostilities. When you live in an engineered, perfect world, it's 
really easy to lose track of ethical shades of gray and to demand 
things that cannot - or should not - be done by your underlings 
back home. Worse still, that disconnection between the Front 
Lines and Horizon Constructs bred secrets... secrets which, 
in turn, nurtured the Technocracy's moral and metaphysical 
corruption. Justas the Traditions suffered a breakdown between 
the lofty ideals and ancient grudges of their Masters, so too 
does the Technocracy suffer from the Schism between abstract 
ideals and human realities. 


Symposiums 

In any given city (or other large geographic area), several 
of the most successful supervisors form a council to oversee 
their operations ona large scale. The Union calls this alliance a 
Symposium; within that Symposium, each of the five Conventions 
has at least one representative. Supervisors move teams and 
resources around through a Symposium’s designated territory, 
like pieces on a chessboard. Some supervisors go along personally 
to oversee their teams on the Front Lines; others watch their 
teams through remote surveillance; still others delegate authority 
through lower-ranking supervisors or high-ranking operatives. 


Symposium meetings are formal affairs, accompanied by lively 
debate, heavy security, and intricate status reports. In moments of 
great triumph, crisis, tragedy, or failure, agents and amalgams get 
called in to report their activities to a Symposium... and possibly 
to receive appropriate rewards, reassignments, or punishments 


Chapter Five: Ascension Warriors 177 


H 


TN A 


A 


r , = 


ak 


E^ ins 


Horizon Constructs 


For much of the last two centuries, upper-echelon Technocrats have tended to live full time in Horizon Constructs: 
Technocracy bases stationed in geosynchronous orbit over the Earth, just outside the barrier of Earth's Horizon. Essentially 
space stations, these colonies provide self-contained reality bubbles, far from the risks and contaminations of an imperfect 
world. Heavily defended and technologically superior to anything found on Earth, the Horizon Constructs provide secure 
barracks for low-ranking initiates, safe workspace for higher-level operatives, and dedicated offices for the higher-ranking 
supervisors, managers, and Inner Circle. 


All Technocratic ranks have a place within a Horizon Construct. Extraordinary citizens work the menial jobs, and freshly 
initiated personnel tend to enter their newlives away fromthe material world’s distracting and often dangerous environment. 
Successful agents travel to Horizon Constructs to use research facilities in Paradox-free environments, whereas unsuccessful 
ones.get taken there for punishment, reprogramming, indoctrination, or repurposing. Supervisors and Managers prefer 


the focus and seclusion of Colony life; certain allied beings and enhanced operatives can't exist for long in Earthly 
space, so they must live in Horizon Constructs until the day when the Union achieves total domination of Earthly reality. 


In the Avatar Storm metaplot, most Horizon Constructs are damaged, destroyed, or mysteriously lost. The Void Engineers 
experience the highest losses, but every Convention is affected. The Revised Edition Convention Books follow this 
post-catastrophic Technocracy, which might or might not have come to pass in your chronicle. (See the Future Fates 
sidebar The Dimensional Anomaly and a “Kinder, Gentler Technocracy.”) If the Horizon Constructs remain 
operational, Dimensional Science technologies still provide relatively safe and reliable access to the Colonies, although 
large loads and groups travel to and from these Constructs through Technocratic space shuttles. These missions depart 
from covert airstrips across the world, giving rise to UFO rumors and other classified travel methods. 


Because space stations became part of consensual reality roughly a half-century ago, these Horizon Constructs are 
considered coincidental as far as magick is concerned. And because very few Sleepers ever get near such places 
(astronauts, after all, are extraordinary citizens), the Technocracy's reality is the only one that matters in a Horizon Construct. 


as a result of those activities. For the most part, Symposiums are 
Earthbound affairs. The logistics and hazards involved with Horizon 
Construct meetings limit these meetings to secure office buildings 
and military bases unless some extraordinary threat forces them 
to relocate to a more remote location. 


Masters, Managers, 
and Extradimensional Realms 

Beyond the Horizon Constructs, the Technocracy has absolute 
dominion over other, more exotic realms - domains where reality 
has been completely reformed according to the ideals of the masters 
who control it. Such extradimensional realms can be legendary or 
infamous, depending on their purposes. Iteration X devotees 
speak reverently of Autocthonia, a Realm completely remade into 
an ideal of mechanical perfection. Void Engineers know of many 
extradimensional destinations - including the Darkside Moonbase 
on the far side of the moon and the magnificent Copernicus 
Research Station - as well as other fortresses used to monitor and 
observe extradimensional races and entities. 


Among these alien landscapes and their related Horizon 
Constructs, Technocratic Managers assert a level of control 
uncommon in the more mundane and limited reality of Earth. 
Although plenty of operatives attain a Master-level degree of 
Enlightenment (in game terms, Enlightenment Traits of 5 to 8), 
the acknowledged masters of the Technocratic Union usually 
prefer to escape worldly imperfections and travel to realms that 
better suit their ideals. 


One Convention provides an exception to this rule: 
the Syndicate. Although the high masters of Iteration X, the 


178 Mage: The Ascension 20" Anniversary Edition 


Progenitors, and the New World Order escape the annoying 
boundaries of Earth whenever possible and the Void 
Engineers avoid them as a matter of principle, the Syndicate 
favors an earthier sort of reality: the sumptuous privilege of 
extreme wealth. Granted, the vast estates, penthouse suites, 
and exclusive retreats that such Technocrats enjoy bear little 
resemblance to reality as most human beings experience it. 
Those territories, though, are very much a part of the Earthly 
plane - purchased with unimaginable wealth and protected by 
advanced technologies, of course, but still a part of the material 
world. Syndicate Managers like to say that their connection to 
Earth protects their Convention from the distancing effects 
of the Schism; other Technocrats suspect (very quietly) that 
these masters are just as disconnected - perhaps even more 
disconnected - from the human condition as the masters 
who've gone off in search of extraplanetary ideals. 


Disconnected or not, some Managers are remarkably 
hands-on in their day to day activities. A Void Engineer 
Manager on an Umbral Moonbase, for instance, might prefer 
to act like the captain of a science fiction starship chasing 
down extradimensional horrors instead of hiding out in his 
fortified control room. A different Manager might travel to a 
Horizon Construct, accompanied by a supervisor and one or 
more teams of agents, to oversee technicians who specialize in 
highlyadvanced equipment. Other Technocratic masters employ 
holographic technology and virtual telepresence (in game terms, 
Correspondence and Mind Procedures) to visit places from afar, 
monitoring their agents from a safe but perceptive distance. 


Some Managers choose to remain on Earth or travel back 
to it in order to conduct extremely important missions. The 


mysterious Secret Agent John Courage is generally considered 
a Master level operative, yet he can be found anywhere that 
danger calls. When several high-level Technocrats work together 
as part of the same amalgam - like the famous Special Response 
Team Alpha - they intervene personally in some of Earth's most 
dangerous crises. Such extreme measures, however, remain rare. 
MasterJevel expertise allows for greater acts of Enlightened 
Science... which, in turn, carry greater risks of Paradox. Master- 
level intervention might cause bigger problems than the ones 
the team was originally sent in to solve... and so, though such 
missions occur from time to time, they're notundertaken lightly. 


Old Masters: 
The Inner Circle of Great Old Men 


The Technocracy’s highest-ranking entities are the legendary 
Old Masters: humans so far removed from Earthly reality that 
they contemplate the highest mysteries of Enlightenment. The 
Order of Reason knew them as Honori, and because techniques 
of life extension are easier to accomplish beyond the Horizon, 
some of the Old Masters are many centuries old. In the echelons 
of the elite, they debate concepts like the Time Table, cosmic 
enigmas, and the ultimate role of Reality Deviants in the greater 
scheme of things. Untroubled by Paradox, these “great old men” 
(all but one of whom are indeed male) regard the innovative 
creations of lesser Enlightened folk, dreaming of how their 
Inner Circle might reshape the future of the human race. 


Plagued by human limitations, these great old men also chase 
after rarefied goals like immortality, omnipresence within lesser 
realms, the creation of new Horizon Realms, and the mentoring 
of the next generation of Old Masters. Mere agents never speak 
directly with this Enlightened inner sanctum; instead, the Old 
Masters appoint or create factotums and representatives to deal 
with lesser concerns. These entities - artificial intelligences, 
holographic personalities, shadowy groups, or inhumanly capable 
operatives - speak and act on behalf of the Old Masters. To the 
average Technocrat, such entities are legends... often rumored, 
rarely seen, and almost inevitably feared. 


(Obviously, the continuing influence of these Old Masters 
depends upon aworld in which the Dimensional Anomaly never 
happened. In the Reckoning metaplot, these august Technocrats 
were apparently severed from their Earthly connections, and 
the Union reorganized itself in the early years of the new 
millennium. The Old Masters might still send messages from 
time to time or otherwise manifest their will back on Earth. 
For the most part, though, the Front Lines are the only lines in 
a post-Anomaly setting. Although the current leadership still 
suffers a bit of disconnect from the realities of those Front Lines, 
the new leaders are far more aware of Earthly realities than the 
ones who'd been living off world for decades or centuries.) 


Control 


The most legendary representative is an adaptable entity 
known as Control: a being whose identity and power can be 
instantly verified by anyone with enough Enlightenment to see 
it for what it is. Control rarely intervenes. Control does not 
constrain itself to one appearance, although it usually manifests 


asa man dressed in white. Control sometimes appears in several 
different bodies rather than one, and it almost always refers to 
itself as a collective we rather than an individual I. 


Control does not need to fight, command, or engage itself 
with rivals; Control has agents for thatsortof thing. And although 
Control appears to be physical, rumors claim that it's a remote 
projection of distant consciousness. On many levels, Control is as 
close to a god as most Technocrats ever get - a collective and active 
manifestation ofthe Old Masters’ will. Although Control is clearlya 
productoftechnology (any other option would be too ridiculous to 
contemplate), the science thatallows itto existtranscends anything 
currently known by even the most accomplished operatives. 


What, really, is Control? Is the entity some manifestation 
of the concept of Technocratic domination? A hyperpowerful 
hologram? A psychic entity forged by the Enlightened wills of the 
Inner Circle? Maybe this is the Technocratic Master Oracle, a being 
who personifies the All-Seeing Eye and the ultimate wisdom of the 
Union's cause. Some rumors even claim it’s the ghost of all the Old 
Masters who've passed on, bound by their philosophy into a single 
entity... butthatidea, of course, is absurd. Control is simply Control. 
Further analysis is restricted to the Technocracy’s highest ranks. 


For most Technocratic agents, the existence of such ranks 
is theoretical. It’s hard enough to survive day to day and 
carry out the necessary orders of one’s immediate supervisor 
without troubling one’s head thinking about the eye at the 
top of the pyramid. It’s a rare thing indeed for anyone below 
the supervisor rank to encounter a master or Control, and it’s 
almost impossible to actually meet one of the great old men. 
The Schism prevents most Earthbound Technocrats from 
dealing with the Horizon-based ones on anything other than 
a need-to-know basis, and it prevents the so-called Union from 
truly coming together as it might have done otherwise. And 
if those rumors about Nephandic corruption are true, those 
distant and secretive Old Masters might provide the key to the 
cage that either imprisons the best promises of the Technocratic 
Union or else keeps something even worse in check... for now. 


(The Revised Convention Books declare that Control has 
been cut off from the Earthly Technocracy. Whether or not 
that is true depends on the wishes of an individual Storyteller. 
If Control does manifest, of course, it could be any number 
of things: a manifestation of the real Control, an impostor, a 
Sending (see Appendix I, p. 641), an agent of Threat Null (see 
above), a Nephandic ploy, or whatever other agency of rule or 
misrule the Storyteller wants it to become.) 


Unlike the free-spirited Traditions, the Technocratic Union 
depends upon this designated chain of command. Reliable 
precision is essential to the survival and prosperity of the Union. 
Even in the more individualized spirit of the 21* century, the 
Union isa collective society whose existence demands obedience 
and cooperation. Although certain degrees of eccentricity and 
personal initiative have been built into the system (see The 
Six Degrees, below), continual carelessness, sloppiness, and 
insubordination cannot be tolerated. Flawed pieces within the 
system must either be corrected (via Processing) or discarded. 
In all ways that matter, the Union trumps the individual. The 
future of humanity deserves no less. 


Chapter Five: Ascension Warriors 179 


ee Sw 


Onconventional Operatives 


(For more details, see the Background: Enhancement 
in Chapter Six; Extraordinary Operatives and Technocratic 
Creations in Appendix I; and The Toybox in Appendix II.) 


As Reality Deviants and other critics have pointed out, 
the Technocracy employs extrahuman personnel. Although 
the extent of those unconventional operatives has been grossly 
exaggerated by the critics (or so the Inner Circle insists...), 
anyone who's seen the Union's true face knows that its features 
can seem a bit mechanical at times. 


Despite xenophobic hysteria, all loyal Technocrats recognize 
thattheuseofcyborgs, clones, and biomodified organisms issimply 
good policy. The human organism, after all, remains subject to 
all manner of embarrassing and fatal malfunctions. Technology 
improves upon nature, and the Technocracy personnel are no 
exception to that rule. True, the disputes between enhanced 
operatives and "naturals" occasionally flare into open conflicts 
and covert sabotage. Such behavior, though, is not in the Union's 
best interests, so those conflicts are often dealt with harshly. 
Just as European males within the Order of Reason learned to 
accommodate femalevisionaries and people from assorted cultures, 
so too must the sel£labeled naturals and the so-called constructs 
learn to deal peacefully with one another. 


Technically, discrimination within the ranks is a non- 
problem: it cannot exist, therefore it does not exist. Even so, the 
divisions between Adamites and superiors remain a thorn in 
the Technocratic armor - not a crippling problem, but one 
that continues to irritate and hinder the full potential of the 
Union. The most obvious parties in those conflicts include... 


Adamites 


In the eyes of certain natural-born and unenhanced homo 
sapiens, the various constructs and modified personnel are 
useful but ultimately inferior. Favoring names like "Adamites," 
"naturals.," or "human-firsters," these Technocrats cast a wary 
eye on their unnatural compatriots. 


Like other subcultures within the Union (see Technocratic 
Dissidents), the Adamites don't hang up flags to advertise 
their agendas. Instead, they employ a covert set of cues by 
which they recognize one another and use subtle forms of 
discouragement and one-upmanship to keep the freaks in their 
place. Unconventional operatives are rarely harassed - thatsort 
of thing is an invitation to punishment, censure, and a late-night 
beatdown from an annoyed cyborg or two. No, the freaks get 
lousy assignments, endure subtle pranks, and find themselves 
lacking for essential services or gear when an Adamite finds 
a chance to make their lives difficult. Meanwhile, naturals 
get preferential treatment, attract like-minded friends, and 
somehow find themselves advancing through the ranks faster 
and more easily than a cybernetic comrade would. Adamites 
sometimes advertise their allegiance by eating apples in a 
conspicuous way or keeping bowls of fruit (always with some 
apples) close at hand. Most often, though, they simply play their 
prejudices close to their chests and appear perfectly tolerant of 
the misfits in their midst. 


Mage: The Ascension 20" Anniversary Edition 


Victors, Clones, and Biojocks 

At the other extreme of the biomass equation, the 
Technocracy’s advanced organic beings tend to view themselves 
at one of two extremes: either they consider themselves freakish 
toys brewed up in some Progenitor lab or they embrace the tag 
Homo superior and aren’t shy about helping their flawed human 
counterparts remember it. 


Thanks tothe Progenitor Convention, the Technocracy’s filled 
with biologically enhanced personnel. Most appear to be more 
or less human, although they tend to boast an inhuman level of 
physical perfection. Given the Photoshopped glamor of modern 
advertising (not to mention the miracles of plastic surgery), such 
perfection isn’t as noticeable as it once was. These days, a Homo 
superior Victor looks like he or she just stepped off a magazine 
cover... probably an issue of Muscle & Fitness, true enough, but 
still within the bounds of acceptability. Not long ago, it was easy 
to tell a Progenitor construct from an unenhanced agent. Now, 
the genegineering and biomods are far more difficult to spot 
unless something went wrong during the procedure. Granted, 
the clones, Victors, and biojocks tend to be a lot stronger than 
normal people, and they’re often a bit unstable too. Still, the 
obvious improvements on the human machine are too valuable 
to dismiss, and so the various bioenhanced operatives retain a 
valued place in the Technocratic ranks. 


The most obvious organic constructs belong to the infamous 
Black Suit agencies. Although such operatives remain inferior to 
fully Enlightened agents, the NWO beefs up its street-level ranks 
with unique clones who possess the training and abilities of a 
typical Black Suit operative. Reputedly cloned from a handful of 
distinguished operatives, these agents possess paranormal abilities 
dedicated to the cause of order and control. And although they've 
been known to get rather enthusiastic in the performance of their 
duties, certain excesses are understandable, given the hazardous 
yet necessary duties such agents pursue. 


Other bioconstructs and biomodified personnel typically 
conceal their augmented nature more thoroughly. A handful ofthem 
manifest unfortunate genetic or organic flaws, butsuchare the costs of 
progress. Most ofthese regrettable casualties of biological imperfection 
remain in secluded Constructs and laboratories, tending to internal 
duties until their unusual skills are required in the field. Despite 
propaganda to the contrary, the mythic batwinged Chihuahua is 
not typical of such constructs. Although young Progenitors will have 
their little jokes, most bioconstructed and biomodified personnel 
are perfectly designed, if not altogether natural. 


Exos and Steelskins 


Cybernetic enhancements are common tools among the 
Technocratic ranks. Many have been carefully concealed, obvious 
only when in use. Others are more... noticeable. The unkind 
labels exos and steelskins have been applied to cybernetically 
enhanced operatives whose modifications evoke disturbed 
and perhaps envious reactions from their fellow Technocrats. 


2]*century cyborgs tend to be far less obvious than their 
older counterparts. The classic HIT Marks seem positively quaint, 
although they possess a definite intimidation factor. These days, 


nanotech replaces clunky metal gear, especially among the newer 
generations of cyborgs and HIT Marks. Still, obvious cybertech 
does have a certain retro coolfactor, and certain jobs still require 
a halfmetal dude who can bust through walls. For the dudes (and 
ladies) in question, that role can be a fairly mixed bag. 


Of all Union personnel, it's the cyborgs who present the 
most archetypal form of Technocratic power. (The Men in Black 
come in a close second.) Embodying the fusion of flesh, mind, 
and machine, these agents can be unenlightened Ciphers or 
Enlightened operatives. Iteration X is most (in)famous for 
its cybernetic personnel; most Iterators have some degree of 
modification, if only because of the Convention's ideal of 
transcending fleshly limitations. All Conventions, though, have 
a few cybernetic agents among their ranks - most of them simply 
aren't as obvious or extensive as the Iteration X operatives. 


The Progenitors, Iteration X, and the Void Engineers also 
employ cybernetically enhanced animals and clones, typically for 
hardcore field duty way beyond the gaze of the Masses. Although 
such beings are extremely vulgar in the eyes of the Consensus, 
extreme situations call for extreme measures. Cybernetic 
beasts - like the infamous cyber-tooth tiger - get dispatched to 
extradimensional hot zones, where the Paradox Effect holds 
very little influence and the uncanny nature of the terrain and 
its inhabitants necessitate such durable and efficient operatives. 


Robots 


Although independent robot technology is notas successful 
within the Technocracy as science-fiction films would have us 
believe, there are numerous robotic and even android agents 
and assistants within the Union’s ranks. Most of them are 
battlefield models, exploration devices, or lab-assistant units 
whose limited intellect allows them to perform grunt labor 
without becoming a burden on their organic peers. For the 
most part, these entities remain restricted to Constructs and 
extradimensional facilities. Even in a world raised on Star Wars, 
there’s only so much complexity a robot can display within the 
Consensus before chronic malfunctions limit its efficiency. 


That said, simple robots - drones, lab units, intelligent 
vehicles, and so forth - function perfectly well among the 
Masses. The success of hunterkiller drones deployed by 
military and police forces has brought such robots fully into 
Consensus reality. For obvious reasons, the Masses hold that 
kind of technology in wary awe; it's pretty cool, yet ominous. 
There’s a big difference between watchingsci-fi action movies and 
being on the receiving end of one yourself. And so, although 
they’re significantly more advanced than they might appear, 
these robotic operatives play dumb among the Masses, acting 
more like charming mechanical pets than like viable rivals for 
humanity. An enemy’s underestimation, after all, is a very 
potent weapon. 


Regardless of their rivalries, every Technocratic operative is 
expected to play nice with the others. Bigotry and favoritism are 
not, under official policy, tolerated within the Union’s ranks. 
People being people (even if those people seem rather unusual), 
certain prejudices exist. Especially in the 21* century, however 
- when operatives of all ethnicities and gender configurations 


MA AE 


fill the Technocratic ranks - the core principle of mutuality is 
vital to this group's survival. 


Mutuality and Onmutuality 


Mutuality is such avital principle within the Technocracy’s 
operations that the words mutual and unmutual carry strong 
connotations for Union personnel. Drawn from the Latin 
root meaning "to reciprocate" (and related to the word mutate, 
meaning "to change"), mutuality suggests investment and 
exchange between parties. You give me something, I give you 
something, and we're mutual; if I give you something and you 
take something away from me, then you're being unmutual. 


Technocracy justice - formal and otherwise - depends 
upon the principle thatthe Union gives greatthings to its agents 
and expects great things from them in return. Selfishness is 
unmutual. Disloyalty is unmutual. Rebellion is unmutual. And 
because the Technocracy bestows such magnificent things upon 
its agents and depends so much upon their loyalty, judgment 
is swift and punishment harsh when an agent or team acts 
in an unmutual way. A well-intentioned failure is acceptable. 
Deliberately spitting in the Union's face is not. 


The Six De$rees 


As all Technocrats know from indoctrination onward, the 
Union holds a spectrum that features six degrees of tolerable 
loyalty. At one end, an operative is unimpeachably loyal; at the 
other, she's marked for cancellation. Punishments can move 
an agent further down the scale, whereas loyal and successful 
service moves her up toward the favorable end. 


* Degree 1 - Total Loyalty: The operative is considered a 
bastion of Technocratic honor, viewed with great respect, 
and granted an enviable amount of freedom. So long 
as the agent doesn't abuse this trust, she's as trusted as 
a person can be within the Union. 


* Degree 2 - Assured Loyalty: The agent has performed 
admirably, and her superiors have no reasonable 
suspicions regarding her devotion to the cause. She'll still 
be supervised, of course, but until and unless the agent 
behaves in some questionable manner, she enjoys an 
overall independence within Technocratic constraints. 


* Degree 3 - Assumed Loyalty: The operative has yet to 
give her superiors a reason to doubt her loyalty. She'll be 
monitored and evaluated, of course, but at this default 
level of trust she's presumed to be trustworthy until she 
proves otherwise. 


* Degree4 - Questionable Loyalty: The agent’s behavior, 
judgment, and/or activities have given her supervisors 
a reason to question her commitment to the cause. 
Monitoring increases and tighter restrictions are placed 
upon the operative until her behavior improves. 


* Degree 5 - Doubtful Loyalty: Sloppy judgment and 
dubious behavior have put the agent on "the red 


Chapter Five: Ascension Warriors lal 


H 


A 


ak 


E^ tas 


list." She'll be watched very carefully and made aware 
that her slope is getting quite slippery indeed. Social 
Conditioning might be in order, and whatever liberties 
she's had have been curtailed. 


* Degree 6 - Disloyalty: The operative is considered a 
failure. Essentially, she's one screw-up away from a trip 
to Room 101, the spare-parts room, a suicide mission, 
or the grave. 


* Degree 7: There is no Degree 7. It's a euphemism for 
cancellation. 


Failure to Comply 

Despite its draconian reputation, the Technocracy does 
not turn agents into dog food for any perceived infraction. 
Such measures are, if nothing else, profound wastes of training, 
investment, and potential. Still, rules are rules, and when rules 
are broken - as they inevitably will be - an escalating series of 
punishments must be invoked. 


Minor infractions warrant the following measures: 
Reprimand (dressing-down by one's superior), Report (an official 
complaint against the operative), Restriction (loss of freedoms 
and privileges), and Surveillance (monitoring of that agent's 
activities). Serious infractions - or a consistent pattern of 
smaller ones - get punished by more diligent Surveillance, 
Forfeiture (loss of gear, perks, or more), Demotion (loss of rank 
and status), Amended Society (a rearranging of that agent's 
personal life, courtesy of his supervisors), Reassignment (transfer), 
Extradimensional Reassignment (transfer to a new and deadly 
extradimensional post), Reprogramming/ Social Conditioning 
(intense brainwashing; see this book’s Prelude for residual 
effects), Duplication (replacement of that agent witha functional 
clone), and, finally, the Degree Absolute (a.k.a. Cancellation). 


Again, severe measures are not used without careful 
consideration. Every supervisor is responsible for the conduct 
and status of the agents under her command, and if she uses 


Room IOI 


Agenericnameforthe most dreaded cornerofaTechnocratic 
stronghold, Room 101 (a.k.a., the White Room, the Black 
Room, or, most ominously, the Red Room) is a secured 
chamber used for interrogations, Social Conditioning 
Procedures, or outright torture. Soundproofed and 
safeguarded against most forms of magick or transmission, 
aRoom 101 facility features powerful restraints; monitoring 


andrecordingdevices; and ahandfulofspeciallytrained and 
very efficient operatives who know how to get the desired 
results and can break almost anyone with combinations of 
physical distress, psychological manipulation, Enlightened 
Procedures, and gross bodily harm. 


For details about Social Processing and 
Reprogramming, see the section of that name in 
Chapter Ten, (pp. 605-606). 


182 Mage: The Ascension 20" Anniversary Edition 


Rewards of Service 


A glance atthe Backgrounds section of Chapter Six 
reveals justhowrewarding service tothe Technocracy can 
be. Certain Backgrounds are available onlyto members 
in good standing, with benefits like outsourcing and 
requisitions that come from Technocratic membership. 
Certain Ability Traits, too, are part of Technocratic 
training programs, and the Union has plenty of cool toys 
to play with as well. For dedicated operatives, Union 
membership provides a deep well of potential benefits. 
Just remember: what can be given can be taken away 
if the recipient seems ungrateful... 


VDAS: The Datacrawl 


Officially known as the Visual Data & Analysis 
Spectrum (VDAS), the “datacrawl” keeps Technocracy 
field agents apprised of vital information. Thanks to 
the VDAS (pronounced vee-DAS), an appropriately 
equipped or cybernetically enhanced operative can 
usually accessintel abouther companions or surroundings. 
Upon command, a flow of relevant data — targeting; 
positioning; vital statistics for people, substances, or 
creatures; and so forth — scrolls along the edges of the 
agent's peripheral vision, usually on the edges of her 
glasses or viewscreen. A subvocalized command (or, 
in cybernetic implants, a mental impulse) can request 
information about a given subject; otherwise, the VDAS 
scans whatever is positioned in the agent's field of vision. 
Because this datacrawl can be distracting or might 
provide compromising information, the agent can turn it 
on or off with a particular type of blink or — in the case 
of a cybernetically installed VDAS — with a mental shrug. 


Datacrawlintel comesfromthe Technocracy's monitoring 
technology. If there's no information about a given 
subject in the Union's database, the VDAS can't pull 
up the information. In the 21* century, however, many 
people in industrialized areas have their vital statistics — 
height, weight, birth date, etc. — within readily available 
databases... and, by extension, within reach of the 
Technocracy’s datacrawl. VDAS data gets displayed in 
metric terms for maximum efficiency. An example of a 
VDAS in action appears in this book's Prelude, when 
John Courage scans Lee Ann Milner. Naturally, the 
VDAS registers the information that’s being scanned, the 
agent who's scanning it, and the subjects in the agent's 
view during the scan. An agent who wants to keep her 
secrets, therefore, is very careful about where, when, 
and how often she uses the datacrawl. 


For game-system details about the datacrawl, see The 
Toybox section in Appendix II. 


punishments too freely - or, in contrast, if her agents are not 
governed strictly enough - things will go poorly for that supervisor. 


Risks and Rewards 


Just as there are punishments, there are rewards for loyal 
service. Every agent has potential, and if she plays her cards right, 


KENA 


she'll be set for life. The Technocracy isn't just some company that 
sets up its employees with paychecks and health insurance. It’s the 
secret society that owns that company... and its competition... and 
the secret masters that set them against each other. The elite of 
humanity can change your life forever. You want money? You'll 
never think about it again, and your credit will be spotless. You 
wantsex? Ifyou don't mind the moral implications, the Progenitors 
could clone you a partner who can make every dream you ever had 
come true. You want power? You'll need to fight to keep it, but 
you'll still be better off than 9996 of the human race. Cybernetics? 
Biomods? Gadgets that would make James Bond jealous? Huge 
guns? A private army? The Technocracy has them all. Loyal service 
earns royal treatment, and well-regarded Technocrats are the kings 
and queens of the Awakened world. 


But if the carrot isn't enough for you, there's always the 
stick: no matter how bad you think failure can be, failing the 
Technocracy is far worse. Citizenship in the Union isn't like 
some job where you'll end up escorted to the parking lot when 
you fail, carrying your personal stuff in a cardboard box. If your 
supervisors decide to terminate you, you won't make it outside 
the building. You can run, and they will find you. And then 
they can strap you down to a medical table and scramble your 
brains until you don't have a choice. They can clone you and 
make an obedient little brainwashed agent... one who won't 
quite be you but will still be alive. 


And even if you escape, it's not as though the Traditions 
have any reason to trust a rogue agent on the run. So if you're 
good, you won't just have all your dreams come true, you'll also 
get to keep your free will. If you rebel, though, that's another 
story - one where an idealist gets hunted down by the most 
extensive secret society in the world. Ironically enough, that's 
the other side of the looking glass, because it's a life that the 
greatest enemies of the Technocracy struggle to survive. 


Enlightenment and Empowerment: 
The Collective and the Individual 


Each individual in the Union has a choice: conformity 
or rebellion. A crisis of loyalty could occur during the events 
of a single mission; devotion might be tested throughout a 
long crusade for reality. An agent must serve the needs of his 
collective, but he mustalso pursue his own path to Empowerment: 
that state known to RDs as Ascension. For truly loyal agents, 
the two goals are one and the same. Any one of the Precepts 
of Damian can provide a path to Empowerment, even if it’s 
an ideal that can’t be achieved in one lifetime. For brilliant 
minds, the Enlightened Genius is an extension of identity and 
individuality, offering new frontiers, new risks, and new rewards. 


For all that they would never use or accept that word, 
Enlightened Technocracy agents are mages. Driven by the same 
urges and awareness that guide their rivals, they see a bigger picture 
than the one the Masses understand. Their actions shift reality - 
in accordance with a master plan, yes, but with a sense of cosmic 
Dynamism that mere grunts simply don’t possess. Although their 
Union employs different terminology and insists on a firm divide 
between magic and reason, there’s still a lot of common ground 
between the Traditions and their longtime enemies. 


Technocratic operatives meditate between missions. No 
matter how many indoctrination sessions or formal reviews they 
may endure, each agent must walk the Path to Empowerment 
- from innocence to omniscience - alone. Mystic mages learn 
magick from the moment of their Awakening with the guidance 
of an Avatar. An agent follows a similar Path, awakening to 
the possibilities of Enlightened Science from the moment of 
his Epiphany with the guidance of his Genius. For any agent 
who wants to retain his or her individuality, the concepts of 
Epiphany and Genius are essential. (And in game terms, the 
downtime between missions provides useful opportunities to 
explore these issues of individuality.) 


Epiphany 

An Enlightened Technocrat first realizes his or her ability 
ina moment of Epiphany - just as other mages do, seen through 
a lens of science and reason. It’s a flash of Genius, a brilliant 
revelation in which the impossible suddenly becomes possible. 
Some Epiphanies are witnessed by Technocratic operatives 
before a particular Technocrat gets recruited; others remain 
hidden, shameful events that the Technocrat conceals from 
watchful eyes. 


Some common Ephiphanies include: 


* A scientific breakthrough in a laboratory or other 
controlled environment, in which the Enlightened 
person accomplishes some remarkable feat he’s never 
achieved before. 


e Avivid dream orvision ofa future in which technologically 
improbable things become possible, with results that lead 
to Utopia or Dystopia. 


* The discovery of a phenomenon that the Enlightened 
scientist had regarded, up until that moment, as strictly 
theoretical. 


* The budding Void Engineer crosses a boundary 
between worlds or encounters something from another 
dimension. 


* A future Progenitor gives life to something that would 
not normally thrive, heals an injury or illness that 
should be incurable, or alters himself in a way that 
defies conventional biology. 


* A potential member of Iteration X creates a mechanical 
or virtual avatar that achieves measurable artificial 
intelligence. 


* A future citizen of the New World Order achieves an 
impossible intellectual feat, a sudden revelation, or a 
burst of psychic activity. 


* A promising recruit for the Syndicate manipulates, 
coerces, reshapes, exploits, or dominates another human 
being's intelligence or judgment, leading to unexpected 
profit. 


Chapter Five: Ascension Warriors 183 


d 


Ti 


Zi 


e Aninvestigator confronts some paranormal entity head- 
on for the first time and uses her intellect and ingenuity 
to defeat it. 


Genius 

Just as mages have Avatars, Technocrats employ the 
guidance of their Geniuses. Unlike the connotations of gods 
and magic inherent in the word “avatar,” the word genius 
(from a root meaning “born” and “origin”) holds impressions 
of rationality, intellect, talent, and achievement. (It also once 
meant “guardian spirit” and shares a link to genie, but no one 
talks about that in the Technocracy...) Simply put, the Genius 
is the best aspect of an Enlightened Technocrat - the essential 
excellence that makes him what he is. 


Although Technocrats regard conformity as essential to 
survival, the appearance of Genius varies from operative to 
operative. In the case of weird mystical manifestations, folks 
just don't talk about them truthfully. Because Genius, like 
Avatar, is an intimate and personal matter, it's easy to lie about 
the appearance or personality of one's Genius. Even so, most 
Technocratic Geniuses appear to their hosts as embodiments 
of technology, science, rationality, or protection... and when 
they don't, the Technocrat in question typically interprets his 
genius in that light anyway. Yes, a Man in Black might view his 
Genius as a dragon; to him, however, that dragon is symbolic of 
power and majesty, perhaps a guardian of treasure (the world), 
not some mythic force of chaos. 


Typical Technocratic Geniuses include: 


e Avirtual associate who communicates only through text 
messages, phone calls, emails, or online icons. 


* Animaginary mentor who confronts the Technocrat in 
dreams and reveries, whether that's a historical figure, 
a Platonic ideal, or a mirror (or idealized) image of the 
Technocrat herself. 


* A guardian who waits at the threshold to another 
dimension, reachable only through Dimensional 
Science. 


* A shadowy and nondescript agent who appears before 
the Technocrat when no one else is around. 


* A religious icon (an angel, prophet, avatar, or patron 
saint) that appears in dreams and visions even though 
the agent doesn't practice her religion openly. 


In most cases, the Genius appears to a given operative in 
moments ofsolitude, meditation, or introspection. Disreputable 
Supervisors might attempt to infiltrate or construct artificial 
representations ofthese events, butsuch intrusive and deceptive 
measures are exceedingly difficult to pull off well and remain 
officially unsanctioned and extremely unmutual. 


Technocratic Faith 
Officially, the Technocracy acknowledges rational science 
as its only god. That's not to say, however, that all Technocrats 


Ma$e: The Ascension 20^ Anniversary Edition 


are atheists. For the most part, religion is considered a private 
matter by the Union unless and until it becomes a disruptive 
influence. The original Order of Reason, after all, was deeply 
rooted in sacred inspiration, and although religion was officially 
purged from the Technocracy during its 1800s reinvention, that 
heritage has never been completely dismissed. 


Contrary to popular misconception, plenty of scientists are 
people of faith, and plenty of religious creeds respect science. 
Faith is typically regarded as the path to matters that science 
cannot fully address, and science is regarded as the divinely 
inspired key to material life. Within the Technocracy, science 
can become faith, too; Iteration X's veneration of The Machine, 
for example, provides a vision of God every bit as potent as 
some desert prophet's revelations. 


So yes, certain Technocrats hold religious faith - often in 
an established creed, occasionally in a Technocratic religion 
that elevates science to a metaphysical ideal. And although 
openly religious behavior earns a wary eye from supervisors (and 
religious extremity receives a visit from the agents of Control), 
each individual is allowed some degree of personal faith... so 
long as that faith does not conflict with the ideals and duties 
of the Technocracy. 


United and Alone 


Theworld is a dangerous place and, as any agentsoon learns, 
there’s safety in numbers. Enlightened operatives meditate alone, 
but they learn to survive together - working with teams of agents, 
receiving instruction from their respective Conventions, resolving 
missions for their supervisors, and receiving information from 
a world monitored through extensive surveillance. 


Just as the world holds infinite possibilities, it presents 
infinite perils. Once, it was a larger place, where distance could 
isolate communities from civilization. Before cell phones, 
satellites, jet travel, and the Internet, a tiny community on the 
other side of the planet could remain completely isolated from 
the world’s most advanced civilizations. The boundary between 
possible and impossible was defined by the consensus of the 
local populace. If the people of a village believed that a shaman 
could heal the sick or talk to the dead, then the boundary 
between the possible and impossible shifted to accommodate 
that belief. The result was a patchwork world, where thousands 
of variants of different paradigms coexisted - a world where 
anything was possible, especially if the Sleeper witnesses around 
you believed it was. The result was chaos. 


Indoctrinators in the Ivory Tower would have us believe that 
world was a dangerous anachronism. A world that accepts all truths 
is ultimately a world with no truth. When everything is permissible 
and nothingis forbidden, justice is impossible. As a mage gains more 
power, he strays from the reality, the justice, and the truth of the 
Masses around him. He becomes answerable only to himself - no 
matter what words of socalled wisdom his mentor gives him - until 
he strays too far and reality punishes him for his hubris. Among 
"Tradition mages, the most powerful willworkers test the boundaries 
of the impossible. There is, however, a contesting point of view. 


The Masses - the common populace of unAwakened 
Sleepers - have their own vision of how the world should 


Future Fates: A Technocratic Opgrade? 


Modern corporations change with the times. It stands to reason that the Technocracy would do the same. Rumor has it 
that the Technocracy is gearing up for a monumental re-org - a new-millennium upgrade that will purge a lot of the old 
bugs (and probably a lot of personnel as well) in an effort to address a brave new world. 


Like the New Horizon Council, this reorganized Technocracy is an optional development. You can use it, ignore it, or 
modify it to suit your chronicle. If you're running a Technocracy-based chronicle, the news and implementation of the re- 
org could present a dramatic variation to the old “hunt Reality Deviants” thing... especially ifthe reorganized Technocracy 
has put your players on the termination list. 


It's a good bet that the pending re-org comes courtesy of the Nephandic Inner Circle. What better way could there be, 
after all, to rattle loose the stubborn idealists than to reorganize the entire organization and find out who and where 
those malcontents might be? Such shakeups always have casualties, and if a bit of red ink winds up spilling over groups 
like Project Invictus, the Friends of Courage, and the Harbingers of Avalon, well, that's just the cost of doing business. 


As of 2015, the re-org is simply a rumor among the rank and file. The future configuration of this 21 -century Technocracy 


remains to be seen... assuming, of course, that the idealists remain alive to see it appear! 


work. Consensus creates this vision, and the Sleepers’ beliefs, 
in turn, create the Consensus. Although the Masses still cling 
to their regrettable religious extremes and cultural superstitions, 
increasing numbers of people share a predictable, orderly world 
- one in which two plus two will always equal four, gravity is an 
absolute, and magic is nothing more than a stage magician’s 
repertoire of tricks and illusions. 


Under the Enlightened Anthropic Principle, people with 
sufficient brilliance and dedication shape the world in general. 
Their Enlightenment channels great forces of probability and 
stability. And so, the agents of the Technocratic Union have a 
duty to use that Enlightenment for the common benefit of man. 
Those agents might need to shepherd the stupider elements of 
humanity toward those greener pastures, but - like shepherds 
- Technocrats are dedicated to guiding the flock and killing 
the wolves whenever it becomes necessary to do so. 


(Some folks would argue that Technocrats are the wolves; to 
that claim, a Technocrat might respond that of course she’s a wolf 
- an Alpha wolf safeguarding her pack. And could a pack survive 
without leadership and occasional ferocity? No. Case closed.) 


Technocracy agents know which world the vast majority 
of humanity wants: one world with one immutable set of laws. 
No secret society was required to create it, although cabals of 
idealists have worked to reinforce its boundaries. Individuals 
might dissent, but the world we inhabit exists because, allegedly, 
this is the world the Masses want. Its stability depends on a 
staunch belief that the supernatural does not exist, that magic 
is not real. Science, not superstition, must be the order of 
the day. Guided and defended by the Technocracy, men and 
women must be masters of their own world. 


This ideal is the world the Technocracy defends: not the 
world of the future, but the world of today. It’s a world in which 
supernatural forces are not allowed to prey upon mankind. 


A world in which reality is shaped by a single unified vision, 
and all alternatives to safety and stability are eliminated. It’s 
an ideal world, a theory that Enlightened minds developed 
in rarefied realms. The Technocracy’s crusade is a crusade for 
Reality itself. As such, there will be casualties. Individuals will 
die so the collective can live. 


As an agent of the Union, this is the new life that awaits 
you: the world of the Technocracy, the realm of uplift, progress, 
and Control. 


The Dirty Side of the Coin 


It all sounds so civilized. And it is. But this is the civilization 
of the sweatshop and the drone, where bulldozing a village and 
gunning down its people is a perfectly acceptable price for cheap 
fuel and higher stock dividends. A civilization in which the strong 
and capable rule the weak through distraction, indulgence, 
debt, and, when necessary, force. A civilization where police 
forces sweep in with military hardware to disperse and - when 
necessary - destroy perceived renegades. A civilization in which 
imagination is a commodity and compassion is a threat to the 
bottom line. 


Are we talking about the Technocracy now or about our 
real world? 


Yes. 


The Technocracy represents the civilized ideal of 
achievement and control. On the shiny side of that coin, wealth 
and brilliance and convenience and prosperity beckon us with 
the promise of cool stuff and the luxury to enjoy it. On the 
flip side, that same coin is caked with blood and grease, the 
inevitable byproducts of mechanized society. 


So is it possible to have the shine without the grime? 
Perhaps. But that new, improved reality might require a lot of 
work and a little bit of magic. 


Chapter Five: Ascension Warriors 185 


(ivan che chofes between freiity aml 


Penfeccions 


nomeasoningonganismiwouldichooselitsihlaws. 


Humans are weak, but technology makes 
usstrong. Over generations, scientists have 
augmented humans with state-of-the-art 
tech, improving bodies and minds. Mass 
media disseminate news about these 
new inventions in order to uplift the 
Consensus; the greatest innovators of 
such enhancements, though, perfect their creations in absolute 
secrecy. Under the aegis of the “Clockwork Convention,” elite 
Technocrats create hypertech devices in secluded laboratories 
and then deploy them to the Front Lines of an improved 
reality. Through many iterations of such progress, Enlightened 
visionaries develop integrated masterworks to surpass mere 
humanity, striving to meet their greatest challenge: artificial 
intelligences that can replace the flawed human mind. These 
Enlightened Scientists seek cybernetic perfection; with each 
generation, their creations improve. The state of the art is the 
current incarnation of Iteration X. 


- ZEE 


Refined over millennia from visionary artisans to 
posthuman mechanistics, Iteration X commands the most 
impressive firepower and most disciplined military capacities 
in the Union. Its military operatives boast weaponry as integral 
parts of their bodies, from energy-packed blasters to kinetic 
chain guns. Various enhancements make these agents faster 
and stronger than their all-too-human rivals. Meanwhile, clones 
conditioned in laboratories and trained as Kamrads bolster 


their ranks. Such operatives pride themselves on efficiency, 
each individual working as a part of a much larger machine. 


Despite the Convention's military rep, not all Iterators 
are soldiers. This Convention also specializes in innovation, 
hyperefficiency, mass production, and statistical prediction. 
Some of the group's most visionary work is virtual, not 
bhysical, relying upon elaborate simulations and organic/ 
mechanical integration technologies. Enlightened analysts 
simulate endless variations of events to predict outbreaks of 
anomalous phenomena, supernatural deviance, and other 
chaotic disruptions before they occur. Some operatives refine 
diverse skill sets, coordinating various operations through 
interconnected thought processes. Others appear perfectly 
mundane but are anything but that when you get beneath 
their skins. 


The Convention's most dangerous agents and weapons 
remain too advanced for Earthly Consensus; developed in 
remote facilities (off world, whenever possible), these armatures 
are shipped in from labs and factories filled with sublime 
hypertech. In the old days, the machine-realm called Autocthonia 
represented a near-mythic reflection of sublime perfection. 
New-millennium Iterators seem less dogmatic about cybernetic 
refinement - perhaps because Autocthonia fell victim to a 
Dimensional Anomaly, or maybe just because "Borging out” 
doesn't seem quite as cool as it used to be. Even so, certain 
Iterators believe full Empowermentis possible only within such 


Fellow Conventions: Lacking our drive toward perfection, they do the best they can. Still, our Union would be more 


efficient if our comrades adopted our successes in place of their own limitations. 


The Traditions: Forces of visionary chaos, doomed to be replaced. 


The Disparates: Sad remnants of primitive stages of evolution. Humanity has already moved beyond their kind. 


186 Ma$e: The Ascension 20^ Anniversary Edition 


realms. When humanity Ascends, they believe, all of reality will 
be recast in mechanistic perfection. 


Organization: Iterators employ chains of command that 
dictate missions with mathematical precision. Ideally, the 
operatives and their Convention work as parts of alarger machine, 
setting aside autonomy and ego. Both agents and supervisors are 

expected to perform to their utmost ability, sacrificing themselves, 
when necessary, for the greater good. 


Among the lower ranks, Socially Conditioned Iterators work 
exclusively with one another, refining their teamwork and proving 
their value. Successful agents gradually achieve free will, greater trust, 
upgrades, enhancements, and cross-Convention assignments that 

reward efficient flexibility. Experienced Iterators learn to critique and 
question their superiors but also to wait until the right moment to do 
so. For most Iterators, gray areas are unacceptable; instead, each action 
becomes a binary choice, swiftly evaluated as either success or failure. 


Repeated failures condemn an Iterator to serve time as part of 
a mindless machine. The lowestranking operatives are little more 
than tools, and a powerful cyborg who cannot manage his resources 
must temporarily surrender his autonomy to more efficient external 
management. 
Initiation: Sophisticated calculations (that is, Time-based 
Procedures) help Iteration X recruiters find likely personnel before 
those people reach Enlightenment. Soldiers, scientists, mathematicians, 
philosophers, and even people with profound physical handicaps all 
provide suitable personnel, so long as they can accept an essential role 
in a greater whole. Previously Awakened recruits are rare, but they can 
be Socially Conditioned to accept assimilation. Once a potential initiate 
has been removed from the distracting imperfections of the Masses, 
a complex process of indoctrination, surgery, and enhancement 
shapes each Iterator into an effective and often Enlightened 
operative. Failed experiments, meanwhile, get deconstructed 
into Kamrads and Ciphers, creating an army of obedientworkers 
and soldiers who act in unison toward programmed goals. 


Affinity Spheres: Forces, Matter, or Time. 


Focus: The core of Iteration X science comes from the 
synergy between organic, mechanical, social, mathematical, 
and psychological elements. And so, cybernetics, craftwork 
and hypertech forge the foundation of this group's practices. 
Innovative Iterators employ martial arts, social dominion, 
hypereconomics, and reality hacking - after all, even perfection 
must be flexible! A few even hold a demi-religious faith in 
the ultimate potential of The Machine; these days, though, 
they don't often discuss that out loud. 
A Mechanistic Cosmos presents the obvious paradigm 
for Iteration X. Clearly, Tech Holds All Answers. Math- 
inclined members of this Convention assure their 
comrades that Everything is Data. This group has no use 
for “fuzzy” paradigms, so the Sphere of Dimensional 
Science is an extremely rare discipline among its ranks. 


Chapter Five: Ascension Warriors 187 


finnsensusiShapes 


EW 


Re dligvennelwonldwelseelistneloneltheMasseswwants 


i m 
ORDER 


tthe moment, that wieton ts ohecane. We willl Fiz it Far dhe betterment oF ell. 


Knowledge grants power, and true knowledge should 

be restricted to those with the appropriate respect 

for the power it contains. As masters of 

information and indoctrination, the agents 

of the New World Order alter data to enforce 

their vision of a perfect world. Masses, as these 

Technocrats understand, remain safest when they’ re 

kept blissfully, ignorantly asleep. Humanity prospers best in a world 
where deviance is hidden, science is predictable, and controlled 
technology empowers those people who have the training to 


handle it. 


The group’s now-infamous name comes from the 
philosophies of 18"-century idealists. Proposing a global state in 
which random elements such as primitive societies, art, magic, 
and even religion were abolished in favor of benevolently imposed 
order, these heretical masters began disseminating the concept 
through secret lodges and assorted allies across the world. During 
Queen Victoria’s reign, this group consolidated its power within 
the existing Cabal of Pure Thought. Moving that group from a 
religious foundation to a secular one, the idealists purged their 
superstitionist peers through campaigns of truth reform and 
rhetorical intrigue. Reason replaced religion as the paragon of their 
newly ordered world. Joining forces with Inspector Rathbone’s 
Skeleton Keys, those idealists forged their metaphorical Ivory 
Tower with London at its center and Victorious Britannia its 
figurehead. By the time American conspiracist Robert Welch 


began spreading the term among the Masses in the early 1970s, 
the New World Order was many decades old. 


The bedrock of this group involves control of information... 
and thus, of possibilities. To this end, the Convention employs 
athree-pronged strategy: eliminate dissent and Reality Deviance, 
consolidate information and Enlightenment, and propagate the 
image of a safely governed world. Using all three elements to 
reinforce one another, the Order strives to bring chaos to heel. 
It’s a titanic labor, to be sure, and one in which open conflict 
remains undesirable. Therefore, the NWO prefers covert action 
to overt action. Beneath a cover of secrets and misdirection, 
the rampant elements of deviant reality can be taken down, 
erased, and revised to fit a more productive truth. 


Information provides the cornerstone of NWO operations. 
And so, the Order employs advanced surveillance, field agents, 
and data-tracking processes to collect and assimilate intelligence 
throughout the world. Meanwhile, those field-agent teams also 
hunt down deviant elements for elimination or recruitment. 
Captured RDs get subjected to intense Social Conditioning 
sessions - refinements of the same Conditioning that errant 
members of the Technocracy undergo in order to bring them 
back into line. By the end of that programming, those Deviants 
either join the Union as productive citizens or else become will- 
broken ragdolls in the Order’s hands. Either way, they no longer 
threaten the Consensus. 


Stereotypes 


Fellow Conventions: We know their secrets; they do their jobs... or else. 


The Traditions: A promising field of potential recruits poisoned by toxic ideologies and disruptive tendencies. Convert 


them when possible, exterminate them otherwise. 


The Disparates: The persistent heirs of primitive cultures. Convert or exterminate as necessary. 


188 Mage: The Ascension 20" Anniversary Edition 


Organization: Reflectingthatthree-pronged strategy, the NWO employs three 
primary Methodologies to implement its goals. The Operative group sends 
agents - typically the Black Suits, though it employs less obvious agents 
too - into the field to address threats and collect intelligence. The Ivory 
Tower handles administration and implementation throughout 
the entire Technocracy and also disseminates controlled truths 
through Sleeper academia. Meanwhile, the Watchers collect 
information, simultaneously circulating messages of control 
and complacency among the Masses so as to minimize 
chaos and dissent. All three agencies report to upperechelon 
supervisors, who direct operations from safe distance. 


be 


Meanwhile, two other Methodologies - Q Division and 
the Feed - provide support for the other operations. Technically 
a cross-Convention imperative, Q Division provides the field gear for 
Technocratic agents (NWO and otherwise), and the Feed assesses 
and guides the growing power of the Internet and its many social 
technologies. Within all NWO divisions, an ascending order of 
seniority (Black Suits/ Gray Suits/ White Suits) reflects what 
the Order calls the "purification of genius" and the formality 
of control. 


Pa 


Al D 


Initiation: By reviewing standardized academic and h 
vocational tests, scanning databases, and coordinating covert ~ 
surveillance efforts, the Ivory Tower selects potential recruits. 

Generally, a new recruit dies to his oldlife and enters a newlife 3 è 
as a NWO trainee. Other recruits get converted from Y 
among the Union's enemies, by way of the Order's 


sophisticated Social Conditioning techniques. 


Because these tactics can be very resource- 
intensive, the NWO bolsters its ranks with clones: 
unEnlightened constructs trained to act in unison, 
empowered with a telepathic hive mind, and 
chemically altered to disintegrate upon death. 
As a matter of course, the NWO subjects its 
agents to varying degrees of indoctrination and 
social conditioning, depending on individual 
performanceand their roles outthere in the field. 


AffinitySpheres: MindorCorrespondence/ 
Data. 


Focus: In A World of Gods and Monsters, 
Might is Right and Tech Holds All Answers. Social 
dominion and the command of consciousness - 
that is, the influence, harnessing, programming, 
and reprogramming of the homo sapiens mind - 
provides the cornerstone of this New World Order’s 
techniques. To that end, psychic training, information 
manipulation, perceptual conditioning, and symbolic 
connections (like a man wearing a formal black suit 
and carrying a badge) provide the essential tools for 
NWO Procedures. Physical media constitute the 
second level of manipulation, with the third and most 
brutal level - force - channeled through guns, armor, 
gadgets, hypertech vehicles, advanced weaponry, and 
the martial arts training all operatives receive. Paranoia, 
however, is the Order’s strongest weapon. If people believe 
you can do something, after all, their belief tilts reality 
in your favor before you even begin to act. 


Chapter Five: Ascension Warriors 189 


Sh 


H 
|: 


Potential horror is the cast of Therecion. 
ouly wien we face the (iret can we secure the second. 


Gods do not create and destroy life. Scientific 
laws do. With an understanding of such 
laws, then, nothing separates a man from 
a god. In fact, given the errant nature of 
gods, a dedicated scientist can improve 

on the decidedly unintelligent designs of 

natural selection and thus become greater 

than the capricious divinities of legend. The 

Progenitors - those Technocrats working toward 

beginnings - understand thatthe only things standing between 

flawed evolution and a new, improved strain of organic life are 

the understanding of organic principles and the willingness to 
reshape them to one's own design. 


Originating in the esoteric and often forbidden mysteries 
of life and death, this Convention retains the scary allure 
of its witchy forebears. From bloody-handed midwives and 
dirty-fingered herbalists to the hunters and domesticators of 
nature's rough beasts, the Progenitors share their beginnings 
with the mystic Verbenae. But whereas the earthy Pagans kept 
their craft wrist-deep in entrails, the embalmers and physicians 
of the classical era studied the workings of mortality and the 
methods of transcending it. Medicine came first, followed by 
the manipulation of living organisms: adaptation, mutation, 
artificial limbs and organs, chemical enhancements... the 
possibilities seemed limited only by technology and fear. 


But fear's a powerful force. Despite their many victories 
and cures, these physicians remained pariahs among the 
terrified cattle they sought to save. Even when the healer 
Hippocrates established his Cosian Circle in ancient Greece, 
mortal terror haunted the practitioners of those fearsome arts. 
The descendants of that Circle joined the Order of Reason 
during the medieval era, but not even their tireless work to 
cure that age's plagues could save some Cosians from flames 
and censure. Is it any wonder, then, that Progenitors tend to 
hold a chip on their collective shoulders? 


190 Ma$e: The Ascension 20^ Anniversary Edition 


When Darwin's work popularized what the Cosians already 
knew - that life is organic adaptation, not divine providence - 
the Cosians adapted as well. Shedding their classical trappings in 
favor of Victorian formalism and the budding scientific method, 
these small-p progenitors continued to push the boundaries 
of healing and mutation. The First and Second World Wars 
gave them plenty of material to work with, and though some 
of those experiments were... shall we say, unethical... the data 
gained from 20" century conflicts vaulted the Progenitors to 
the horizons of organic potential. 


These days, a Progenitor enjoys clean facilities and bleeding- 
edge technologies developed far outside Earth's invasive 
ecosystems. Healing, cloning, genetic manipulation, viral 
evolution, chemical consciousness, biological mutation, animal 
crossbreeding, accelerated and controlled evolution, compound 
synthesis... their list of projects and accomplishments makes 
Iteration X look dull. Despite their reputation - even within 
the Union - as "Frankensteinians," these visionaries retain the 
courage and imagination oftheir ancestors, bravely shaping new 
worlds from primal materials and fresh technologies. 


Organization: Throughout its various Methodologies 
(Pharmacopoeists, Genegineers, FACADE Engineers, and the 
cross-disciplinary Damage Control), this Convention follows 
an academic hierarchy. UnEnlightened facilitators (janitors, 
lab assistants, receptionists) provide support for the ascending 


Fellow Conventions: The strong right arms of our 
scientific body. 


TheTraditions: A mud-smeared packofevolutionary 
mistakes. 


The Disparates: Apparently, and thankfully, extinct. 


ranks of Students, Research Associates, Primary Investigators, 
Research Directors, and the mysterious Administrators. A 
ruthless but unEnlightened contingent of field and street 
operatives (backed up by the Conventions' considerably more 
capable collection of clones, constructs, Victors, biomodified 
agents, and bestial projects) provides muscle when needed. 
The most versatile Progenitor agents learn techniques and 
Procedures from all ofthese disciplines, developing formidable 
arsenals of scientific knowledge. 


Advancement through those 
ranks demands constant study, 
research, and innovation. 
Students must pass many 
tests, eventually providing 
and defending a thesis that 
demonstrates her mastery 
of Enlightened Science. 
Success means promotion 
to progressively higher levels, 
levels at which the various 
scientists contend for grants 
and resources. Investigators spend 
copious amounts of time working 
with teams of other agents to prove their loyalty 
and usefulness to the Technocracy. As one would 
expect, if they can't publish successful results for 
the Union, they might perish for their failure. 


Initiation: This Convention prefers to 
find potential recruits before they Awaken. 
Working with the Ivory Tower, Progenitor 
supervisors analyze standardized tests and 
search databases to find clever scholars with 
budding potential. (Recruiting Progenitors 
aftertheir Awakening is more difficult... but 
the Union offers answers for troubled minds.) 
Promising recruits get tagged before medical 
school, sponsored with scholarships, and 
offered a chance forsomething more. 
If a recruit accepts, she receives 
training above and beyond what 
the Masses can offer; if she refuses, 
then the entire episode gets wiped from 


LIA EO 


-—- 7 
a A 


her mind and she just has a bad quarter, defined only by hazy 
recollections and a lingering feeling that she missed something 
grand. In the worst cases, the student ODs on recreational drugs 
or suffers stress-based suicide. The Progenitors hate to waste good 
material, but life isn't always fair. 


Affinity Spheres: Life or Prime. 


Focus: The intricate enigmas and potential of 
organic life provide the foundation of Progenitor 
techniques. Upon that framework, an individual 
Progenitor can build a wide variety of innovations. 
Although specific applications must be 
scientifically defensible (see * Wait 
-Ican Explain!” in the Chapter 
Six sidebar SCIENCE!!!, p. 
290), the Progenitors employ 
a dizzying variety of theories and 
Procedures. That said, those weird- 
science techniques typically demand 
the presence of a well-stocked lab and 
intricate, often time-consuming, labor. 
Any tool that a healer, scientist, or 
naturalistwould use can yield miraculous 
results in the skillful hands of a trained 
Technocrat, but the Progenitors usually need time 
and space to work their miracles. 


To certain evolutionists, Might is Right, 
paradigm-wise. Most Progenitors, however, 
favor the agnostic Gaia-hypothesis approach 
to Creation’s Divine and Alive. Cybernetics 
blend in witha hypertech approach to 
medicine-work, and the Con- 
vention’s eclectic 
methods often 
seem like weird 
-seience by the 
"standards of oth- 
er Conventions. 


e 
| Chapter Five: Sesion Warriors Iol 


IBU 


[| 
c 
] 


/ 


Whoever males the galt males the roles. 
And hontunatelvalican|dojbocts 


Money is power - not only because of what it 
can buy but because the very idea of money 
defines what people are worth. Words like 
"value," “wealth,” and yes, “worth” reflect the 
influence money holds in human society. We 
define ourselves and view others in ways often 
based on fiscal ability. Notions of class and style 
depend upon the things that money can buy. And 
so, in many ways, the Syndicate is the most powerful group 
on Earth today. 


You wouldn’t know it to hear the scuttlebutt. After all, 
popular misconception links the word “syndicate” with the 
lowlifes of organized crime. A common image of Syndicate 
operatives depicts them as gangsters - dangerous, certainly, but 
no match for true Enlightenment. And although there’s some 
truth to that impression (illegal goods, after all, are profitable), 
it’s a carefully maintained camouflage that cloaks the true scope 
and power of this Convention. On the few occasions when a 
Tradition mage crosses paths with an obvious Syndicate rep, 
bullets are sure to be exchanged. What that pitiful sorcerer never 
understands, though, is that the gun-toting bully is as close 
to the halls of influence as most spell-slinging weirdoes ever 
get. The real power, meanwhile, rests comfortably in executive 
offices high above the fray. 


In many ways, the Syndicate has always run the Technocracy. 
Where else, after all, would the Craftmasons have gotten the 
funds to build their cannons? How else could the Explorators 
have constructed their ships? Artisans and priests and knights 
all need money in order to purchase the tools and toys of which 
they’re all so proud. And since the earliest days, that money 
has come from the vaults of the High Guild. In return, the 
Guildsmen extracted taxes, tithes, and plunder at the same 
time that they set the agendas... and, quite often, the very 
realities... that governed the other Conventions. Though the 
Guild seldom got its own hands dirty, its operatives and funds 
spread the group’s influence across the human world. 


Stripped of its gangland connotations, the word syndicate refers 
to “those who bring things together.” When the Order of Reason 
transformed itselfin the 1800s, the High Guild (whose name, guild, 
refers to payment in gold) assumed that word as its name. While 
other Technocrats experimented in labs, chased Reality Deviants, 
or pushed the boundaries of science into the 20^ century, the 
Syndicate brought them all together through the power of wealth. 
Bankers, tradesman, politicians, and the occasional criminal tied 
the world into a single profitable enterprise, linked by global 
commerce, diplomacy, and media. From the international shipping 
companies of the imperial age to the pervasive corporations of 
today'sworld, the Syndicate hasliterallybanked on human progress. 


Stereotypes 


Fellow Conventions: We've got a winning team so long as they remember which side their bread is buttered on, and 


forget who holds the knife. 


The Traditions: Some gamblers don't know when to fold their cards and go home. If that means liquidating them 
entirely, so be it. 


The Disparates: Red ink on the hoof, they’re like homeless drunks running loose in your casino with half-loaded .45s. 


In short, they're bankrupt enough to be dangerous. 


192 Ma$e: The Ascension 20^ Anniversary Edition 


And so, although most of the Ascension War has pitted Black Suits and HIT Marks against desperate superstitionists, the Syndicate 
has consolidated the world into a handful of associated corporations... most of which it controls. 


This sounds sinister... and yet, without trade and money, culture as we know it would be 
impossible. Language and mathematics evolved through trade; technologies spread through 
commerce; regulated monetary systems helped civilizations expand and prosper. Even Jesus 
understood the importance of "rendering unto Caesar what is Caesar's." Money and 
its attendant benefits are the rewards earned by hard work and imaginative 
enterprise. It stands to reason, then, that the people who understand 
those systems best should be the ones who benefit from it most. 


Organization: Organized like a corporation (or perhaps 
it's the other way around...), the Syndicate descends in a top- 
down pyramid. At the apex sits a CEO and 10 Vice 
Presidents of Operations (VPOs) who head the 

Board; from there, the various Chairmen (or Vision 
Men) answer to the Board, supervising each 
Construct and Symposium. Managers answer to 
these Chairmen, and Associates (or Magic Men) 
answer to the Managers. Those Associates comprise 
the lowest rank of unEnlightened Syndicate ops, 
with Providers (a.k.a. Our Friends or simply Staples) 
rounding out the lowest duties and handling most of 
the busywork at the bottom of that pyramid. 


$ 


Initiation: Talent, hardwork, industrious imagination, 

and a gift for playing hardball mean everything in this 
Convention. Recruits often come from offices or business 

schools where scouts watch for rising stars... especially 

ones who are deeply in debt, incredibly skillful, or both. 
After a series of interviews, the would-be recruit is tested, 
employed as a Provider, and groomed for ruthless acumen 

and personal responsibility. If and when a prospective 

Associate reveals that she controls money rather than 

letting money control her, she receives a promotion to the 
head division. There, she begins to learn the secrets of 
desire and the means to manipulate reality’s bottom line. 


Affinity Spheres: Entropy, Mind or Primal Utility. 


Focus: Ars Cupiditae, the Art of Desire, provides the heart of 
Syndicate methodology. Refined by the High Guild during the 
medieval period, this portfolio of techniques focuses on self- 
mastery and social psychology. Essentially, the practitioner 
disciplines his own body and mind, refines relationship 

techniques, and establishes a kingdom around himself 
that he gradually expands into an empire of subtle but 
compelling influence. 


Except in the most desperate circumstances, a 

Syndicate rep never resorts to vulgar Procedures; even 
then, those Adjustments employ high-tech weapons, 
martial arts, or other stylishly technological methods. 
Most often, a Syndicate Associate manipulates people 
and systems with subtle yet effective nudges - phone 
calls, bribes, handshakes, perfumes, seductions, power 
lunches, PowerPoint presentations, hypereconomics, 
social domination, and so on - that get other people to 
pull the trigger while the Associate tallies up the profits. 
Mightis Right in the Syndicate world; without it, civilization 
as we know it is on a One-Way Trip to Oblivion. 


-A 


Chapter Five: Ascension Warriors 193 


evenjas Mnr remains A dreaminge 


The cosmos are vast and dangerous. Like 

the savage frontiers of old, the many 

dimensions must be tamed, catalogued, 

and assimilated into a safely controlled 

cosmos. At worst, they should be sealed 

away so that the monsters on the other 

side cannot disrupt the Consensus... which they have a nasty 

tendency to do whenever they get the chance. That void must 

be engineered - not merely tolerated, but transformed. And 

since the Renaissance, this Convention has understood that 
goal and worked to shape chaos into stability. 


In the tenuous balance between humanity and the 
Void, this Convention maintains a careful (and sometimes 
unsuccessful) foothold. Originally founded as two separate 
groups - the Celestial Masters and the Explorators (a.k.a. the 
Void Seekers) - the Convention discovered that the promise 
of Heaven Above was a lie; instead, a trackless Void stretched 
off into infinity, ripe with horrors that made the hells of 
Dutch painters look insignificant. As Explorators mapped out 
the mysteries of the human world, Celestial Masters began 
exploring that Void. In the late 1800s, the groups merged 
into a single faction. Its duty: to chart the mysteries and keep 
them from polluting the Earth. 


On one hand, the Engineers pursue an imperial agenda 
of conquest and sterilization; on the other, they’re not wrong 
about the threats they confront. No Technocracy Convention 
has nearly as much hands-on experience with the unspeakably 
counterrational Otherworlds and their equally ineffable hosts. 
The brain-twisting expertise of this Convention has allowed the 
Technocracy to shut down Nazi invocations, Marauder reality 
storms, and Reality Deviant strongholds. The Technocracy 
owes its Horizon Constructs, ectoplasmic disruptors, machine 
realms, and sentinel satellites to these Engineers, whose Border 
Corps Division steps in where cyborgs fear to tread. Most 
of all, perhaps, the Union owes its supply of Quintessential 
energies to this convention. And so although the Wanderers 
(an old name that still applies) might be the loosest cannon 
on the Technocratic gunship, they're a damn powerful force, 
politically and otherwise. 


The Void Engineers hold one goal above and beyond all 
others: defend humanity against everything beyond the Gauntlet. 
To that end, high-tech laboratories maintain barriers against 
unauthorized crossings; heavily armed marines seek and destroy 
anything that crosses that line. Alien incursions, mystical spirits, 
astral entities, and ghostly apparitions all pose threats to the 
safety of the human race, but the Void Engineers possess the 


Fellow Conventions: A fractured collection of useful allies to be guided, placated, feared, ignored, and occasionally 


destroyed as necessary. 


The Traditions: An unstable bunch of cosmic riff-raff whose antics have done more to endanger humanity than every 


pack of aspiring Nephandi combined. 


The Disparates: The last holdouts of essentially extinct primitives. Sad, really. Their day in the sun ended centuries ago, 
and yet they still act as though they speak in coherent sentences. 


194 Mage: The Ascension 20" Anniversary Edition 


tools and talent to oppose them all. And although most Technocrats hate to admit this, legions of extradimensional entities 
already hide throughout the human world, entrenched on the Front Lines of the battle for reality. Void Engineers track them 
down, using specialized training to hunt exotic prey. 


To tip the balance between order and chaos, Void Engineers prefer to know their foes. They lead expeditions to 
extradimensional realms to study impossible creatures in their unnatural habitats. For the sake of 
survival, they'll recruit Technocrats from other Conventions to assist them, but Void Engineers insist 
on leading the way. Research provides a common goal, of course. When the fate of the world's at 
stake, however, a preemptive strike can buy a little more time for humanity. 


Given these alien environments and pursuits, it's not surprising that Engineers seem kind 
of odd. All too often, operatives return from off-world assignments as hollow-eyed malcontents in 
need of social processing. Indeed, the Wanderers have their 
own sanity division, the Descartes Institute of Mental Health, 
where Earthbound Social Processing is broken and 
replaced with a more suitable mentality. Despite their 
longstanding image as freewheeling space hippies or 
hammerheaded star-grunts, this Convention boasts 
many of the Union's most dedicated and accomplished 
members. Each Engineer, regardless of her post, is a 
scientist; all other duties remain secondary. 


Organization: Especially in the wake of the Dimensional 
Anomaly, Void Engineer groups follow military-style ranks: 
Technicians, Marines, and Cadets form the lowest echelon, 
graduating upward to become Enforcers (who guard the 
borders), Explorers (who chart new territory), Investigators (who 
pursue scientific inquiries), or Researchers (who develop new 
tech). Higherranking personnel within these levels assume 
command of individual units. At the highest level, a series 
of Coordinators handles the logistical and administrative 
responsibilities, overseeing the Convention as a whole. 
(Note: In an Avatar Storm metaplot, this Convention 
changes drastically; see Convention Book: Void Engineers 
for details.) 


$, 


Initiation: Recruiting personnel from among 
top-level researchers, tech geeks with an eye for 
unconventional applications of science, and folks 
who feel disappointed by science program cutbacks, (. 
the Engineers bring their Cadets off-world to specially 
designed training and research facilities. From that point 
onward, a Cadet is considered initiated whether or not she 
ever achieves Enlightenment - she's seen too much to ever 
be considered mundane again. 


Affinity Spheres: Dimensional Science (Spirit), Correspon- 
dence, or Forces. 


Focus: As every Engineer knows, only Tech Holds All Answers 
in A World of Gods and Monsters. Without imposed order, Everything ^ X. 
is Chaos. And so, hypertech melds with cybernetics, craftwork, cosmic 
reality hacking, and a formalized type of weird science. 


Mind-bending quantum physics, and the machines created to channel 
those physics, form the core of Wanderer beliefs. To that end, they adapt alien 
technologies and sanitized versions of ancient spiritual Arts, incorporated 
through reconciliation theories that bind those ideas and energies to scientific 
methods. In the Realms beyond Earth's limited reality sphere, Void 
Engineer technologies have all the subtlety ofa big-budgetscience-fiction 
film. Blasters slide out of holsters, power-armor suits become essential, 
and titanic Universal craft (that is, spaceships) are the order of the day. 


Chapter Five: Ascension Warriors 195 


Ae 7L 


les) 


Part IV: The Disparates 


“He cannot see you.” 

"Yeah, I'm kind of used to that." 

“I do not mean in the usual way, Simon,” she tells 
me. “I mean you have been removed from his sight." 
“That must be a relief to him.” 

“Why?” 

“Because...” I try, and fail, to keep the bitterness 


out of my voice. “...it’s easier for him to forget me 
if he can’t see me.” 


Her face gives nothing away. Behind that veil, there’s not much of 
it I can see. I guess in her country, you have to learn to read people's eyes 
and voice. There’s not much more there to work with. It’s disconcerting, 
to be honest. All the usual cues disappear. 


The cop strides by like he owns the place. For all practical purposes, 
he does. The color of his skin’s less important than the color of his 
uniform, but both colors make him more respectable than me. Than 
me and the veiled girl, I should say. I still don’t know where she came 
from, but she seems to have been around here for a while. As the cop 
passes, he doesn’t even slow down. His face and body never get that 
squinting look I’m so familiar with. Damn straight, he can’t see us. 
I could get used to this. 


ace 


“Why was he looking for you?” she asks without a whisper. The 
cop’s ears don’t even flicker and he doesn’t break stride. 


“He wasn't," I tell her. 
“Then why...?” 


I don’t mean to laugh at her, but I do. Again, the cop hears 
nothing. “You really AREN’T from around here, are you?” 


"A little ways off,” she replies. Again, I get nothing from her face. 
It occurs to me that maybe she’s wearing the veil less out of custom or 
habit than out of practicality. With that on her face, you can’t read her. 


“So how'd you do that?” 


“A useful trick,” she says, looking past me at the cop. He’s off 
doing whatever cops do in their heads when they’re not trying to bust 
mine. This time, I can sense amusement in her voice. 


“PI bet,” I tell her. “Think you could teach me that one?" 

“Why else did you think I was here?” she asks, looking me in the 
eyes. I wait for her to say my full name, like it’s some kind of spell. 
That’s the way scenes like this are supposed to go, I guess, but she’s 
doesn’t say it. 

I crack a smile for both of us. “I don’t know, but I've got a feeling 
I'm about to find out...” 


Hey, Didn't You Join the...? 


According to several Revised-era sourcebooks; many Crafts merged into various Traditions, most notably the Hermetic 
Houses of Ngoma and Solificati, plus the Wu Lung presence within the Akashayana and the Hermetic House Hong Lei. 
Did that happen? Well, that depends upon the wishes of each individual Storyteller. 


In official Mage 20 terms, those mergers did occur; the converts, however, reflect only a small percentage of the group's 
total membership. Some individuals might have genuinely changed their allegiance and now belong solidly to their 
Tradition of choice... in which case and by definition, they're not members of the Disparate Alliance. Even if they share 
origins and practices with their Craft, these days they're Tradition mages, not Disparates. 


Other converts have deeper agendas. Sure, they'll use the Council and its Traditions as shelter, aid, and backup. In 
their hearts, however, they're still Disparates, working toward the goals of their original Craft, the Alliance, or both. If a 
conflict erupts, they'll be the knives in the backs and the banana peels under the feet of their respective Traditions. In the 
event of large-scale warfare, this could provide an ugly surprise for the Council... possibly even a fatal one. 


On the flipside, these bridges between Council and Disparates might provide a game-changing stability for both groups 
instead. Just as the Etherites and Virtual Adepts jumped ship to join the Council, so too might shared membership bring groups 
like the Bata'a, Ngoma, Solificati, and Templars fully into the Council's fold. The Traditions and Crafts could join together, 
cementing the Unity that the Ahl-i-Batin have pursued for centuries. If things go that way, the original promise of the Council 
could emerge in the new millennium as a larger, more inclusive mystic faction... a true match for the Technocratic Union. 


In the meantime, those groups might remain divided between the Traditions and Disparates, maybe even disputing the 
true course of their respective sects. As anyone who’s studied occult societies can attest, such divisions are maddeningly 
common in the real world as well as in the World of Darkness. Secret societies frequently take many different forms, 
each one ostensibly the One True Order of Mystic Whateverness. As in many other cases, Mage 20 leaves the final 


answers to these questions up to you. 


Practiced Subtleties 


The rumor of their deaths has been greatly exaggerated. 


Oh, sure it’s been said that the Crafts - those Disparate sects 
that refused to join either the Traditions or Technocracy - have 
been more or less exterminated by the turn of the millennium. 
That’s the most convenient story for both groups to tell. The 
Traditions would like to think that anyone outside their safe 
little world is doomed, and the Technocrats have declared 
victory over their mystic rivals. Thus, it stands to reason that 
those Disparates have all but disappeared, their members either 
scattering into the various Traditions or else being hunted to 
extinction at Technocratic hands. 


That’s the official story. And it’s not even remotely true. 


In actuality, many of the best-known groups on the fringes 
of the Ascension War are not only alive and well but have been 
quietly banding together into their own configuration: asarcastically 
named Disparate Alliance whose ironic moniker mocks the Council's 
vision of itselfas Magekind’s Great White Savior. Although several 
Crafts - the uncanny Hem-Ka Sobk and the demon-bound Wu- 
Keng among them - have apparently been obliterated, the larger 
groups have not only survived but have, in the shadows, prospered. 


How? It’s not hard to understand. “The Subtle Ones” is 
literally the name assumed by the AhLi-Batin, and other groups 
like the Bata’a and Sisters of Hippolyta have spent centuries being 
more or less invisible. Coming, as so many Craft mages do, from 
dispossessed cultures and so-called “un-people,” the Disparate 
groups have lots of practice with disappearing. When witch-hunters 
came calling orslave-masters cracked down, these people knew how 


to hide their practices and make all the right excuses. Concealing 
their power has been second nature for quite some time. 


The time forsuch concealment, though, may be endingsoon. 


A Silent Alliance 


In the 1990s, many Disparate representatives began laying 
groundwork for an alliance. Like other folks who'd been living 
on the fringes until then, they recognized the potential of 
global social media, virtual contact, and mutual protection. 
Before the Internet, such people had to find physical locations 
to meet; however, as the world got wired, the need for safe 
physical space faded. By the turn of the millennium, hundreds 
of Disparate mages had made contact with each other and 
begun to plan. Perhaps an Alliance freed from the baggage of 
the Nine Traditions could be a good idea after all... 


Five groups provided the foundation for this Alliance: 


* The Batini, now seeking new partners for a fresh path 
toward Unity; 


* The Ngoma, whose work across the so-called dark 
continent has left them fairly obscure since the 
Renaissance; 


* The Bata'a, perhaps the largest of the sects, whose 
influence spans from North and South Americas to 
East and Central Africa; 


* The Hollow Ones, disgusted with Tradition bullshit 
and looking to make something better; 


Chapter Five: Ascension Warriors 197 


* ..and the Children of Knowledge, who consider 
themselves the true heirs of that much-(ab)used title, 
Solificati. 


Conversations cropped up in the global club culture, 
where representatives from those five groups maintain a strong 
presence, especially throughout Europe, India, and the Middle 
East. They sparked in chat rooms and sectors of the Digital 
Web. As the Ascension Warrior prepared to invade Horizon, 
the various orphans in Heylel's army started talking to one 
another. Sure, the Council was broken and the Technocracy 
was worse... but the concept of a Disparate Alliance began to 
make sense. When the Technocracy locked its sights on the 
various Crafts, the networks established by those meetings 
helped those groups survive the purge. Though a few smaller 
sects were hunted down, the budding Alliance took the others 
underground. And once concealed, those mages crafted a larger, 
more secure Alliance. 


Secret Common Ground 

Since that purge, the core groups have made overtures 
to other fairly reliable sects around the world. The Kopa Loei 
were pretty easy to convince... especially because so few of 
the Alliance mages were Caucasian ha'oles. The Taftàni have 
been more reticent, given their troubled history with the Ahl- 
i-Batin and the solitary nature of the Weavers in general. The 
Knights Templar and theSisters of Hippolyta make very strange 
bedfellows, although their customary exclusions of the opposite 
sex serve to balance one another out within the greater group. 
Perhaps the hardest sell, though, has been the venerable Wu 
Lung, whose ancient pedigree and infamous pride have made 


Il 


ur 
P»n»pyusiss2? P J 


»»D»- 


H 
77 


[| 
3 


Y arf 


them resistant to yet another group of round-eyed cohorts. 
Even so, the Alliance has a lot to offer... especially because 
several of its members know a secret: 


They understand just how corrupt the Technocracy truly 
is. More importantly, they believe they know why. 


The Solificati, Templars, and Wu Lung have long, ugly 
histories with the Technocratic Union. Atone time or another, 
all three groups either belonged to the Order of Reason or 
allied themselves with it. And all three have been betrayed 
by those associations. They've seen the heart of corruption 
within that group... and in the case of the Templars, it almost 
destroyed them. And so, for them, there's a personal stake in 
taking down the Union. It is, quite literally, the Great Beast 
devouring the world. 


The Bata'a, Kopa Loei, Ngoma, and Sisters have 
bones to pick with the Union too. After all, it was Queen 
Isabella's Triangle Trade that savaged both Africa and 

the Americas, and Explorator ships gutted Polynesia. 

The Bata'a were forged by 500 years of genocide, 

slavery, and hate, whereas the Sisters have dodged 
-the shadow of patriarchy (Technocratic and 
~ otherwise) since their inception roughly three 


oat f ~~a - millennia ago. And then you've got the 
OW . : Taftáni, whose Arts have been fouled with 


Paradox and whose people have been 


198 Mage: the Ascension 20" Anniversary Edition 


So is it true? Is the Technocracy secretly controlled by the Fallen? As we saw in the previous section, it mightbe... or it might 
not be. The important thing is that the Disparate Alliance believes it is. That belief could cause all kinds of complications if 
it turns out that the Union is not actually controlled by Nephandic infiltrators... especially if it turns out that the Traditions 
secretly are. Maybe nobody is being controlled by the Nephandi, but everybody thinks that the other group is. The 
Fallen don't actually have to be involved at all... although they might have been the ones spreading rumors about their 


involvement. What a mess. Isn't paranoia fun? 


burnt by technological fires. So yes - it is personal for them all. 
The Technocratic Pogrom just solidified the Alliance's resolve. 


Meanwhile, the Batini have an equally rough history with 
the Nephandi. As the shadow of the Subtle Ones, the Fallen 
share certain traits with the Batini. Both groups are subtle, 
persuasive, the masters of misdirection and deceit. The Batini 
pursue Unity, but Nephandi encourage disintegration. Both 
groups hold ancient grudges against one another... and so, 
once the Templars, Solificati, and Wu Lung claimed to have 
discovered Fallen puppet masters within the Technocracy, the 
course of action became clear. 


In many ways, the Nephandi truly forged the core of this 
unlikely Alliance. Whether by their infiltration ofthe already-hated 
Technocracy; the bloody ties between these Devil-Kings and the 
Weavers and Batini who drove them from the Middle East; their 
horrific crimes again the Sisters, Kopa Loei, Hollow Ones, and 
Bata'a; or simply their Satanic nature - which puts them straight 
in the Templars' sights - the Fallen have made many dedicated 
enemies. So then, it stands to reason that those enemies would 
find common cause, despite their many differences, in the despised 
Technocracy and the Nephandi they believe are behind it. 


The Alliance can't attack the Technocracy head on. 
That's not just suicide - it's bad tactics and terrible PR. As 
the Traditions have shown, direct assaults tend to kill the 
wrong people. Instead, the Alliance has started doing what 
oppressed people often do: wearing the master down from the 
insideout, launchingsubtle campaigns ofsabotage, subversion, 
misdirection, and exposure. 


So what about the Traditions? According to the official 
story, survivors from the Crafts joined various groups within 
the Council. To a degree, that's true; some refugees did find 
new homes among the Council mages. Most of them simply 
hold a second allegiance to the Disparate Alliance too. After 
all, the Technocracy's not the only master who deserves to be 
taken down a few pegs... 


Organization 


At least for now, the Disparate Alliance is a loose 
confederation of independent states, lacking the protocols, 
centralized leadership, common titles, Ascension ideals, and 
other complexities of the Council and Technocracy. Each Ally 
is a self-governing unit that cooperates voluntarily with the 
group as a whole. Given the abuses each group has suffered 
in the past and the logistical impossibilities of, say, having the 
either the Templars or the Sisters taking orders from (or giving 


orders to) each other, that’s probably how things will stay, at 
least for a while. This informality presents both a strength and 
a weakness for the Alliance as a whole. 


Currently, the Alliance functions on a lot of promises 
and very little else. Out of necessity, this must change if the 
Disparates are to become less... disparate. In order to take on 
an enemy as powerful and established as the Technocratic 
Union (or, for that matter, the Council of Traditions), the 
Alliance needs more stability than it currently enjoys. It’s easy 
to maintain cohesion when you're essentially invisible, but if 
your alliance plans to survive the first major clash with a rival, 
it’s going to need more than a common hatred for that enemy. 


This Disparate Alliance combines some very different groups 
- sects whose practices and philosophies can be diametrically 
opposed. A stable group requires a certain power of authority, and 
although the individual sects have internal authorities, no one has 
yet figured out how to resolve things if the sects themselves come 
to blows. Consideringthat the Templars are patriarchal Christian 
millennialists, the Taftani are Arab-Persian spirit-masters, the 
Sisters are Pagan feminists, and the Wu Lung are Confucian 
aristocrats, the Alliance faces some vast ideological challenges. 
Still, so long as an atmosphere of mutual respect prevails, the 
Alliance could be a literal game-changer in the world of Mage. 


Each Disparate group is a collection of survivors from a 
proud, respectable lineage - a bunch of folks whose cultures 
and practices withstand constant attack from the outside world. 
As such, they’re insular and often paranoid, balancing trust 
and goodwill with treacherous history. When playing them, 
therefore, keep an eye on the shadows, puzzle your alliances 
out carefully, and recall that the path from past pain to future 
prosperity might be determined by the people you trust and 
the extent to which you trust them. This Alliance, then, is a 
delicate test of faith. 


But then again, aren't they all...? 


Potential Recruits 

Beyond the five core members of the Alliance and its 
current associates, the Disparate Alliance has ties to other sects 
who might play a part in the faction’s future plans: 


* The Balamob, a group of Mayan jaguar-priests. 
* The Thunder Society, a confederation of mystics from 


North American Native nations that want little or 
nothing to do with the Dreamspeaker Tradition. 


Chapter Five: Ascension Warriors 99 


P 


200 


Mage: the Ascension 20" Anniversary Edition 


e The Uzoma, Yoruban intercessors with the sacred spirits, 
whose Arts inspired the Bata’a. 


e Navalon, a breakaway group of idealistic Technocrats 
who revere the example of King Arthur and despise the 
corruption of their previous Union. 


* The Mirainohmen, or simply Nohmen, a sect of young 
Japanese technomystical tricksters who use psychic 
bonds with technological spirits in order to rearrange 
identities and undermine social preconceptions. 


¢ The Red Thorn Dedicants, a sect of Lilithian mages whose 
practices make the Verbena and Cult of Ecstasy look 
tame. 


* The Itz’at, a long-hidden sect of Mayan time-seers who 
mysteriously escaped notice for over 500 years. 


* The Go Kamisori Gama, a clan of hypertech ninjas 
who have their own reasons for wanting to topple the 
Technocracy. 


Although it’s unlikely that all of these groups would join the 
alliance (or that certain Allies would ever endure their presence 
- especially in the case of the Red Thorn and Navalon), these 
sects, and others like them, have entered the Disparate orbit. 
They might not become full-fledged Allies, but there could be 
a roster of affiliates to call upon once the Disparate Alliance 
finally tips its hand to the other factions. 


Secrecy: The Heart of the Alliance 

Drawn as they are from specific cultures and subcultures, 
Disparate mages represent people who're typically ignored in 
the industrialized world. The foundation of the Allies and their 
people, then, comes from each group’s particular culture, beliefs, 
agenda, and mystic practices. A Ngoma banker, for example, 
won't have much in common with a Hollower street kid beyond 
their new and potentially temporary Alliance. Each person will 
have individual needs, wants, and practices that depend more 
upon the person’s Craft than upon the Alliance as a whole. 
For obvious reasons, this encourages them to be secretive, 
subtle, and elusive with regards to their existence and identity. 


Survival might be the most important goal of all... which 
leads, by extension, to secrecy. The Alliance, remember, is a 
SECRET, its survival and prosperity linked to keeping that 
secret safe. A Hollow One might hang around her club of 
choice and probably admits to being a Darkling to those who 
know what such terms mean. (Assuming, of course, that the 
Hollow Ones didn’t betray the Nine Traditions; if that did 
happen, then she’s not even going to cop to that affiliation.) 
Still, she won’t go bragging about her Allies among the Bata’a 
and so forth - that'd be a potential death sentence for those 
Allies and very probably for her as well. If the Technocracy has 
been gunning for Craft mages, the Alliance and its people will 
be keeping very low profiles, probably declaring themselves as 
members of other sects rather than their own. 


Future Fates: Hollow Treachery? 


According to certain sources, Horizon fell because an ambassador from the Hollow Ones led Technocratic forces into the 
Realm. Whether or not that accusation is true remains debatable even within Mage sourcebooks. Several Revised-era 
books make the claim, whereas others present the Hollow Ones as a harmless bunch of dissidents. So did the Darklings 
perform the greatest betrayal in Council history... and if so, was that the act of one treacherous individual, or was it part 
of a master plan on the Hollow Ones’ behalf? 


By now, yov're probably familiar with the phrase "it's your call." In the case of this “Hollow treachery” element, though, 
it’s a pretty significant decision. If the Darkling ambassador did cause Horizon to fall, then the Hollow Ones are targets 
for every Tradition mage with an understandable grudge... or they will be targets soon, if that betrayal has yet to be 
revealed. Should that be the case, the Disparate Alliance could find itself declared an enemy of the Council, even if most 
Disparates know nothing about Horizon or the attack. 


As a Storyteller, you could have a monumental sword of Damocles hanging over the Disparates, just waiting for the 
moment when the Traditions discover the Hollow ambassador’s betrayal. The Technocracy, too, might want to clean up 
loose ends by eliminating the Hollow Ones (and their allies) once and for all. Maybe that ambassador was actually 
a Hollow turncoat, betraying not only the Traditions but the Hollow Ones as well on behalf of the Nephandi. It could 
even have been a simple act of spite. Chances are, he was acting on his own... but perhaps he wasn’t. Could the entire 
Horizon attack have been a plan to clear away the deadwood and leave room for the Disparate Alliance? Is the entire 
idea of Hollow treachery a rumor without substance... and even if it is, does anyone think the Traditions will just ignore 
the possibility that their Council was destroyed by the Hollow Ones? Not bloody likely. 


Whether or not the accusation is true, the idea of Hollow treachery will certainly influence the other Disparates. After 


all, the Hollow Ones might betray them just as casually. If the truth remains unknown, then its revelation could tear the 
Alliance apart. If other Craft mages have heard the rumors (whether or not those tales are accurate), those rumors will 
probably color the mages’ perception of the Hollow Ones in general. Maybe some folks felt it needed to be done; 
others, though, might be watching for a black-clad, trendy-looking knife in their backs, and they might have already 
planned accordingly... 


Faced with the potential repercussions of Hollow treachery, the Storyteller has several options: 


*- It happened: The Hollow ambassador caused Horizon's fall, either on his own or on behalf of the group as a whole. 
Now the Hollow Ones are at war with Tradition mages, and the Disparate Alliance is a survival tactic. Maybe the truth 
has yet to come out, but the Hollow Ones are preparing for the inevitable retribution. Meanwhile, the Technocratic 
purge has been mowing down Disparates in an effort to find and kill the Hollow ambassador. Either now or in the 
very near future, the Hollow Ones and other Disparates face an open war with both the Traditions and Technocracy... 
a war possibly instigated by Nephandi, or perhaps kicked off by one man’s careless treachery. 


Rumors exist: Conspiracy theories claim that the Hollow Ones were behind Horizon's fall, but most Tradition mages 
don’t believe them. A few of them might, however, so the Disparate Alliance still serves as protective cover for the 
Hollow Ones. If something were to prove the rumors right, though, the war described above would certainly erupt. 
There’s no way the Council would forgive a betrayal of that scale. 


It never happened: Either Horizon never fell, or it was attacked, but nothing ties the Hollow Ones to that invasion. The 
Traditions and Hollow Ones still get along as well as they always did, and the Disparate Alliance is just an attempt to protect 
unaligned mages from the Technocratic purge while also exposing the Nephandic infection within the Union itself. 


Either way, the Disparate Alliance faces important conflicts, with some dramatic surprises perhaps waiting in its not-too- 
distant future... 


And so, for the present at least, the Disparate Alliance the religious devotion inherent in several of its current Allies 
remains a closely-guarded secret whose purpose might involve could make this a potentially explosive player in the hidden 


war against the Technocracy, Traditions, or both. The fractious politics of the 21*-century world. 
nature of this Alliance, the essential secrecy of its existence, and 


Chapter Five: Ascension Warriors 


201 


\ 


— 


Ah -—À atin 


is the key to bidimg m plam sight 


Allthings are connected, for all things are One. 

Though this world appears to be a rich 

pageant of people, places, creatures, and 

thoughts, those myriad elements are but 

mirrors and reflections of a greater Unity. 

When one realizes this fundamental truth, 

the Tapestry unfolds, responding to one's will. 

That Will and the Tapestry become One. This 

truth the AhLi-Batin have known since their beginnings on 

the legendary Night of Fana, when, in the midst of a terrible 

war, a faction of Akashayana came upon a group of Darwushim 

- dervishes - who were dancing and whirling in the moonlit 

night. On that night, the Brothers and the Darwushim danced 

together, forming a great mandala... and in the midst of that 
dance, an ancient consciousness Awakened. 


Called the Entelechy by certain scholars, this consciousness 
was said to be comprised of the Ascended souls of mages who 
lived in an age before this one, mages who hoped to bring 
humanity into harmonious unity with the cosmos. As the 
Entelechy manifested into our chaotic world, it fragmented 
and dissolved. In so doing, it caused the Akashayana and the 
Darwushim dancing in the center to become a single entity 
that was neither one man nor the other. This was the Kwajah- 
al-Akbar, and as it spoke its mighty prophecy, those who danced 
around it were enlightened. Time ceased to be. Everyone upon 


that field became one with their partners in the dance - united 
in mind, body, and spirit. 


When the Fana ended, all those who had been joined 
became individuals once again, forever transformed by their 
experience. Of what use were names? Of what importance 
country or kingdom when one understood the Unity of all 
things? The story of that night ends with these newborn souls 
forming a circle and dancing a spiral into its center, where, one 
by one, they disappeared. When these AhLi-Batin (“Subtle” or 
"Interior" Ones) re-emerged, their sole purpose was to continue 
the legacy of the great consciousness that now spoke in the 
voices of their Avatars. From the humblest hut to the grandest 
palaces, these mages used their Awakened magicks to bring 
about Unity for all mankind. 


These are the myths surrounding the Batini. Such tales 
recall that once, not long ago, the AhLi-Batin sat upon the 
Council of Nine Traditions, occupying the Seat of Connection, 
as Correspondence was then called. People have said that the rise 
of the Technocratic Union spelled the end of the Subtle Ones, 
forcing them all into exile - hiding in the mysterious Realm of 
Mount Qaf, lost to time and obscurity. Everyone knows that. 


And what everyone knows is false. 


The AhLi-Batin never went anywhere. Rather, they went 
everywhere, leaving the turmoil of the Technocratic pogroms 


Stereotypes 


The Traditions: They refuse to see the connections between all things that make us One, and yet they believe themselves 


to be authorities on all things mystical! 


The Technocracy: Riddled through with Nephandic corruption. Now, more than ever, we must crack their shell and 


purge their poisons. 


The Disparates: Perhaps Unity will speak more clearly in disparate voices than it has in traditional ones! 


202 Mage: the Ascension 20" Anniversary Edition 


in the Middle East to emerge in Europe, Asia, the Americas, Central and South Africa... 
always gently and softly bringing the world into Oneness - one whisper, one sigh, one 
leaf-fall at a time. 


Butalthough Batini ideals focus on Oneness and light, their methods, in practice, 
often take on the darker, bloodier cast of war - particularly with regards to their ancient 
fight against the Nephandi. It has been said that no one knows the ways of the Dark 
Mirrors, or battles them as assiduously, as the Batini do. Itwas Batini scholars, after all, 
who compiled the dreaded Sebil-elMafouh Whash that first detailed the Nephandi, 
and it was Batini Masters who drove the Devil Kings from the Middle East. 
Unfortunately, their deep connection to the Fallen also leaves the 
Subtle Ones far more susceptible to Nephandic corruption than 
they might be otherwise. Both groups could indeed be seen as 
opposite reflections of the same principle: all things are Unified, 
and thus all things remain bound... even light to darkness and 
oblivion to hope. 


Organization: Unity emerges from structure; therefore, the 
Batinivalue order in their organization. There are five khanates in 


different parts of the world, each one presided over by a Master h p 


Murshid called a Qtub, or “pole.” Each khanate is made up of 
about a dozen or so cabals composed of a few Murshids, several 
Murids, and 10 to 20 initiates. Each cabal knows that the others 
exist, but they rarely have contact with other AhLi-Batin outside 
their own immediate circle. 


Initiation: Joining this sect requires equal amounts of secrecy and 
patience. Often, a candidate for initiation is observed for years before ZU 
she's ever approached by a Murid. If the candidate expresses an interest in ? 
the AhLi-Batin, she undergoes a slow and steady process of removing herself bi A 
from the world (and from the possessions and luxuries inherent therein)and f 
adopting stringent levels of asceticism. This successive removal of distractions 
and temptations separates the initiate from ego and attachments, preparing 
her to embrace the greater freedom of Unity. 

Affinity Sphere: Correspondence or Mind - but never Entropy. 

Focus: As their name declares, the Batini remain subtle. The phrase £ 
"leave no trace” holds a particularly significance in everything they f 4 
do. A Batini mage often spends weeks, months, even years observing, Em si 
considering, and contemplating a situation before she finally uses her l > 


Arts to nudge things in the desired direction. | 1 
Ag 


M 
y 


Faith is an essential element of Batini practices, with a core belief in 
Divine Order and Earthly Chaos. Certain Batini assert that It's All Good, 
and others hold the bleak conviction that Everything's an Illusion. Crazy 
wisdom, alchemy, and High Ritual Magick maintain their traditional 
places in Batini Arts, with yoga, gutter magick, reality hacking, and 
even chaos magick appearing in the practices of certain devotees. 


Despite their mystic acumen, Batini cannot learn the 
Entropy Arts atall. This mystic blind spot presents an interesting 
conundrum: if all things are Unified, then surely even decay 
has a place in that sacred order? That's a question the sect has 
not yet answered. 


Chapter Five: Ascension Warriors 


203 


Where there's faith and passion, freedom finds a way, 


From deep within the bayous of Louisiana 

and the Mississippi backwaters, spirit drums 
sound the pulse of hungry life. Pounding 

like thousands of racing hearts, they echo 
with the ghosts of ancient natives and murdered 
slaves. Louder and louder, they shout out one to 
another, resounding across the islands of the Caribbean and 
down into Central and South America - harbingers of wild, 
blessed ecstasy and the wet, red work of bitterness and revenge. 


Named for the spirit drums held sacred by Caribbean 
cultures, the mages who call themselves Bata’a possess the unique 
power to simultaneously stir the souls of men to the heights of 
love and grateful awe and to plunge them into depths of horrified 
agony. Largely misunderstood or misrepresented by outsiders, 
these practitioners of Voudoun, Candomblé, and even Spanish 
Catholicism trace their descent back to seven African tribes 
enslaved to work the farms and plantations of the New World. 
As the old ghosts tell it, these slaves brought their own spirits 
and traditions with them, only to find common interest and 
customs with the native Carib and Arawak islanders. Over time, 
these cultures blended, incorporating Catholicism into their own 
magical spiritualism. The result produced a new society, both 
mundane and magickal, that empowered the slaves in certain 
places like Barbados, Bermuda, and Haiti to overthrow their false 
masters and exact revenge for those murdered in the struggle. 


Though their homelands have been ravaged by conquest, 
slavery, piracy, war, corruption, disaster, and poverty, the Bata'a 
still keep faith with in Les Invisibles: the powerful spirits who 
permeate the land and its people. These folk revere, worship, and 
serve Les Mysteres - also called the Loa or orishas - and attribute 
their magickal abilities and powers to them... and only them. 
"Magick" comes through communion - a respectful exchange 
of powers and offerings. For the Bata'a, either you believe in 
the holy rites or you can count yourself amongst les idiots, the 
fools who dismiss or trivialize the spirits and their Arts. 


Beyond the silly stereotypes of “voodoo” lies a survivor's 
creed of reverent assimilation. Bata'a make the best of whatever 
they have to work with: French saints, African gods, Germanic 
hexes, Spanish goods, Native spirits, and the heartbeat of the 
people, mirrored in the drums, a pulse that cannot be stilled by 
any force on Earth. It's this heartbeat that gives the sect its name, 
and it’s that defiance that gives the Bata’a their independence. 
For though they might strike alliances with the Verbena and 
Dreamspeaker Traditions, bond with Hollow Ones, and even 
tolerate the presence of crusty old Crusaders, these mystics are 
ultimately their own people. Even their ties the Loa are based 
on mutual respect, not abject servitude. 

Organization: A deliberately informal sect, the Bata’a 
work mostly ona local level, with few titles beyond mae-de-santos 
(momma saint) and pae-de-santos (papa saint), both given to 


Stereotypes 


The Traditions: Useful allies, but too devoted to their own interests to be reliable friends for ours. 


The Technocracy: Pretty new chains, same old slavers. 


The Disparate Alliance: Our allies understand the weight of someone’s boot on your neck. Still, too many of them 
would become conquerors if they could... and some of them have been conquerors before. A useful alliance for now, 
but not one | think will last. 


204 Mage: the Ascension 20" Anniversary Edition 


respected members. Because Bata'a don't discriminate between hedge wizards and 
true mages, the group enjoys an incredibly large membership drawn from related 
faiths throughout the world. Ronde des Ames - the "Chain of Souls" - unites all 
localized links into a spiritual network; tied together by gossip, spirit messengers, 
and - these days - phone calls and the Internet, these links circulate information, 
rituals, and news. In the early 21* century, the Chain sustains a growing political 
activism. Though the Bata'a once focused on the seven Rangi (“colors,” or families) 
and localized Marassas (male-female partnerships, representing the father and mother 
figures ofa given group), the sect now pursues a more unified global agenda. Especially 
since the Technocratic purge and the dreadful Tempéte - the Avatar Storm - Bata'a 
now recognize that division means extinction... or, as history has shown, even worse. 


Initiation: In order to be considered for membership, a person must be 
truly devoted to the Loa. This candidate must seek out a known member 
of the Bata'a and petition him for instruction. Very often, especially for 
white students, this request isn't granted unless the would-be initiate has 
connections or introductions through reputable sources. Once accepted, the 
candidate pledges to sacrifice all her time and money for a year in service 
to her teacher and the Craft. At the end of that time, if she shows talent, 
devotion, and common sense, she becomes a hounsis (initiate) and begins 
to learn about Les Invisibles, leading up to her first possession. Following a 
lengthy seclusion of prayers, fasts, and purification, the initiate receives a 
potent mixture of alcohol and hallucinogenic herbs and left to the mercy 
of Les Mysteres. If she survives, she becomes Bata'a. 

Affinity Spheres: Spirit or Life. 

Focus: Based in the sublime union between flesh and spirit, Bata'a Arts 
require two things: a ritual calling upon Legba, the guardian of crossroads; 
and a rite designed to induce a trance state and open channels between 
minds, bodies, and spirits. In certain cases, a practitioner may choose to 
create a gris-gris: an item blessed by and infused with the energy of a Loa. 
Such items are used only in cases of dire urgency and limited time. Faith 
is the heart of this invisible family, with common paradigms insisting that 
Creation's Alive, Everything is Chaos, and this World of Gods and. Monsters 
demands good friends and willing allies. 


Voudoun, faith, medicine-work, craftwork, High Ritual, and 
crazy wisdom form the core 
practices within the Bata'a. 
Some members also favor 
gutter magick, shamanism, 
weird science, dominion, 
maleficia, and various 
martial arts. One works 
with whatever's available. So 
longas the spirits are served 
respectfully, a practitioner can 
rely upon them to aid 
her. 


Chapter Five: Ascension Warriors 


205 


‘Chaldreh of 


pow head 


I've been the egg, I’ve been the shit, 
and now I’m reaching for the gold. 


“Better living through chemistry!” Once, that phrase 
epitomized the potential and promise of 
nuclear power, plastic polymers, and a host 

of brave new products guaranteed to make life 

easier and better. For most Awakened folks, 

it’s one of the most insidious catch-phrases 

ever coined by Technocratic propagandists. Even 

so, other mages know it in its original form: Unus es ab arte 

transcendit; est transcendens omnia per artem: “By the Art, one 
transcends; through the Art, all is transcendent.” 


Throughout their long history, the Children - better known 
by their preferred title, the Solificati - have worked toward a 
singular, shining goal: enlightenment and Ascension through 
the ancient Arts and Sciences of Alchemy. Although people have 
practiced forms of alchemy as far back as the Sumerian era, most 
of these self-styled Crowned Ones trace their history to the ancient 
Egyptian court of Queen Hatshepsut. There, the great Queen’s 
cupbearers learned the secrets of the universe as revealed through 
alchemy, and they pledged to share those mysteries only with the 
worthiest of souls. In this way, the Solificati grew in number, 
travelling throughout Persia and North Africa, down the Silk 
Road to India and China, practicing mainly in small and solitary 
groups until they formally banded into an alchemist’s guild at 
the first gathering of what would become the Order of Reason. 


Unfortunately, the alchemists soon realized that the Order 
was, shall we say, less than hospitable to their cause. The resulting 
false starts, purges, and dissolution echoed the various stages of 
alchemy - most notably putrefaction, the stage of decay that precedes 
renewal. Reforming under the Hermetic aegis in 1445, the Solificati 
became one of the original Nine Traditions. Soon, though, the 
scandal involving the Great Betrayer shattered the group's unity once 
again. History reports that, in the aftermath of Heylel’s execution, 
the Solificati disbanded in disgrace and faded into the mists of 
time. As is usually the case with such claims of historical fact, the 
truth follows a different path. Ebb and flow, rise and retreat have 
marked the Solificati way since that group’s inception. That mass 
disappearance was just one more turning of a familiar cycle. 


When the Solificati reemerged in the late 1950s - this time 
called the Children of Knowledge - their Art involved a potent 
new substance: LSD. Whether Dr. Alfred Hoffman and his team 
were true Children of Knowledge or simply chemists influenced 
by their discoveries, lysergic acid diethylamide heralded a radical 
new message: through alchemy (now called chemistry), the mind 
could open and the Masses could Ascend. The newer breed of 
Crowned Ones hustled this compound out among the Masses 
- sometimes wisely, often not. The predictable backlash blunted 
the compound’s potential benefits, but “the doors of perception” 
had been opened and could not easily be shut again. 


The Traditions: We tried to show them Unity. They threw us out. Screw ‘em. We've got better things to think about... 


and to do. 


The Technocracy: Their version of Unity is fucked up, evil, manipulative, and sad. 


The Disparates: Our new companions have the kind of vision that comes only through perseverance against adversity. 


Yeah, we know a thing or two about that. 


This psychotropic method remains controversial even within the group. Once again, the Solificati split into factions. Some 
wound up joining the Order of Hermes in the late 1990s, whereas others jostled for their rightful title like former bandmates 
quarreling over the old band's name. By the new millennium, two different groups had assumed the same confusing moniker 
- the Children growing tired of that diminutive name and the Crowns annoyed by the careless experiments and excesses of 
their peers. Both groups now claim the Solificati title, each one refusing to acknowledge those other idiots as the rightful heirs 


to that name. 


Today's Children of Knowledge are less likely to work alone in isolated candle-it cells crammed with books, papers, and 
bizarre alchemical equipment, and far more inclined to form university research teams, think-tanks, psychotropic occultist 
sects, and club-going exploration groups. The last 25 years have seen these alchemists spread their chemical gospel through rave 
culture, neotribal spirit festivals, and the global adventures of nation-hopping neogypsy tribes. “At play in the fields of the mind,” 


they pursue the roles of chemical tricksters in whose hands the illusions of 
the real world get broken, scattered, and rearranged to form new and 
entertaining pictures. These Children get pretty serious about 
their play, though, and those new pictures include new visions 


for reality. 


Organization: As they have since the group's inception, 
Solificati prefer to gather in small groups centered upon 
one or two Master Alchemists, two or three Adepts, and 
a handful of potential apprentices. The Masters set the 
agendas for study and activity, the Adepts refine the 
process, and the apprentices learn through practice, trial, 
and error. Academic study is crucial and secrecy 
even more so. Given their rough histories with 
both the Traditions and the Technocracy, 
this group has every right to feel paranoid. 
Perhaps this Disparate Alliance will 
finally provide security for the group's 
ongoing Great Work. 


Initiation: To shake off their 
scientificpreconceptions, newly Awakened 
Solificati (called “eggs,” in reference to the alchemical 
symbol for gestation) begin their training with the time- 
honored task of transforming base metals into silver or 
gold. Once she's successfully completed this task, the egg 
gets tested by her Master to see if she understands the lesson 
behind the chore. The correct answer, of course, is that she is 
the base material and that gold symbolizes her ultimate potential. 


Affinity Spheres: Traditionally Matter, though some groups prefer 
Forces, Prime, or Entropy. 


Focus: Because the universe is one huge symphony of vibrating energy, 
magick is simply the application of one's Will to influence and change 
the vibrations between one thing and another. The tools that symbolize 
and channel those vibrations - and that rearrange the perceptions of a 
viewer so that he can retune his own expectations about what is and is 
not possible - make such Greater Alchemy possible. 


To a Child of Knowledge, Everything is Data, Chaos, or an Illusion, 
Prison, or Mistake. Knowledge - honed through alchemy, craftwork, crazy 
wisdom, the Art of Desire, chaos magick, and occasional hypertech 
- confers the truth behind life's illusions. Magick, to a Solificatus, 
is the Art of Transmutation; it changes, refines, breaks down, and P 


reassembles existing materials into newly formed energies. 


Chapter Five: Ascension Warriors 


. 


207 


A 


/ 


J 


ral 
2 
4 
T 
k 


Ours is a strange and beautiful weirdness. 


A hollow age makes hollow people. In many 
regards, the 20" century was that age - filled 
with sound and fury butvery little depth below 
its rather spectacular surface. The term “lost 
/ generation" was coined to reflect the wild rush 
—  ofindulgence and abandon that epitomized the 
early part of that century, and though the Hollow 

Ones are anything but lost, that phrase echoes their questing Path. 


Dismissed as a bunch of shallow club-kids, the Darklings are 
as old as humanity. Where other mages sought enlightenment, the 
hollow people explored shadows. The heirs of Lilith and Lucifer, 
they found power in rebellion, not submission. It’s not surprising, 
then, that they were, until recently, a rare and haunted breed. 


The group’s modern incarnation traces its roots to the 
Romantic Rebellion of the early 1800s, when artists like 
Byron, Beethoven, Goya, and the Shelleys spit in the face of 
that Age of Reason, exposing the tempestuous intersection 
of nature and humanity. Their inheritors, the Decadents, 
reveled in debauchery, seeking wisdom in excess. In those days 
of open-eyed madness, the Hollow Ones found inspiration. 
Although the group’s familiar name and purpose came together 
several decades later, that pursuit of clarity through glorious 
paradox remains a foundation of the sect. “We are,” quoted 
Darkling icon Neville Sinclair, “the Hollow Men. We have 
always been here.” 


Regardless of the name they’ve chosen, the Hollow Ones 
specialize in revealing truths that other folks would rather ignore. 
Their ironic embrace of morbidity is a pose meant to highlight 
the importance of life. A living memento mori, this group kicks 
over monuments in order to show the rot underneath... and 
thus, to also demonstrate the importance of living life well. Art, 
poetry, dance, imagination... such things are sacraments to the 
Hollow Ones, not simply because it’s fun but because of the 
truth embodied in artistry. Art, at its best, distills passions into 
symbols other people can understand. Real art - not the hollow 
confections of pop culture but the deeper levels, where truth 
comes out - is a form of magick. And although other groups 
employ that focus too, no sect understands this form better than 
the Hollow Ones. 


Though they've shared space with other sects for over a 
century now, the Hollowers rarely get the respectthey' ve earned. 
Most other mages see them as dilettantes, capering around the 
club-scene like spoiled children while their elders do the heavy 
lifting. That's an unfair assessment, though understandable at 
times. In reality, the Darklings focus on Earthly matters that 
their oh-so-cosmic peers ignore. Especially since the explosion 
of subcultures in the post\WWII era, Hollow mages have 
concentrated on the young people caught out on the fringes 
of their world: the misfits, the freaks, the left-behinders whose 
oddness strands them, as Patti Smith putit, “outside of society.” 


The Traditions: We gave them a chance - lots of chances, actually. They blew us off, so fuck 'em. We got a new ball 


and we're playing a new game. 


The Technocracy: The rotten core of a rotting age. 


The Disparate Alliance: Is it perfect? Hell no. Is it an improvement? Damn straight. 


208 Mage: the Ascension 20" Anniversary Edition 


Other sects might show up at homeless shelters with some gifts and a sermon, but 
Hollowers speak the language of the streets. Like the cast-off items from which 
they shape their Arts, these mages reclaim life's throwaways and make 
something beautiful from them. 


Organization: Traditionally, the Darklings favor small, family- 
like cliques; within these groups, social acclaim and stigma keep 
the members of that group in line. Given the dangerous nature 
of their world, these cliques prize loyalty and punish betrayal 
with all the harshness of the streets. The rules within such 
groups are simple: don’t fuck each other over, respect one another’s 
autonomy, and remain beautiful in the face of ugliness. 


Until recently, the Hollowers were considered the lost 
Tradition; they had even considered, and been considered for, 
a IO? seat on the Council of Nine. Those plans fell apart when 
various catastrophes shook the Council. Hollow elders, disgusted 
with the constant games of make-nice, decided that the Traditions 
were a lost cause. Although some Hollow Onesjoinedthe Verbena, — . 
Ecstatics, or even the Etherites, the majority decided to ditch s é 


` 


their Council aspirations. The talks thatseeded the Disparate 
Alliance proved instrumental in that decision... and now 
the Darklings - rebel tribes by nature - are adjusting to 
the idea of being leaders instead of malcontents. 


Initiation: Though they re typically associated with the 
Goth-rock subculture, Hollow Ones gravitate toward any 
fashion steeped in beautiful revolt. Punk, metal, hip-hop, 
techno-industrial, and even classical music cultures have 
adherents among the Hollow Ones. Most recently, the neo-jazz, steampunk, 
fae-punk, Gothic Lolita, and androgynous visual kei subcultures have rattled 
the old Bauhaus-style cage. Even so, many Hollowers still enjoy the 
old-school Goth look, if only because it’s so unfashionable these days. 


An element of grace must always be present in Darkling company. 
When an appropriately graceful member gets noticed, a clique begins to 
test his fitness to join the club. From a discreet distance, they prod him 
and watch how he responds. Assuming that he passes their tests, they 
approach the potential member with offers of friendship. If he seems 
cool, he’s allowed further and further into the clique until the members 
judge him fit to join... by which point he’s usually a member by default. 


Affinity Spheres: Any. 


Focus: Darklings use whatever they've got to work with - typically 
things discarded by society. Broken toys, occult goodies, and symbols and 
behaviors that so-called respectable people shun make potent tools in the 
hands of a Hollow mage. Belief-wise, that hollow image is appropriately 
symbolic: these folks tend to see themselves as vessels of life and death, 
pouring their Arts out or carrying those cosmic forces from place to 
place. Magick, then, comes from the proper comprehension and 
intentional use of the energies that, in most people, are simply 
wasted. Everything is Chaos, an Illusion, or a Mistake, probably 
on a One-Way Trip to Oblivion. Some Hollowers insist that It's 
All Good, but they're the minority. Chaos and gutter magick 
are nearuniversal among the Hollow Ones. Although such 
Arts don't actually nurture chaos, they thrive in the chaos 
of our age. 


Chapter Five: Ascension Warriors 


KOLA 


LORI 


‘lo fight sharks, you must breathe 
the water without drowning first. 


In the days before the pristine white sands of 

Waikiki were ever dimmed with the shadows 

of resort hotels or dirtied with the cigarette 

butts and garbage of millions of tourists, the 

land of Hawai'i and the far-flung islands of 

the Polynesian peoples belonged to the Kopa 

Loei. These wizard-priests, called kanakakahuna, used 

their Arts to bind themselves to the land and ensure its fertility 

through rituals meant to honor the native gods, preserving 

the balance between the natural world and the needs of the 

people. Some amongst them used their powers to navigate the 

vast expanses of the Pacific, connecting the islands and their 

people into one large extended family. Above all, the sacred 

laws of kapu ensured that the land thrived... and that the Kopa 
Loei retained their power. 


When mages from the mainlands - now called ha'ole 
kahuna, or “chiefs of Those-Not-Us" -invited the Kopa Loei to 
join in their pale Council, they were politely rebuffed. What 
had the kahuna to fear from these Tupa Nui, the Great Builders 
from across the seas? Much more than they realized. Advance 
scouts from the Odyssean branch ofthe Daedalean Explorators 
sent back reports of rich paradises inhabited by (as they saw 
it) primitive savages. Using an age-old trick, these haka'uhane 
(*emptysouls") impersonated the Polynesian god, Lono, whose 


standard was a tall cross-pole hung with long banners of white 
cloth. The rest, as they say, is history. 


As with so many civilizations that got "civilized" by their 
invaders, the Polynesians and their cousins throughout the 
islands fell to disease, servitude, and cultural conquest. Old 
ways retreated before convenience and Christianity. Today's 
Kopa Loei - what few of them remain - are no longer the kings 
and nobles of the past, nor are they the rulers and keepers of 
island life. Centuries of Technocratic rule have seen to that. 
However, those handfuls of kanakahuna and their kin who 
still live in the Hawai'ian archipelago have managed to keep 
a strong grasp upon the traditions and rituals that sustained 
them for centuries before the arrivals of the ha'oles (Those-Not- 
Us, derived from a word meaning "those without breath"). 
Although the tourist and military trades have ravaged some of 
the most sacred and beautiful portions of the islands, modern 
Kopa Loei still manage to carve out places of their own, free 
from ha'ole developers and New Age tourists. There, they 
work to replenish and rebalance the mana, preserve the flora 
and wildlife, and create communities where kanaka - Sleeping 
and Awakened alike - can live as they did in the times before. 
Such communities, and the laws of kapu that govern them, 
are essential to the future of the people. As Ke aka nui ("the 
Great Shadows,” a.k.a. Nephandi) spread their poison across 


Stereotypes 


The Traditions: No wonder the ha'ole kahuna are scattered, divided, and struggling to survive. With no kapu to guide 
their war with the Tupa Nui, they fight with blunted weapons. 


The Technocracy: The Tupa Nui? We know them far too well. Liars and destroyers, they and the Ke aka nui, the Great 


Shadows, have become one and the same. 


The Disparate Alliance: Ha'ole kahuna, to be sure, but at least they aren't trying to tell us what to do or steal our land 
and way from us. They fight the Ke aka nui as we do, and so, for now, they are friends. 


210 Mage: the Ascension 20" Anniversary Edition 


the world, the Kopa Loei, guided by the resurgence of their Kahuna-nui oracles and seers, prepare for battle... not only with the 
Tupa Nui usurpers, but with the Great Shadows whose sharkdike hungers will end only with oblivion. 


Organization: Kopa Loei gather into loose collections of kadugos (groupings of blood-kin) with anywhere from two to 20 
members in a given group. A kupuna (elder or mentor) teaches his or her keiki (child), and while these aren't "official" titles, 
those terms are recognized as primary foundations of Kopa Loei hierarchy. Within the group, all kanaka receive respect. The 
Kopa Loei don't acknowledge nonsense about "awakening"; certain kanakakahunas are simply more attuned and powerful 
than others are. 


Kopa Loei follow three traditional specialities: the ali'i, wizard-priests who bond with 
the Land and specialize in Prime; the kahuna, mage-shamans who work with a variety 
of Arts; and the often-female he ho'okele moana (“wayfinders”), who navigate the open 4 : > 
oceans and connect the various islands and underwater strongholds of the kanaka i 
maoli. In the past, the alii commanded the greatest respect, with a system of 
religious rules (kapu) to maintain the fertility and prosperity of the land and 
to underscore the deference due to these leaders. Kahuna, also, were 
treated with reverence, and wayfinders (Awakened or not) 
occupied the lowest level of respect. These days, 
however, those he ho'okele moana command g 
far more respect, thanks to their abilities 
to find unspoiled islands in the heavily .— lle 
exploited Pacific. 


Initiation: Unlike other 
Traditions or Disparate groups, 
the Kopa Loeitreatthe initiation 
of their new ho’omaka as 
a private affair between 
each individual kupuna and 
keiki. Potential students and 
initiates are exclusively native 
islanders - no ha'oles allowed! 
- who've been selected through 
their participation in political 
events, islander social media, 
and recommendations by other 
members of their kadugo. Whatever 
herorigins, a potential candidate mustbe 
able to sing her kanaenae (adulation prayer 
to the gods), proving her connections to the 
Polynesian people. 


Affinity Spheres: Kopa Loei don'tbelieve in spheres. 
Game-wise, their Sphere Traits depend on the things 
they do, not on training given by the group. 


Focus: Ho’omana flows through connection 
with nature, sacred intentions, and purity of 
self. For this reason, Kopa Loei do not, for any 
reason, use what they would consider unnatural or 
technological tools to work their magic. Creation’s 
Divine and Alive, split between Divine Order and 
Earthly Chaos. Careless, flashy magic disrupts 
and harms the balance of the natural pathways - 
kapuhuna - and it often angers the gods. In all 
things, balance with nature and blessings from 
the gods are essential. 


Chapter Five: Ascension Warriors 2ll 


NGOMA 


bold ie merely dict Chal chines. 
To be erhdÉ med. 7 Eo 


Storytellers of old wove yarns of clever animals 

living and thriving within the vast and beautiful 

African landscape, puzzling out the riddles of life, 

theuniverse, and the many worlds that exist within it. 

Those tales becamea symbolic method through which 

the Ngoma - the great scholar-wizard-priests of the 

Central African nations - shared the knowledge they 

had discovered. Though such stories, the people, and 

the landscape have changed, the work of the Ngoma is much 

the same as it has always been: observation, contemplation, 
education, and rejuvenation. 


Originating in the ancient rituals of Nubia and Egypt, this 
venerable sect began as the Ngo-Ami, wizard-priests of Classical 
Africa. But as Romans, Persians, and Muslims pushed their 
empires into Nubia, the Ngo-Ami took their Arts and migrated 
further into the African interior, eventually taking on the name 
Ngoma. There, they prospered; during medieval Europe's Dark 
Ages, the African kingdoms enjoyed a now-lost golden age. At 
the height of the age, the Ngoma served as counselors to great 
rulers, as healers, priests, teachers, and philosophers. So great 
was their renown that they caught the attention of European 
magi, who invited them to the Grand Convocation. Alas, 
prejudice and privilege blocked the Ngoma's recognition as 
equals on par with the Hermetics or the Solificati. Lumped in 
with the rest of the shamans and spirit speakers, the offended 


Ngoma withdrew from this Council that preferred to integrate 
them into the Dreamspeakers rather than offer them their 
own Tradition. 


As history tells us, the resulting years were harsh. Slavers 
pushed into Africa's interior, devastating its cultures to feed an 
inexhaustible lust for slaves. The Ngoma saw their schools and 
cities, lands, and peoples exploited and decimated by plague, 
starvation, and war. Cities fell, bloodlines were severed, and 
ancient ways (and the secret languages that conveyed them) were 
all but lost. Yet, as the Ngoma now see things, those holocausts 
became a refining fire - a lesson in humility and gratitude 
for a sect that had, for most of its existence, been revered as 
something akin to the divine. The old ceremonies and rituals 
- now held in even higher regard simply because enough wizard- 
priests survived to perform them - took on greater meaning 
and significance. The preservation of knowledge, as well as the 
gathering of it, became a much higher priority. And from all 
those terrible years, the Ngoma learned to recognize - as they 
never had before - the telltale signs of corruption. 


Aside from a small contingent among the Houses 
of Hermes, the Ngoma have been considered lost. Such 
misconceptions fit their purposes. Rather than preserving 
some dated reenactment of their ancient form, they are now 
what they were in the classical era: urbane sophisticates of 
their age. These millennial Ngoma have proven to be excellent 


Stereotypes 


The Traditions: If they had not let their prejudices blind them, we might have become powerful allies. Then again, 
perhaps the Ancestors’ foresight beheld the Council's current wretched state. 


The Technocracy: Destroyers, desecrators, murderers, and exploiters. 


The Disparate Alliance: Such a diverse group of potential allies! At the very least, we might learn their secrets and 


profit from their lore. 


2l2 Mage: the Ascension 20" Anniversary Edition 


students and frugal stewards of the Arts that have been passed down to them. Fiercely 
aware that the lineage of traditional magick in Central Africa might have vanished 
without the valiant efforts of their ancestors, they have big ideas for the future of 
their rich and varied continent. Today's Ngoma enjoy respectas professors, doctors, 
scientists, astrologers, and the like, but they also serve 
the people as astrophysicists, politicians, architects, 
financiers, and philanthropists. 


Organization: Those Ngoma who survived the 
scourges of the slave trade and colonial exploitation 
re-established the magickal schools for which they were 
renowned. Outof necessity, these schools remain more 
hidden than they used to be in the old days. Because 
the Ngoma recognize the importance of preserving 
their devastated knowledge, rituals, and traditions, these 
schools now span the globe, providing essential training 
in a wide variety of magickal practices: spirit speech, herb 
work, spellcrafting, storytelling, and geomancy. 


As with most elements of African culture, elders instruct 
their younger initiates. Age and experience remain prized attributes within 
Ngomasociety. An elder Kitjito (“Oasis”) provides instruction to his kuwaneko 
(“thirsty one,” as in “thirsty for knowledge”), providing lessons in magick, 
science, African history and lore, and the ancient languages of Nubian 
arcana - most especially Ufungoto, the “Key-Tongue” in which spirits are 
said to speak. Kitujita often send their kuwanakada off to study with other 
elders too, conferring a wide range of disciplines and specialties. As with 
Hermetic magi, knowledge and scholarship are essential elements of Ngoma 
training. Ngoma believe that a wide vessel holds more water, so a broad 
range of knowledge confers a greater range of possibilities. 


Initiation: Within the African continent, a newly Awakened mage 
might locate a Ngoma school all by himself; outside Africa, a potential 
initiate generally needs to find (or be found by) a Kitjito, who begins his 
initial training and then refers him to a school... often paying the entrance 
and travel fees herself so that the kuwaneko can concentrate on his studies 
withoutworrying about finances. Training typically involves years of study and 
includes vision quests and magickal ordeals. Non-Awakened students who 
display exceptional potential are encouraged to learn as much as possible; 
even if such a student never Awakens, he might find a place within the vast 
secret support networks upon which the Ngoma rely. 

Affinity Spheres: Life, Mind, Prime, or Spirit. 

Focus: Knowledge unlocks the various chambers of Art and possibility. 
Because spirits and departed Ancestors provide answers for many secrets, 
outsiders often mistake the Ngoma for shamans. This is not the case; the spirits 
offer guidance, but the knowledge and the Arts depend upon each 
Ngoma, not upon Otherworldly favors. 


Guided by paradigms of Divine Order and Earthly Chaos where 
Tech Holds All Answers, Ngoma employ High Ritual Magick with a 
deep component of faith and modern applications of alchemy, 
hypertech, medicine-work, craftwork, reality hacking, and 
hypereconomics and its associated Art of Desire. Although 
some Ngoma choose to work with the traditional tools 
of their Ancestors, most Suktamke ("those who provide 
a push") employ a mix of ancient and technological 
tools. Knowledge, after all, is not bound to a 
single era. 


My ft, wy mih wy magit MY CHOICE! 


Awakening is older than tradition. Long before 
occult societies appeared to guide and protect 
their mages, people with talent simply shaped 
their own Paths. Some gathered together for 

mutual benefit, whereas others made shit up 

as they went along. In Ascension War terms, 
such people are considered Orphans: poor little 
mages with no home to speak of. 


“Orphan” is a derogatory term used by Tradition mages 
to describe people who use magick without their enlightened 
guidance. In Trad jargon, that term is typically capitalized. 
Folks who actually are orphans, however, often dislike that 
term... and for good reason. The idea thatsomeone’s an orphan 
unless they’re part of your specific family implies a paternalistic 
sense of ownership that drives many orphans straight up a 
goddamned tree. And so, these so-called “orphans” rarely use 
that term among themselves unless they’re being sarcastic with 
some Tradition jackass. 


(As far as the Technocracy’s concerned, all mystic mages are 
| Reality Deviants, to be converted when possible and destroyed 
when necessary.) 


Technically speaking, an orphan can be someone’s who’s 
| selfAwakened, defecting from an official group, or belonging to 


have-to hang there with it. 


a smaller sect that's not part of the more notable factions. The 
Disparate Alliance cheerfully adds such mages to their ranks 
when and if an orphan wants some company. These mages 
make up a fairly large percentage ofthe Disparate membership... 
such as it is, anyway. Although orphan is not a sect per se, there 
are plenty of orphans within the Disparate Alliance, neither 
claiming nor claimed by a particular sect. 


For mages who prefer to make their own destiny, or who 
want nothing to do with the Ascension War, an orphan Path 
provides an independent option. Plenty of mages who've 
never even heard of this Ascension War qualify as orphans by 
default... and plenty of people who do know of it prefer to remain 
independent. An orphan makes her own decisions, determines 
her own practices, believes what she chooses to believe, and 
avoids the political bullshit that comes with membership in 
some larger group. 


That said, the orphan road is a very hard Path, especially 
for those mages who Awaken - as many do - with a blast of wild 
talent(see Chapter Ten, pp. 527-528). When Awakening strikes 
a teenager, that kid usually hits the streets in a panic. Many 
orphans call this trauma the Plunge, the Vortex, or Wintershine: a 
cataclysm that tips the floor sideways and send them headlong 
into Wonderland. In the wake of that experience, the terrified 


Stereotypes 
(Assuming that the orphan has even heard of these groups... which is unlikely.) 


The Traditions: A bunch of self-righteous wizards who not only believe they hung the moon but also insist that you 


The Technocracy: Fuck that bunch of oppressive evil bastards! 


The Disparate Alliance: l'm kinda reserving judgment on the groups | know of, but they seem to have a better handle 


on things than those other folks do. 


24 Ma$e: the Ascension 20^ Anniversary Edition 


orphan usually bolts... and then tries to learn how to survive in a world 
where the previous rules of reality no longer apply. Yeah, sure - there's 
power. But newborn mages don't know how to use that power unless they 
find someone to teach them. Without a mystic society or Technocratic 
indoctrination, those folks tend to wind up puzzling things out for 
themselves by joining small sects, cults, or gangs. Some end up 
perishing in spectacular Paradox backlashes, attacks by rival mage 
groups, or the many other perils of a world in darkness. 


Organization: Typically, an orphan either practices by himself 
or belongs to a small group. Again, there's no common thread 
between such groups. One might be a rock band, another a church 
choir, a third could be a witch family, and a fourth might read 
Tarot cards in a graveyard each Saturday night. As usual, elders 
tend to dominate the group; in this case, though, the word 
"elder" is defined more by mystic accomplishment or personal 
charisma than by age or an appointed title. 


Leaders within an orphan sect can be brilliant, brutal, 
seductive, or persuasive. One could dominate his tribe through 
sex, drugs, and occult babble, and another might have a knack for 
scamming free meals at the homeless shelter. With few exceptions, 
the group's rules depend upon a leader's whims and his ability 
to enforce them within that group. 


Initiation: In the old days, most societies had initiatory 
rites that ushered people into adulthood, a trade, or a mystic 
pursuit. Guided by elders, the initiates would learn the 
things they needed to know in order to function in that 
new capacity. Magickal and spiritual initiations were part 
of most pre-industrial societies, and some of those groups 
became (or joined) the Traditions and Crafts we know today. 
Certain regions still have such groups today, but they're hard to 
find in the industrialized world. 


More often, an orphan mage winds up meeting other 
folks like himself... usually among street cultures, neotribalists, 
transhumanists, fantasy fans, New Agers, occult groups, and so on. 
Thus, initiation can be an exceedingly mixed affair, based more upon 
the people in charge of the group than upon any shared formalities. 
Typically, the orphan has to prove herself trustworthy, swear some level 
of allegiance to the group and its leaders, and demonstrate her skills in 
service to that group. Consequently, an orphan might wind up in a fringe 
Christian enclave, a Satanic coven, a Burning Man art collective, a pack of 
vagabond street kids, a New Age ashram, or any other group that holds a 
place for people who believe in magic. 


Affinity Spheres: Any. 


Focus: Orphans accept almost any worldview that provides a place 
for magickal powers. Some orphans become technomancers too, focusing 
their Arts through technological tools and beliefs. Religious creeds, 
transhumanist philosophy, occult dabbling, and ethnic practices provide 
the most common focuses for orphan magick, and popular culture that 
integrates several of them (often known as "gutter magick" or "high 
eclecticism") is especially prevalent in the technological world. 


Chapter Five: Ascension Warriors 215 


$ 


SIRS 


HiPPOLYTA 


IT’S A SHAME TO MISS SEEING THE PEOPLE WHO NEED HELP. 


-A Zanan Why is God so often considered a man? What 
happened to reverence for the female - or for 
that space between polarities where there’s 

room enough for everyone? It’s a clichéd 
question, yet no less valid for its overuse. 

What the hell is up with constant, pervasive 

denigration of mothers, lovers, sisters, daughters, friends? Why 

are so many people still terrified by the idea of female power? 

The Sisters have been asking that question for over 2000 years, 

and the world still hasn’t answered it to their satisfaction. 


Sacred warriors of life, the Sisters of Hippolyta (more 
commonly, Sisters or Hippolytoi) trace their origins to the 
legendary Amazons. Fed up with the violence directed at their 
sex, these women isolated themselves from those people, male or 
female, who would not respect them. Yet despite their ferocious 
reputation, these women often did love and bond with men. 
Hippolyta herself - the fiercest member of a warlike people - 
was supposedly so impressed with Herakles that she gave him 
her prized possession: a girdle passed down from her father, 
Ares, symbolizing prowess with craft and war. But one of the 
hero’s companions, Theseus - overcome with desire - took 
Hippolyta back to Athens to be his... er, “wife.” 

The Amazons set out to retrieve Hippolyta. According the 
Sisters' version of the legend, the warriors fought Theseus and 
his Athenians to a standstill but failed to rescue Hippolyta. 


Many of the warriors perished. With their queen in sight but 
their strength flagging, one Amazon loosed an arrow into 
Hippolyta's breast. The legend reinforces a core belief: bondage 
is anathema. If a sister gets captured, her conclave will risk 
everything to win her release - even if the only possible escape 
is extinction. Death over slavery has been their creed since the 
very beginning. And although the Sisters forged their new 
fellowship (literally, some myths claim) from the ashes and 
bones of their warlike society, the option of force has always 
been regarded as a necessary tool of peace. 


Firstand foremost, however, the Sisters hold a reverence for 
life - though that life must also be free, not abused or enslaved. 
Historically, they've been healers, liberators, and advocates for 
women and children around the world. Nonaggression provides 
a key to the group's beliefs... although defensive violence is, by 
their definition, not aggressive. Mutual respect is essential as 
well, although like most ideals, it's more difficult to uphold 
in real life. 


Given their focus on the Divine Feminine and the Arts 
of Life, many people wonder why this Craft didn't merge with 
the Verbena long ago. Traditionally, though, the Sisters avoid 
collaboration (much less alliance) with other sects because such 
efforts often come back to bite them. Recent events, though, 
have changed the situation. As all struggles do, the Ascension 
War has left behind casualties and wreckage... and in the 


Stereotypes 


The Traditions: Well-intentioned, maybe, but treacherous and lost. 


The Technocracy: If Patriarchy had a face, it would look like a machine... specifically, this machine. 


The Disparates: l've got doubts — LOTS of doubts. Still, maybe we can learn something from this bunch of boys’ clubs... 
or teach them... or at least limit the damage they'll do otherwise. And if not, we'll do what we've always done before: 


disappear. 


Mage: the Ascension 20" Anniversary Edition 


wake of the 20" century, such casualties and wreckage are higher than usual. Beyond the obvious damage to the Awakened 
community, the massive shifts of that century have unearthed new possibilities of gender and recognition. For the first time in 
millennia, the voiceless have a voice... and in response, certain forces work harder to silence that voice and those people. And 
so, a group that's spent ages in seclusion has become activist instead. Their current affiliation with the other Disparates marks 
a cautious new step for a very old Craft. 


Organization: Most Hippolytoi live together in conclaves that contain only women and children; Sisters who 
choose relationships with men must meet them outside the confines of the conclave. An elected council of seven 
Sisters known as the epitropi guides 
and governs each conclave. Within 
a group, this council forms the 
final authority about everything 
from that conclave's long-term 
direction to the role of its youngest 
member. Unlike most Awakened 
fellowships, the Hippolytoi don't 
discriminate between Awakened 
and unAwakened members. 
Everyone has a voice, and all voices 
are respected. 


m 


Initiation: Joining a society as 
secretive as the Sisters of Hippolyta 
is neither quick nor easy. A Sister might 
spend weeks or months getting to know a 
prospective initiate. Occasionally, a woman gets 
brought into a conclave for healing or sanctuary. If 
the prospect's personality and philosophy fit in with 
the Sisterhood, the epitropi might decide to offer her 
membership. If she accepts, she lives at the conclave for a 
month. During this time, the woman learns about the good 
and bad elements of life within the Craft (though none of gf = | 
their secrets), while the Sisters discern the probationary Jl ma / | 
member's commitment and trustworthiness. If, by the § AA 1 j 
end of this probation, all parties are satisfied, then the 
initiate begins her new life in a short ceremony in which 
she swears oaths to the Sisters of Hippolyta. 


Affinity Spheres: Life or Mind. 


Focus: Though all Sisters, Awakened or not, study the 
magickal Arts, they view magick as an intuitive connection 
rather than a metaphysical discipline. Creation’s Divine and 
Alive, and although Might is (often) Right, It’s All Good when 
you have courage, faith, and sisterhood. 


Lnd 


Essentially a Pagan form of medicine-work with 
modern applications, the Hippolytan practices look 
like witchcraft, shamanism, High Ritual, craft work, 
and martial arts, although few Sisters would describe 
their Arts in those terms. Whenever possible, 
Hippolytoi prefer to do their willworking through 
group rituals. Typically, they enact these rites in 
their home language, although formal Sisters 
perform rituals in ancient Greek. 


apter Five: Ascension Warriors 217 


EET 


eeu el 


219] 


Truth is wy fire art wy jop and courage WY dlasian. 


)) Once upon a time, sultans flew on flying carpets. 
Vizierscommanded and consulted djinni trapped 
in lamps or sparkling jewels. Wealthy merchants 
lived in wondrous castles that floated above the 

clouds. Once upon atime, the Taftani - weavers of 
miracles, masters of Arts - created all these things, 
and more besides. 


Independentand nomadic by nature, these early ashavanti 
("followers of Truth") remained wary of European magi and their 
chained and confined magick. Where the Order of Reason saw 
horrifying forces that needed to be eradicated, and where the 
Council magi saw a solemn, exclusive Art, the Taftáni looked 
upon magick and saw a gift: a boundless expression of the 
beauty and power of Asha - Ultimate Truth - to be savored, 
relished, and enjoyed with as much vigor and enthusiasm as 
an excellent meal, a fine wine, or a sexual rendezvous. 


Sadly, these wild mystics did not fare well as the world changed 
around them. To them, the modern sciences are manifestations 
of druj - “falsehood” - and the deluded souls who manifest it. 
When Weavers pitted their truths against those falsehoods, 
though, they all too often burned. And yet, despite impossible 
odds, the Taftani survived... not many of them, to be sure, but 
enough to preserve their knowledge and their Arts. The sect’s 
independent nature made its individuals hard to find and 


harder still to destroy. Most of the survivors took to the desert 
and joined Bedouin communities. Smaller enclaves took their 
cues from their Batini brethren and made themselves invisible, 
secretly passing on their Arts to worthy apprentices, observing 
the changing world and learning its workings and its ways. 


Today’s Taftáni remain flamboyant, defiant, and boisterous. 
They do, however, tend to have a better relationship with 
Paradox - a practical benefit gained through four centuries of 
trial and error. Although some still travel with the nomadic 
tribes of the Middle East, practicing the venerable Arts of spirits 
and command, most modern Weavers ensconce themselves in 
the glass palaces of oil-rich lands, channeling their arts through 
numbers, finance, and the wonders of technology - snatching 
the tools of Technocratic enemies right out from under them, 
like rugs yanked from beneath the feet of fools. 


The city of Dubai arises from the desert as a base of operations 
for 21%-century Taftani. What else can explain the fantastical 
buildings that defy the laws of physics - these impossible oases in 
the middle of the desert that entice people from all over the world 
to come and see, wonder and play? From the Burj-Al-Arab and 
the Dubai Tower to the underwater Hydropolis and the floating 
Rotating Skyscrapers, each new architectural achievement is 
invested with djinni or spirits... not as some Technocratic prison, 
but as embodiments of wondrous Art. 


Stereotypes 


The Traditions: There is no poetic vision in their works. They shape magick without joy or challenge, and thus do they 


fall far short of Truth. 


The Technocracy: Our word for them —- dregvanti, the followers of deception — reveals their true allegiance to the 
Devil-Kings. We will take their toys and burn away their shadows with our flames. 


The Disparates: All too many of them lack art or courage; still, they stand against the Fallen Ones, and for that - for 


now — we stand together. 


Mage: the Ascension 20" Anniversary Edition 


Organization: A fiercely independent lot, the Weavers do not congregate in houses, families, cabals, or the like. There 
are schools where newly Awakened ashavanti can learn the ways of old. In almost every case, however, Taftani Masters train 
only one apprentice at a time, and rarely train more than three in a lifetime. Outside those apprenticeship bonds, the Weavers 
have - until recently - met only at bagha (“gardens”) every six months. In recent years, however, such isolation has given way 
to pragmatic cooperation. 


Only fools refuse to change in the face of extinction... and that face has come very close indeed. Confronted with the mad 
djinni of the Technocratic Order - and worse, with the poisonous corruption of that Order's Fallen masters - the Weavers 
have abandoned their old tradition of internal conflict. Although Taftáni society holds a very loose weave, it's far more stable... 
and more subtle... than it has ever been before. And in that quiet stability, it has prospered. 


Initiation: Artistic vision, combined with practical aptitude and application, means more to the Taftàni than rigid 
ceremonies. À Weaver who cannot weave, one who cannot see the patterns before they shape themselves beneath his hands, 
is no true Weaver at all. A master, then, finds her apprentices wherever she finds them, trains them vigorously, tests them 
constantly, and places the utmost importance upon teaching them well. 


Taking an apprentice is a sacred honor and responsibility to the 
ashavanti. Truth, after all, is easily dispelled by ignorance or 
corruption. That responsibility cuts both ways; a Weaver's a 
apprentice endures a brutal workload of chores and f " 
services. By long tradition, a Taftáni master takes an 
apprentice somewhere between 11 and 16 years of 
age; teaches him the essential Arts until he dies, 
prospers, or beats his mentor in mystic combat; 
and then introduces him to the djinn and the 
many ways one might control such entities. If 
the pupil dies, then the master mourns... 
but not overmuch. If one presumes to 
weave divine fire, she knows, then that 
Weaver must have the strength of 
Willand Art to survive such majesty! 


Affinity Spheres: Forces, Matter, 
Prime, or Spirit. 

Focus: Asha’s flame is limited 
only by a Weaver’s Will and vision. 
Yet just as a fine carpet follows a 
wave, anda fire follows the currents 
of air and kindling, so too do the 
blessings of Asha follow the bright 
designs of intent and consciousness. 
The focus of a Taftáni mage involves 
shaping thoughts and materials 
toward a grand elaborate design - one 
that demonstrates the beauty of Truth and the 
artistry of the mage. Might is Right in a realm 
of Divine Order and Earthly Chaos, and so 
the ashavanti employ alchemy, craftwork, F 
High Ritual Magick, crazy wisdom, the [ 
Art of Desire, a touch of hypertech, and 
dominion over men and spirits alike. 


Chapter Five: Ascension Warriors 


Leto (smtp 


THe RETURNING CHRIST IS N® LOVING, HUITIBLE CARPENTER, 


He WILL Comme THIS TIE WITH RIGHTE®US WRATH = 


The power and glory of God and His Church 

have blessed the world with love, forgiveness, 

(relative) peace, and civilized order for over 

two millennia. But in spite of the salvation 

that was purchased by Christ’s holy blood, 

an ever-encroaching darkness requires 

constant vigilance and demands the attention 

of holy warriors who'll wage war against Satan's corruption 

and deceit. Those holy warriors were once great and many: 

the Swords of Grace, the Knights Hospitaller, the Order of the 

Hammer, the Falcons of Gabriel, and many more. Now, though, 

only the Knights Templar remain to carry Christ's standard 
and keep the vigil against a second Long Night. 


Once, under the aegis of the Cabal of Pure Thought, 
the Knights Templar commanded respect throughout the 
Christian world, even among the other people of the Book 
whose understanding lacked the grace of Christ. Pledged 
to protect, secure, and someday restore the Holy Temple of 
Solomon - the physical and metaphysical seat of their power 
and a galvanizing symbol of God's reign on Earth - they held 
thatdutysure. Despite their martial valor, however, the Knights 
were also renowned for their honor, kindness, and good works. 
In the name oftheir Lord, these Enlightened Knights educated 


the ignorant, clothed the naked, cured the sick, and fed the 
hungry. Theirs was a duty unto God. 


Graced with Divine sight and Earthly wisdom, the 
Templars were the first to recognize the tendrils of darkness, 
sin, and pride within the Church, the ranks of the Gabrielites, 
and their fellow Conventions in the Order of Reason. They 
were among the first to speak out against such corruption, 
and they were also the first to fall victim to conspiracies 
within their Order. The notorious disgrace and slaughter of 
France's Templars, and the reputed blasphemies of which 
they were accused, remains a matter of record; far less famous 
is the history of the organization after their supposed fall. 
Despite conspiracies and legends, occult rumors and magely 
nonsense, the Templars keep their holy vigil. Their myths 
are many, but the truth is this: the Knights Templar still exist 
today - stronger in conviction and greater in numbers than 
anyone, Sleeper or Awakened, can conceive. 


Then and now, the Templars serve as Militia Christi: 
soldiers of Christ, themselves anointed by His holy blood and 
their own. The sect's members refer to themselves as "loaves 
and fishes": the miracle waiting to happen, the small force 
that shall, by God's grace, become a powerful multitude. God 
will send the prayed-for Messiah, the Holy Warrior who will 


Stereotypes 


The Traditions: Those who work magick for personal glory rather than the glory of God are doomed to fail. 


The Technocracy: Ravaged by the Fallen, governed by greed, treacherous to all mankind, the Technocratic Union 
is the face of the Beast on Earth. On the Day of Judgment, they have much to answer for... and | look forward to that 


meeting. Eagerly. 


The Disparates: Clear of purpose if not pure of heart. They know our Hell-born enemies and fight bravely against them. 


220 Mage: the Ascension 20" Anniversary Edition 


redeem the Earth. And when He arrives, as He soon will, He will find them ready d 
and close at hand. 


Despite their reputed merger with their old rivals in the Celestial Chorus, the 
Knights Templar retain an independent, if secretive, existence. And in a weird 
twist of fortune, they've forged a tentative alliance with sacred heretics, in hopes 
of redeeming those flawed souls (or at least using them as convenient shock 
troops) when the Messiah finally comes. Such mirror-games are nothing 
new to Christ’s Militia; like any wise soldiers, they work with whatever 
circumstances give them. And so, out of necessity, they have changed; 
guns replace swords, laptops replace steeds, Kevlar replaces steel, and the 
old “men-only” rules have bowed to practicality. Women - though still 
discouraged in frontline combat - make up a growing number of support 
troops within the Knights. And in this age, even these Dove Knights are 
warriors of a sort. Satan’s front lines are everywhere these days, after all, 
and an attack could come as easily from a computer virus or an IED as 


from a battlefield blade. 


Organization: Today’s Templars exist as a network of small 
lodges, each presided over by an Honored Master who’s elected 
by the initiated members of the lodge. These Honored Masters 
report directly to a smaller body of regional Resplendent Masters, 
also elected from amongst their ranks. The Resplendent Masters 
receive directives from a small council of Generals who guide the 
larger, global work of these hidden Knights. The network operates 
largely through Internet connections, their communications 
coded in secret scriptures and references only the Knights 
Templar understand. 


Each lodge contains Brothers and Sisters, Aspirants, 
and Knights of various degrees and ranks. Brothers and 
Sisters have demonstrated faith and courage but have not 
yet received the Holy Fire of Awakening. Aspirants have 
been blessed with Holy Vision, but they must still receive 
training and trial before initiation. Many lodges have been 
dedicated either to Peace (healing, charity, and education) 
or War (armed conflict); the former are all-female, and 
the latter are all-male. 


Other lodges welcome both genders and Knights of 
either path; these rare lodges focus on training, recruitment, 
and preparation for the final war. 


Initiation: Like military recruiters, the Templar Knights are always 
looking for a few good men. A prospective candidate might be invited to 
participate in a lodge's projects and initiatives. Compatible candidates could 
be asked to join the lodge as Brothers or Sisters; those who display the Holy 
Fire soon find themselves assigned to a Knight who guides the potential 
initiate in the rituals of prayer, purification, and dedication necessary to 
become an Aspirant. 

Affinity Spheres: Forces, Life, Mind, or Prime. 

Focus: A Templar Knight is just a vessel for God's Will, not his own. 
Despite A World of Gods and Monsters, there is Divine Order and Earthly 
Chaos, so Might is Right when God guides your soul. Faith and martial arts 
provide the core of every Templar’s training, and though dominion, 
craftwork, and hypertech appear in the group’s modern practices, 
every instrument is an extension of God’s hand. 


Chapter Five: Ascension Warriors 22l 


WLI LUNG 


Even in otlineoe, tha earth ohakes, 


Like the mighty Yangtze river, magick flows 

through the Middle Kingdom, twisting 

and diverting from its source to spread 

across the land and feed the mountains, 

valleys, plains, deserts, forests, and people. 

Ancient myths proclaim that the Han 

people came into being through the grace 

of the ancient gods, who descended from the heavens 

in the bellies of dragons to bring order to the chaotic world. 

The august persons of this age included the Yellow Emperor, 

Huangdi, and his mystical advisors, all capable of performing 

feats of incredible magick and supernatural power. Now their 

descendants - the Wu Lung, roughly translated as “dragon 
wizards” - maintain that sacred duty under Heaven. 


The Wu Lung trace their origins to this early group of 
divine beings; indeed, during China's long Imperial history, 
these mages (all male, of course) used this dragon lineage to 
steer the empire to greater heights, achieving great wealth and 
status. In many respects, the Wu Lung were China, which is 
why they ignored the invitations and warnings of those barbaric 
"Traditions. By the time British colonialists - funded and armed 
bythe Technocratic Union - arrived in Asia, the Wu Lung inner 
council members had been so thoroughly blinded and corrupted 
by absolute power that they failed to see the danger. Between 
Japanese, European, and American intruders, followed by the 


Communist Cultural Revolution, the 20" century witnessed 
the nearobliteration of these ancient masters. 


Capping off that century by allying with their ancient 
Akashic enemies, the Wu Lung appear to have humbled 
themselves. This impression is quite deceptive. In fact, the 
Dragons have been busy... most notably in the pursuit of old 
gold and new initiates. Gold, the incorruptible metal, has been 
a primary focus for centuries, less for its monetary worth than 
for its mystic essence. As Wu Lung discovered long ago, pure 
gold works against sinister forces, driving corruption from its 
presence. Seals of gold, for example, can bind evil men and 
lessen their influence upon Enlightened folk. And so, under 
cover ofalliances and illusionary feebleness, the Wu Lungstrive 
to recover the lost gold of Imperial China, returning it home 
for a grand ritual of incredible power. 


When they were forced out of power, the Wu Lung had 
to take a long and critical look at their traditions. It was 
stagnation, after all, that caused Imperial China's weakness 
and collapse. Today's Wu Lung still believe that they're the 
rightful descendants of Huangdi and the old gods; they still 
practice the intricate rituals and ceremonies oftheir ancestors. 
However, they also realize that their sacred traditions have 
become the ligatures around their own throats. In order to 
prosper once again, they must be as clever and flexible as a 
dragon... or as bright and harmonious as gold. 


Stereotypes 


The Traditions: They ignored the natural order of things and are now reduced to a squabbling collection of untrained 
babes presiding over a pit of chaos. Our alliance with them is bound to be short and fruitful... at least, for us. 


The Technocracy: Beneath the talons and teeth of the Dragons, they will pay their souls to the hells of the Yama Kings. 


The Disparate Alliance: Our past has taught us that isolation is a weakness... and that even unwashed mongrels may 


support the will of Heaven. 


222 Mage: the Ascension 20" Anniversary Edition 


Whereas the Dragons once maintained an almost exclusively male (and exclusively 
Chinese) membership, tradition must bow to circumstance. Todays Wu Lung 
might be a man or woman of Chinese heritage; the so-called mongrel taint of 
non-Chinese blood is a regrettable necessity in such confused times, but no non- 
Chinese people are ever considered. Dedicated to Heaven's Celestial Order, the 
modern Dragon considers herself an elite heir to glorious succession. Though 
she cultivates grace, there's an arrogance about her. She is, after all, an ancestral 
ruler of the greatest culture on Earth. Those who doubt China's magnificence 
will perish in China's rebirth. 


Organization: Although the Wu Lung no longer maintain the dizzying 
social structure they once commanded, some vestiges of that ancient structure 
remain. All Wu Lung still recognize the T'ien Kung te Huang Ti Wu Lung 
(Heavenly Emperor of the Dragon Wizards) as their supreme leader and 
his counterpart, the Feng Huan Hou Wu (Phoenix Empress Wizard) as 
his near-equal. Though most modern Dragon Wizards have never even 
seen these two personages, they still recognize that the red thread of 
heritage and tradition is preserved and maintained through those 
august elders. 


The supreme leaders appoint regional ministers to oversee the 
selection of Sifu, or teachers, under the authority of the Dragon 
School (rulership), the Phoenix School (healing and mercy), 
and the Tiger School (fighting and strategy). The Sifu, in turn, 
educate their adepts and senior students and select prospective 
candidates for initiation. At all levels, a Dragon Wizard remains 
acutely aware of where she exists upon the ladder of Wu Lung society, 
who she owes obeisance to, and what her responsibilities within that 
hierarchy must be. 


Initiation: Wu Lung Sifu utilize divination and communication 
with ancestors and spirit guides to find potential new recruits on the cusp of 
Awakening. Those Sifu then contact the prospective initiate through visions 
and dreams, hoping to trigger an Awakening. An ideal candidate is either 
fully Chinese or of close Chinese heritage. Young people with an affinity for 
international business and finance are particularlyvaluable. If she has notbeen 
raised with the traditions and values of preCCommunist Chinese culture, then 
the candidate undergoes a period of education, testing, and training. After 
the Sifu is satisfied that the candidate has progressed well enough in her 
training and performed well enough on her tests, she's formally accepted 
as a Ch'uang Shih, or senior student of the Wu Lung. 


Affinity Spheres: Spirit, Forces, Matter, or Life... though they shun 
such degraded terminology! 


Focus: An Awakened soul is a spiritual inheritance - the Shih, 
or divine ancestor. Magick is a duty to tradition, an honor of the 
ancestors, and the key to the pastand future majesty of China. Ritual 
is essential, and sloppy improvisation is to be avoided at all costs. 


Chinese alchemy and High Ritual Magick form the core of Wu 
Lung practices, reinforced with social dominion and the martial art 
of Kuei Lung Chuan - a.k.a. Dragon Spirit Kung Fu. (See Chapter 
Nine, p. 427.) Such power comes through Li - the righteousness 
of Heaven and an adherence to its perfections. Exquisite ceremony 
mirrors heavenly perfection. Divine Order will allow the Wu Lung 
to Bring Back the Golden Age and banish chaos forever. 


Chapter Five: Ascension Warriors — 223 


Part V: 


"Send in the Hammer and clean it up." 

“Sir,” says the aide, “if I may...?” 

“You may not.” 

The aide drops his pretense of servility. “But, sir, were 
talking about American citizens here.” 

“No we’re not,” says the man behind the desk. “We 
are addressing looters, thugs, and criminals, and we 
will treat them as such.” 


“But they’re people...” the aide’s voice slides toward 
an irritating whine “...and they’re desperate. They’re 
just taking what they need to-“ 


» 


"Laws are laws." The man turns back to his papers. "Handle it." 
And so they did. 
The Hammer went in. The situation was dealt with. 


Swamps and. floodlands provide excellent storage for unwanted 
remains. Especially after hurricanes and other such disasters, certain 


beople simply disappear... 


Overtures of Plague 


Man is a virus pretending it's a saint. Our dreams are jokes 
the universe laughs about in its sleep. Beneath every good man 
or woman's facade is an ape with a scorpion's tail. We are, in 
short, a mistake. And the Fallen are glad to tell us so. 


They probably won't tell you to your face. As a rule, they're 
more subtle than that. Instead, a Nephandus wins your trust, 
gives you gifts, provides every overture of friendship. He won't 
come screaming out of the darkness with veins in his teeth, 
although he'll be glad to point you at someone who will. No, 
the true Fallen mage is like Lassie with Joker venom - a loyal 
companion until the moment his poison kicks in and you both 
laugh yourselves to death. 


He doesn't expect to get out of this alive. When Creation 
burns, he'll burn too. Butsee, that’s his choice - he knows the fire’s 
coming, and he would rather be a flamethrower than kindling. 
The Nephandic Path is not a state of Ascension but of Descent: 


The Fallen 


a willing embrace of the Void, which the Fallen sometimes call 
the Absolute. A Nephandus, then, has shared communion with 
that Absolute and has become the heat-death of the universe 
in human form. It doesn't matter what you do, he believes. You 
were worm-meat and ashes before you were born. The gods are 
insane and justice is a lie, and the evidence supports his point 
of view. He is, then, perhaps the most dangerous creature in 
the World of Darkness: a mage with dark truths on his side. 


Those who've heard of the Nephandi imagine them as mad- 
eyed, screeching weirdos babbling about Outer Gods as they slash 
up some poor virgin's rack. It's true that some Nephandi fit that 
description, but those folks are primarily distractions. A typical 
Nephandus is the enemy you won’t see coming... or, if you do, 
you'll want to trust him. He's probably attractive, usually well-off, 
and possessed of charismatic confidence. He knows he’s right with 
the surety of a sociopathic fundamentalist, and he doesn’t give 
a fuck about rules or consequences. As a result, he’s incredibly 
appealing. People will give literally all they can to be with him... or 
to be him... and that’s where his power lies. Sure, he’s got magick 
if he needs it, but that appeal is his greatest weapon. 


Predatory Shadows 


There've always been people who found allies among 
predatory gods. Just as certain people reached toward the sun, 
others ran off into the darkness. There, they learned terrible 
things. On the rare occasions when such people would return 
to their old tribes, their awful transformations and atrocious 
deeds branded them anathema. Forsaking, and forsaken by, the 
people they had loved, these seekers nurtured bloody grudges 
that often led to bloody deeds. A few were born to that Path, 
but most stepped out on it willingly. Even before there were 
words to describe them, such people understood the cosmic 
joke and wanted to be in on it. 


The term Nephandi has many potential origins. It might 
come from Nif’ ur ‘en Daah, the “Eaters of the Weak” in ancient 
Sumer; it could come from the Arabic Naffas Iblis (“Breath of 
the Adversary”), the Greek nephlos (“cloud”), Germanic nibla/ 


Fallen as Player Characters? 


Can you play a Nephandus? That’s a Storyteller call. We, however, advise no. First off, Nephandi are sick, twisted, 
manipulative fucks who make everyone else their bitch. That might sound fun in theory, but in practice it would probably 
destroy your group. Secondly, they do things that are, shall we say, unpleasant; unless you want to play Gross-Out 
Bingo, that sort of thing’s best left to Storyteller characters and the mighty Blackout. (See Chapter Seven, p.345.) 


The real reason to avoid Nephandic player-characters, though, is this: Mage is an interactive game in which the players 
are encouraged to act out aspects of themselves. Those aspects have power, and the things we express through them 
can influence our daily lives. If you really want Nephandic deeds to influence your daily life, that’s your call, but we 
don't recommend it. There's something to be said for this level of shadow-play, but it’s not a casual choice. If and when 
someone decides to go down that path, it should be handled with care and an eye toward the potential consequences. 


In short, it's your group's decision... but not really a wise idea until and unless you're prepared to go a lot deeper than 
you might expect. 


224 Ma$e: The Ascension 20" Anniversary Edition 


nifl (*mist/ dark”), or the Latin nefarious (“to negate rightness”). 
The modern form blends Greek, Latin, and Arabic grammars 
in the sort of subversive chaos that the Fallen appreciate. By 
any name, these mages choose to become hungry shadows, 
following a Path of Screams all the way to oblivion. 


Why? They’ve got plenty of reasons. Occasionally, it’s anger 
at the hypocrisy of goodness or lust for things we re not supposed 
to enjoy. It’s disgust with a corrupt status quo or revenge for 
real or imaginary wrongs. A Nephandus can choose curiosity 
about verboten topics, indulgence of appalling passions, or 
simple perversity in an apparently meaningless cosmos. For 
whatever reasons he or she might give, the end is the same. The 
Fallen One perceives a darkly existential view: the universe is 
meaningless, virtue is delusion, and the only thing that matters 
is an enjoyable ride to annihilation. 


There’s still some Miltonian “reign in hell” mentality in 
the modern Nephandic ranks - a gleeful embrace of glorious 
demonism. Those Fallen, though, provide the shock troops for 
their more Enlightened peers. Sure, there's a bit of old-school devil 
worship going on. It's in the group's best interests, after all, to have 
visible targets running around to provide scapegoats and targets 
for other sects. The serious Nephandi, though, have graduated 
from Satanic Kindergarten. Yes, there are demonic entities out 
there. Yes, the Deep Umbra is crawling with horrors. Of course you 
can make pacts with dark masters who provide scary powers for a 
price. The true Nephandic Masters, though, understand that the 
root of all evils can be found in the human heart. 


That’s the punch line of the Fallen joke: a creature so insignificant 
in the grand scheme of things perceives himself as the center of the 
universe... and in his corner of the universe, he’s right. He believes that 
gods weigh his every move and choice with the scales of all eternity, and 
he feels that his value in their eyes entitles him to commit atrocities in 
theirname. He'll poison babies and declare his righteousness. He'll steal 
and kill and claim God loves him best. His dreams conjure heavens 
and hells and science and magic and art and waste and television and 
every other thing he can envision. But in the cosmic eye, he’s less than 
dust. When the lights go out forever, he'll see the true face of Eternity. 
And in that endless midnight orgasm, Eternity will extinguish him. 


To the Nephandi, that day can’t come soon enough. 


Slaves of the Star-Squid? 


Persistent rumors link the Fallen to alien masters on the 
far side of eternity. Supposedly, the Nephandi serve these 
malignant gods, paving the way for an eventual conquest of 
Earth. In the late 1990s, these pawns of the Outer Darkness 
and the demons that live there were supposedly hunted, killed, 
cut off from their tentacled overlords, and either driven out 
beyond the Horizon, or else whittled down to insignificance. 


Nonsense. 


Oh, sure - there are Nephandi who booga-dee-boo their way 
through appeals to obscene star-squids, cast lots for evil gods, 
and dream of things best left nameless, waiting in the Outer 
Dark. But the outsiders who see these Fallen souls caper in the 
light of some unholy majesty are missing the point entirely. 


Chapter Five: Ascension Warriors — 225 


Nephandi Ranks 


Among the Fallen, rank isn't so much a progression of titles so much as it's a reflection of power. Although the Nephandi 
use a few honorifics to define themselves, those titles might be more sarcastic than sincere. Most of them wind up being 
used more by outsiders to define what they think they see among the Fallen. Even so, status is a reflection of power, and 
one-upmanship has a time-honored place among the Fallen and their various pawns. Whatever the origins and intentions 
behind these titles might be, they mark hierarchies within the Fallen ranks: 


* pawns (unAwakened): Willing or witting mortals who spread Fallen influence; pursue Fallen agendas; or work 


as muscle, playmates, and targets for the group's enemies. Obviously, these folks don'tthink of themselves as pawns, 
and may give themselves all kinds of ridiculous titles like “archfiend,” "high priest,” and "senator." 


pawns (Awakened): Deluded or seduced mages who further the Nephandic agenda, often without realizing they're 
doing it. 


pawns (Night-Folk): Vampires, werewolves, hunters, and so on who either collaborate intentionally with Fallen 
mages or else serve as smokescreens and cannon-fodder with a nasty bite. Like other pawns, they're almost inevitably 
convinced that they're in charge of the arrangement... and they're almost inevitably wrong. 


All types of pawns are sometimes referred to as dregvati, "followers of the lie"... or simply as "the dregs." 


Shaytans: Living weapons of the damned with heavy-duty powers and a gleeful urge to destroy. These folks know 
exactly what they are, and they truly enjoy their job. 


adsinistrati: Skillful tempters and salesmen of the Abyss. Though.they'll.almost never answer to this name, they're 
among the most effective - and dangerous — Nephandi alive. That said, they won't fight unless their backs are to the 
wall. Their goal is corruption, not carnage. 


prelati: Strategists of the infernal cause, these Nephandic Masters use pawns and allies rather than direct force. 
When they have to be, however, they're remarkably powerful. Prelati are the 3:00 am phone calls to which vampire 
princes and mortal leaders respond with immediate obedience... or else. Female prelati are sometimes called Lili, in 
honor of Lilith and her devotees. 


Gilledians: Fallen Archmages, too corrupted and Paradox-ridden to set foot in the mortal world. These demonic 
entities seem to be trapped in Otherworldly Realms; other mages, Nephandic and otherwise, are brought to them, 
not the other way around. And in those Realms, they're insanely powerful. 


aswadim: Bodhisattvas of the Void; infernal saints. Unlike Gilledians, these entities don't seem monstrous. Instead, 
they manifest as soft-spoken helpers and willing teachers. Nephandus? What's a Nephandus? An aswad rarely tips 
her hand to show what she truly is. She simply leads a pawn toward temptation and lets human nature take its course... 


The Dark Masters: Whatarethese entities? Dreaming ghosts? Demonic hosts? Elder things? Giantevil gods? Ultimately, 
they're enigmas — masks for the Absolute. Conventional wisdom says that the Nephandi serve their Dark Masters, 
but the truth is a hall of shadowy broken mirrors that all appear to reflect deceptions. It could be that the whole Dark 
Masters thing is one more sick joke in the Nephandic arsenal. Perhaps the most perceptive Nephandi worship their 


own sinister reflections... or maybe they understand that there’s nothing there worth worshipping at all. 


The Nephandi aren’t pawns for hive-dwelling demonoids 
or voracious elder gods. They see the truth behind the face of 
cosmic obscenity, and they realize that it looks like us. 


The entities called Those Beyond are not the chess masters of 
abject servants. They’ re embodiments of the Absolute - horrific 
masks grafted by human imagination onto something too vast 
to contemplate without madness. Although it’s comforting to 
view the Fallen as deluded playthings of alien pretenders, the 
fact (as much as facts can be discerned in such cosmic business, 
anyway) is this: the Nephandi have looked behind the mask of 
eternity, and its wisdom has driven them sane. 


So if and when they dress themselves in predictable 
costumes of Satan-kissing freaks, it’s a masquerade the Fallen 
understand... and few other mages do. They don’t serve Outer 
Gods, in truth. Nephandi simply recognize such beings as 
reflections of their own Enlightenment... a savage wisdom 


226 Mage: The Ascension 20^ Anniversary Edition 


that sees the Absolute in every living thing and knows what’s 
waiting at the end of All. 


In short, they understand the mortal comedy. That’s what 
makes them so very good at what they do. 


The Winners, Spoiled 


The Nephandi are playing a long, deep game, tossing out 
pawns to distract their opponents. These pawns, though dangerous, 
are not the true threat. The Traditions and Technocracy believe 
they’ve exiled the Fallen to someplace beyond the Horizon... and 
they’re wrong. In reality, the Nephandi have been infiltrating the 
Council, the Inner Circle, the Disparates, and... most of all... the 
mortal world. Onlythe Marauders remain uncorrupted, and that's 
mostly because the Mad are too far gone to corrupt. 


That’s the awful truth of the Ascension War: while the 
Traditions and Technocracy battle one another, the Fallen 


occupy the field, buy the horses, and sell artillery to all sides. 
In short, they're winning. And the longer the other factions fight, 
the darker their World of Darkness grows. 


Now, the Fallen have plenty of pawns to waste: the angry 
teens with guns and bombs; the media pundits who tear societies 
apart for profit; the tycoons to whom no one else matters unless 
that other party provides them a bit more wealth; the racists, 
sexists, homophobes, and fundies whose fears inspire virtual and 
often physical violence; the religious zealots who plant bombs 
in playgrounds, fly planes into skyscrapers, or recite ancient 
scriptures while they bathe their hands in blood. The drug 
gangs and the slavers, holy warlords with child armies. From 
the wetbrain puking in the gutter to the billionaire slashing 
jobs while using prison labor and foreign slaves to increase the 
bottom line, these people advance the Fallen agenda. Very few 
of them consider themselves Satanists, and most think they're 
right with God. And every one of them - with their selfishness 
- strangles hope and shapes reality. 


The Sleepers are feeding on hate and puking up lies. 
This is the Consensus. This is the World of Darkness. 


And that's what's killing magick in the world. Not science. 
Not technology. Not even apathy. Just mindless indulgence 
and tribal hate. 


The Nephandic gospel moves the world. 


Roads to Hell 


The Fallen and their pawns are everywhere. Few of them, 
though, are obvious as what they are. While Technocrats 
chase infernal cultists, the worst offenders call their shots. 
The Traditions have fewer Nephandi in their ranks, but they 
have more pawns and dupes than anyone expects. As for the 
Disparates, it’s an open question. Although the Templars, 
in particular, have dedicated themselves to rooting out such 
corruption, their fanaticism breeds the fury and despair that 
make the Fallen so powerful in this world. 


How did they get so powerful? By taking advantage of human 
weaknesses. The Fallen don't need to haul folks off to attend 
Black Mass; instead, they encourage apathy, despair, greed, 
and selfishness. They build people up and tear people down 
and use pride and fear as tools to do so. A politician doesn't 
have to sell her soul to a slavering eldritch thing in order to 
spread Nephandic influence. She just has to gut social budgets, 
pocket a few bribes, give free rein to polluting industries, and 
purge citizen rights while putting people on the streets. She 
probably won't realize what she's doing, and she might even 
have spiritual advisors to tell her she's doing God's work on 
Earth. The advisors themselves might not be Nephandi... but 
quite a few of them are, and the rest take their cues from those. 
Corporations, churches, governments, armies... the Fallen 
influence them all; not with force, in most cases, but typically 
by telling people what they want to hear. 


That's how the Nephandi overwhelmed the Technocratic 
safeguards and wormed their way into the halls of Doissetep 
and Horizon: they nurtured the hubris inside every mage 
until many of the most powerful willworkers alive believed in 


their own divine rights. The Fallen pointed their pawns at one 
another, singled out the biggest threats, and staged an infernal 
pantomime to direct attention away from what they've actually 
been doing. Whilethe Union and the Council teamed up to shut 
down death camps, the Nephandi sent their most influential 
pawns off to deep-cover scientific posts. Brave mages destroyed 
the Thule Gesellschaft, but hubris destroyed Hiroshima. "The 
ends justify the means,” "It's a dogeat-dog world,” “Survival of the 
fittest”... even if the Fallen didn't coin these phrases (though 
perhaps, some might have done so), those ideas advance the 
Nephandic cause. Humanity has many roads to hell, and those 
roads are always open for business. 


A Diabolic Trinity 


Essentially, there are three kinds of Nephandi: 


e Dregvati: These dupes, allies, toys, tools, playmates, fall- 
guys, and other assorted idiots don’t really understand 
the full scope of what they’re doing... if they know what 
they're doing at all. The dregs haven't Fallen in the true 
sense of makinga decision to join the Nephandi - they're 
just useful pawns for influence, distraction, and fun, 
and they may even believe they’re good guys despite the 
awful things they do. 


e Barabbi:Supposedly named for Barabbas, the murderer set 
free in place of Christ, the barabbi began along a different 
Path but then converted to the Nephandic cause. Traitors 
to their original sects, these people have had their souls 
literally turned inside out in the Cauls: metaphysical 
inversion chambers in which an Awakened Avatar chooses 
to damn itself and be born again through the Gate of Dark 
Rebirth. Now, they embody the worst qualities of their 
former sects... and probably still belong to those groups, 
tempting their colleagues toward atrocious deeds and taking 
their philosophies to the sickest possible extremes. 


e Widderslainte: Essentially born damned, the widderslainte 
bearthe reincarnated Avatars of dead Nephandi. Mockeries 
of the Euthanatoic ideal of reincarnation as a cosmic reset, 
these mages sometimes struggle with their destinies before 
giving in. In more ways than one, such people are Original 
Sin on two legs. Can they find redemption? Perhaps... but 
most don’t even care to find out. 


Among these three types, the barabbi seem most dangerous to 
other mages, with the widderslainte providing tragic counterpoints, 
occasional pathos, and existential horror. It’s the pawns, though, 
that command the board, if not the strategies, in the Nephandic 
deep game. If belief shapes reality, and the majority of people 
accept perversity, hate, and selfishness as the natural order of 
things, then reality itself becomes perverse, hateful, and selfish. 


Perhaps the weird manifestations of Paradox - so often 
blamed on the Technocratic paradigm - are actually reflections 
of twisted human belief. That would explain entities like Old 
Man Wrinkle and the essence of Paradox Realms. What better 
manifestation, after all, could there be for a selfish world than 
to take its most brilliant souls and lock them up - out of sight, 


Chapter Five: Ascension Warriors 227 


out of mind - in a metaphysical reality jail? The Nephandi, 
then, might even be shaping the Paradox Effect, turning reality 
itself into a weapon without casting a single spell. 


"That's the essence of Nephandic strategy: get your enemies 
shooting at shadows... or at one another... while winning them 
over to your point of view, all the while seeming like their best 
friend in the world. 


Fallen Sects 


Nephandic influence reaches from Wall Street to heavy- 
metal vomit parties. In few of those places, though, is it 
obvious. Again, the most prominent sects provide moving 
targets and shocletroop overkill when the Fallen need it. The 
ones without oogie-boogie masks exert Nephandic influence 
across the mortal world. 


Some of the groups most likely to enter a Mage chronicle 
include... 


The K'llasshaa 


Servitors of obscene overlords, the K'llasshaa sect has 
been around in one form or another since the Predatory Age. 
Associated in ancient works with the subhuman K’wahhll, whose 
degraded practices can still be found in secret corners of the 
wilderness, K'llasshaa Nephandi embrace the Hungry Void 
in all its sublime terror. To them, light and life are atrocities 
committed against eternity; in return, they commit atrocities 
against anything and everything they can find. For them, 
depravity is reverence and blasphemy is a holy act. 


Sometimes obvious, often devious, this sect mixes dementia 
with patience. Its maddest members committhe mostunspeakable 
sorts of crimes, and the saner ones wind them up and set them 
loose. This sect - and its many cults, like the Wailing Darkness, 
Flaming Brand Church, and Circle of the Broken Star - appeals to 
disaffected intellectuals, mentally deficient rage-heads, inbred 
recluses, and folks who are, to be blunt, batshit insane. Rituals 
and initiations are as gorily perverse as the cult leaders can make 
them, and the survivors become human horrorshows with weird 
(though often unAwakened) powers and insatiable perversities. 


Malfeans 

Some folks believe that a titanic spirit Wyrm is gnawing at the 
universe. In the World of Darkness, the werewolves accept this as 
a literal truth. Certain mages serve this Wyrm as well, and though 
they might view it as some symbolic abstraction of fundamental 
chaos, they're still - as the Garou put it - “of the Wyrm.” 


These Malfeans run with the Black Spiral Dancer werewolf 
tribe, work for Pentex (the Wyrm’s pet megacorp), or serve one or 
more of the Maeljin Incarna - godlike avatars of spiritual malaise. 
Uncanny even to most Nephandi, they often display grotesque 
deformities and powers: poison pustules, bestial fangs, toxic 
vomit, and, of course, tentacles, among other things. The ones 
without such mutations have warped souls so corrosive that all 
but the most corrupted Fallen find them repellent. Their decay 
feels almost elemental, drawn from living fusions of spirit, flesh, 
and rot. (See the Werewolf: The Apocalypse series for details.) 


Mage: The Ascension 20" Anniversary Edition 


Infernal Cults 

When that kid with the Necrophagia tshirt cuts up Fido in the 
name of Satan, he’s not a Nephandus but could be a pawn for one. 
Such infernal cults are not a sect so much as they’re an approach 
to damnation in which the cultists devote themselves to demonic 
powers. Expecting a ringside seat at the rise of Satan or his ilk, these 
folks belong to groups like the New Rite Church, the Dai Han Loc, 
and the Hidden Trinity of the Black Watch. And just because they tend 


to be pathetic doesn’t mean they can’t be dangerous! 


Composed mostly of Sleepers with a few Nephandic 
puppet masters, infernal cults infiltrate society on several 
fronts. The blatant ones channel teenage rage through violent 
music scenes, rowdy frats, decadent packs of wealthy assholes, 
and, paradoxically, religious groups who think God's will 
involves blowing people up. A handful of true Infernalist 
mages, meanwhile, maintain the Black Arts of medieval legend, 
devoting themselves to Lucifer or Baphomet in an effort to 
gain a favored place in Hell. These Nephandi make dangerous 
enemies, blending religious dedication with demonic pacts and 
the power that comes with both. 


The Gatekeepers 

The Absolute waits beyond the sky. The Gatekeepers seek 
the keys to that barrier. Striving to unlock the Horizon and 
let the Darkness in, they've been scanning the stars for over 
4000 years, awaiting the return of Those Who Walked Above 


Us in the ancient days. 


Legends speak of demon cities filled with black temples 
decorated with human skins. Struck down by angry gods and 
their followers, those cities passed into memory. Sodom, Enoch, 
Quin'che-La, Bhat, Iyrnntorr... their names still echo in the 
throats of Gatekeepers everywhere. In each sacred place, the 
Devil-Kings celebrated the oldest gods of all... and ever since the 
fall of the last stronghold of the Devil-King Age, they've been 
plotting to open the heavens and let eternal hell rain through. 


Though they originated in Mesopotamia, the Gatekeepers 
are everywhere. Their scriptures, once rare, can be found in new 
translations on bookstore shelves and Internet sites. On the 
surface, these devotees seem calm, smart, and oh-so-civilized. 
Many of them are quite literate and can quote Sumerian 
prophecies and string-theory treatises at length... and tie them 
together as well. You'd never know upon meeting these people 
that they skin stray cats for writing paper or keep vans filled 
with torture equipment for equally stray children they find 
when no one else is looking. It's not at all obvious that these 
people have been partofthe Void Engineer Convention since its 
origins in the Renaissance. The Gatekeepers have had millennia 
to master subtlety. Unless you know what you're looking for, 
they're essentially... and sometimes literally... invisible. 


Technephandi 

No one actually calls them “technephandi,” of course, 
but the Fallen members of the Technocracy (plus a few barabbi 
Adepts, Etherites, and other technomancers) use Awakened 
hypertech for appalling ends. Imagine the corrupted cyborg, 
demonic hacker, or demented space marine. Consider a mad 


scientist whose lab sits ankle-deep in blood while mutilated 
subjects scream their lives out in barbed wire cages. Envision 
the Syndicate boss who knows damn well that his latest round 
of layoffs will result in suicides, abused kids, and rising crime 
rates... and so he lays folks off just to make that happen. These 
are the soulless Technocrats everyone talks about, and their 
hold on the Inner Circle is just one of their many crimes... 


The Decadenti 


How does she stay so thin? How did he get so pumped? 
Why do so many people worship the stars and celebutantes of 
modern media culture? That's a trade secret you might hear 
about but not believe. There really is a cult of celebrity, and 
it's older than you might think... 


The decadenti date back to late medieval Europe, when the 
conflux of trade and aristocracy breda class of people rich enough 
to indulge themselves and callous enough to take whatever they 
wanted. As their bastardized French/ Italian name suggests, this 
Nephandicbranch flourished in Renaissance-era France and Italy, 
spawning cults like the Laughing Rose, the Siren Circle, and the Jade 
Cross of St. Lucifer (who inspired the band called St. Lucifer as 
well). These groups, and others from that era, still survive today. 
Their members enjoy access to unearthly pleasures and success. 


In a world where few people believe in stupid things 
like souls, the bargains struck by would-be decadenti seem like 
harmless games. They're not, of course, and by the time a new 
member realizes what she’s playing with, it’s too late to leave the 
cult. Oh, sure, they might hunt you down, torture you for fun, 
and then leave your body in a compromising position so that 
the press and Internet can have field days with your corpse. It's 
far more fun, however, to wreck you while you're still alive - to 
sic the sect's flacks and paparazzi on you and then turn your 
fame into one big scandal. Remember a certain King of Pop, 
or the trailer-trash teen queen who crashed and burned in the 
public eye? That's how the decadenti deal with folks who want 
to duck out on the Fame Monsters. Meanwhile, the petty Arts 
and demonic gifts enjoyed by famous decadenti push Sleepers 
toward impossible ideals... and thus, toward despair when they 
cannot meet those goals. A particular decadenti sect, the New 
Youth Foundation, takes advantage of such despair by specializing 
in plastic surgery and other cosmetic and anti-aging treatments. 
(It’s amazing how much money people will pay to be tortured 
and mutilated in the name of beauty!) The decadenti, of course, 
are always looking for new playmates - and in an age when 
everyone wants to be a star, they're never lacking for fresh meat. 


Los San$rientos 


The bloody gods of Mesoamerica were never truly 
stilled by Catholicism. As such groups tend to do, they often 
went literally underground, into cave-based secret societies 
that honeycomb both the natural and the social landscape. 
Throughout the hacienda age, these groups sold their secrets 
to masters and slaves alike. Blood, after all, is blood, and the 
old gods remained thirsty. 


To Los Sangrientos (in the female form, Las Sangrientas; 
sometimes collectively known as the Morongos), the Spanish 


conquest brought new refinements for ancient sacrifice. The 
Inquisitores, after all, had many techniques of inflicting pain 
to call upon. By the time Mexico won its independence (with 
help from Los Sangrientos and their nightmarish devotions), 
the Bloody Ones had established solid foundations throughout 
Central and South America and the Southwest U.S. territories. 
Since then, they've kept feeding Los Carnivoros - a fusion 
of Catholic saints and devils with Aztec, Incan, and Mayan 
godheads - the proverbial blood and souls... plus pain. Lots 
and lots of pain... 


The original devotees were not Nephandi in the truest 
sense, but the sect has been adopted over time. Morongos call 
the Cauls las Flores del Renacimiento, or "the Flowers of Rebirth," 
and they treasure the agonies of inversion in las Flores’ embrace. 
With the modern era, they've adopted modern weapons, power 
tools, and media into their holy sacraments, often filming their 
ceremonies and selling them as snuff films and true-death 
documentaries. In the new millennium, Sangrientos post these 
videoson YouTube with death-metal soundtracks and warnings 
that attract attention from bored and curious web surfers; as 
a result, they've gained a presence in the Digital Web as well... 
one that's growing like a tumor in that virtual world. 


Back in Meatspace, Los Sangrientos manage both drug 
cartels and government agencies, pitting them against one 
another in orgies of sacrifice. The horrific tortures and massacres 
associated with those wars are often (though not always...) 
celebrations of Los Carnivoros. Traditionally associated with 
Latino culture, they've spread to other ethnicities as well. Is it 
coincidence, after all, thata prominent gang brotherhood calls 
itself “the Bloods...?” Perhaps it is... or maybe not. 


Hammer Security Response 
(a.k.a. God's Hammer) 


“God told me to kill you” is one of the oldest excuses a mass- 
murderer uses. God’s Hammer proudly furnishes that excuse. 
Ostensibly a maximum security force, HSR is an Apocalyptic 
Christian mercenary firm that employs over 20,000 men and 
women, nearly all of them combat veterans from various wars. 
Are they all Nephandi? Of course not. In fact, they believe just 
the opposite; to them, the Second Coming is in progress and 
they'll provide backup for Jesus Christ's return. Why Almighty 
God would need backup is anyone's guess, but that's their line 
and they swallow it whole. 


Despite their avowed Christianity, the true masters of the 
Hammer are essentially Antichrists. Belief, though, promotes 
powerful illusions, especially when it's backed up with money, 
guns, and the ability to use both whenever you want. Founded 
in thelate 1980s by Col. Erik Rose Hammer (a Nephandus who 
Fell during the Vietnam War), God's Hammer gets deployed 
to trouble spots all over the world... especially places where 
Muslims, Jews, Buddhists, and other infidels get restless. 


Hammer provides a special thorn in the sides of Templar 
Knights, who all too often find themselves fighting alongside 
so-called fellow Christians, who actually serve the enemy. 
Some folks speculate that Hammer Security began among the 
Templars; Col. Rose is reputed to have been a Templar himself, 


Chapter Five: Ascension Warriors — 229 


~~ eo 


TN AE 


"rtr. 


and he might still call upon his old comrades for backup. As 
far as the Templar leadership’s concerned, Hammer operatives 
are among the worst of the worst in Satan's army. The fact that 
God's Hammer employs the Knights’ own devotion against 
them has surely got to hurt... 


Although very few Hammer operatives have paranormal 
talents, they've got the best firepower money can buy, plus 
enough political clout and religious zeal to commit mass 
murder and getaway with it. In third-world countries and urban 
disaster zones, the Hammer dregvati execute Nephandic plans 
while supposedly doing the Lord's work. And so, for many 
mages and their allies, the Hammer is the last thing they feel. 


The Pipers 

Slavery did not end in the 1800s. True, it's no longer legal in 
most parts of the world, but like most forbidden pleasures, it simply 
wentunderground. The Pipers are not the only slave network in the 
world, but they are perhaps the most organized. Rooted in Hilf Al’Aj 
- “the Ivory Pact" forged between European and African merchants 
at the core of the Triangle Trade - the modern Pipers manage an 
international pipeline of human misery and unfettered profit. 


In the old days, slavery involved rounding up victims or 
enemies, hauling them off to a staging ground, transporting 
them to market, and then buying and selling that human cargo. 
Back then, the process took months or even years; today, it 
can take less than 48 hours, and the cargo often comes to the 
buyer. Refugees, illegal immigrants, people seeking new starts, 
even children sold off by desperate or uncaring parents - they 
all follow the Pipers to the gates of someone else's hell. For the 
price of a promise, certain people will hand themselves over to 
guides, employers, talent agents, and gentlemen of means. And 
with modern transportation making the whole deal quick and 
easy, new merchandise can board a plane in Vilyuysk and wind 
up in Abü Zaby, Tokyo, or Los Angeles within a day or two. 
Smart Pipers can even get the cargo to pay for the ride, perhaps 
picking up a finder's fee on the other end of that transaction. 


Aswith many other Nephandicsects, most Pipers are dregvati, 
not full-fledged Fallen mages. They’re just in it for the money 
and for the sense of power the business gives them over other 
human beings. Even so, the most formidable Pipers are either 
Awakened slavers or invested cultists with demonic patrons and 
abilities. Some even see themselves as servants of God, though a 
fair number of Pipers believe in nothing at all. It takes a special 
kind of deadness, after all, to sell people fora living. And though 
the original cargo traditionally consisted of African prisoners or 
European convicts, today’s Pipers buy and sell everyone: Chinese 
children, American tourists, pretty girls from Eastern Europe, 
migrantworkers from Central America, war refugees and curiosity 
seekers and religious pilgrims who happened to pick the wrong 
travel agency... there's a market for them all, and customers across 
the globe - occasionally Nephandic but typically mortal - will 
pay plenty to acquire their own human possessions. 


The Golden Bull 


Few things display the Nephandic sense of humor better 
than the gold bull on Wall Street and the cult that reveres it. A 


Ma$e: The Ascension 20^ Anniversary Edition 


mocking allusion to the golden calf from Exodus, this statue was 
commissioned by a sect whose lineage goes back to the Florentine 
High Guild. Most members of the Golden Bull think they're part 
ofsome mortal fraternity. That's exactly what the Fallen wantthem 
to think. Nurturing an especially predatory strain of capitalism, 
the Golden Bull’s sponsors throw massive parties and political 
fundraisers, buy influence throughout world governments, and 
even stage prayer rallies around the bull itself. Several prominent 
evangelists and talk-show hosts belong to the Golden Bull, spreading 
a prosperity gospel with nationalist overtones. Scared Sleepers - 
many of whom are victims of the Bull’s economic policies - buy 
into that gospel, believing that they'll someday own a share of it 
too. That's ridiculous, of course, but it's a compelling lie. 


In reality, the Golden Bull is an elite Infernalist cult. 
Only the most select members of that fraternity even learn 
about the cult's secret orgies and rituals, and even fewer get to 
enjoy them. Those who've demonstrated sufficient levels of 
callous profiteering (with additional incentives and rewards 
from Fallen tempters) are examined, tested, and provided with 
enough blackmailable indulgences to destroy them if need 
be. Only then are they invited to join the Midas Key Society, 
the secret club near the heart of the Bull. Supposedly, this 
Society controls financial matters worldwide... and many of 
its members, including several prominent Syndicate tycoons, 
believe as much. In reality, it's just another Hellfire Club, with 
members who are destroying everything they touch, along 
with whatever souls they might have had left. The real magick 
remains the province of three Nephandic pawn-masters, plus 
whatever power the various pawns possess. The Bull's true goal 
is corrupting influence, not Infernal Arts. The rituals are just 
for show... and, if a member steps out of line, for tell. 


Nephandic Tactics 


The Fallen didn't attain their position of power by being 
stupid. Although rival mages might occasionally cross spells with 
wild-eyed demon-cultists, such ploys are diversions for bigger 
things. When Nephandi want to accomplish some important 
goal, they typically use a mixture of the following tactics: 


Indulgence 


An oldie but a goodie, this tactic appeals to the target’s 
desires. Vast knowledge? Great sex? A killer rack in any 
interpretation of that term? The Fallen have got what you want. 
And although disciplined souls might believe they’re above 
such gambits, the Fallen can offer up ascetic pleasures too. A 
quiet mind? An unspoiled grove? The ability to dismiss carnal 
pleasures with a glance? Sure, they can get that for you. The 
price? No price - they’ re just doing you a favor. Of course, those 
favors add up, so when the friend needs a little favor too, it just 
seems like the right thing to do to give him what he wants... 


Most people, though, are easier to tempt. Money? Fame? 
Security? Revenge? That car or guy or house or whatever else 
you've had your eye on all this time? It’s yours. Why shouldn't 
you have it, after all? You have a right to enjoy yourself! The 
Fallen One offers up a slide, pours Crisco all over it, and then 
invites her target to hop on and slide down and... well, it's an 


nF daen F 
7 


obvious game if you're not the person on that slippery slide. believe in gun control? You vote Republican? You eat meat or 
Everybody, though, wants something, and the Fallen are expert worship Jesus or follow a different sect of Islam than I do? You're 
procurers. Typically, they don't have to do anything more. A everything WRONG with the world!!! Especially in the age of the 
person on that slip-n-slide has many opportunities to damn Internet, this tactic is incredibly effective, and mages - being 
himself and make other folks miserable while he's doing so. ^ at least halfway isolated from the Sleepers to begin with - are 
especially vulnerable to it. This, more than any other tactic, 
Deception allowed the Fallen to corrupt the Technocracy and Traditions 
The Fallen rarely present themselves as who and what they without tipping their hand in the process. 
really are. Unless a tempter's appealing to a teenage Satanist 
or something (and really, there's no lack of those in the World Escalation 
of Darkness!) she'll be whomever her target wants her 
to be. An evangelist meets a fellow believer; an 
anarchist meets a kindred spirit. An artist meets 
his Muse, and a cop meets the perfect partner. 
That Nephandus does whatever it takes to get 
that target believing in their friendship. And 
from there, the lies keep on coming... 


Once a Nephandus gets her monkey dancing, she speeds 
the music up, inspiring him to jump higher and perform 
more daring moves. Escalation takes the other tactics and 
ratchets them up until the targetwouldn't recognize himself 
anymore. A few hits breed heroin addiction; the frustrated 
dude on unemployment finds himself blaming THEM for 
all his problems. The wizard who used to accept Hermetic 

discipline decides thatsummoning a demon or 

two isn't really dangerous because she knows 

whatshe's doing. Around this point, joining 
the Nephandi starts looking like a really 
good idea... 


Thepresident'sa Nazi? Yep - here's proof. Lilith 
was a love goddess framed by the Patriarchy? Sure 
she was. Nephandi are masters when it comes 
to getting folks to believe what they want to 
believe. Most members of Hammer Security 
Response are dedicated Christians who truly 
believe God wants them to kill minions of 
the Antichrist. And by mixing truth in with 
the lies (those damned witches sure look 
like minions of the Antichrist!), the Fallen 
move their pawns and initiates around like 
chessmen on a board that no one sees 
except them. 


Corruption 


..and that's when the trap closes. 
Either the target becomes a reliable 
pawn in the Fallen game or walks into the 
Cauls of his own volition. In the old days, 
folks called this tarnation of the soul: a level 
of degradation where the subject's old ideals 
have been scourged away by his activities. 
Here's the difference between a Nephandic 
victim and a Nephandic convert: the victim gets 
overwhelmed by external forces that break him 
in ways he never wanted; the convert chooses 
to do what he does and thus breaks himself... 
a far more desirable option for the Nephandi. 


Isolation 


A related tactic, isolation, removes 
the subject from external influences. The 7 , 
target finds himself in an echo chamber ‘J 
that reinforces the Nephandic line, one € 
where every other message is a lie from 
Them. They, of course, are out to get you... and 
in the World of Darkness, where countless secret 
societies really do exist, that impression might just 
be accurate. 


Force 
And then there’s force - a blunt but 
popular option in which the Nephandus 
simply beats the living shit out of her prey. 
Better still, she has someone else do it for her 
- a cult, a demon, seduced pawns, unwitting 
authorities, whatever causes maximum pain 
with minimal risk! Sure, some Nephandienjoy 
carnage, and all of them have alittle agonizing 
fun with victims they pick specifically 
for play. As a tactic, though, force is 
a dangerous option, especially when 
you're dealing with the Awakened, the 
Night-Folk, or potent mortal forces like the 
ubevenode- who doesnt police. Violence holds no guarantees, 
think they way he : and the Nephandus who 
dogs You S NV wades into a fight 
might not walk 
out under 


23l 


Inaworld where real and imaginary grudges are 
thestockin-trade of various groups and corporations, 
this tactic is remarkably efficacious. People are 
already willing to believe the worst about their fellow 
primates, and so pushing such buttons (often from 
a distance on the Internet) is a fun and easy game. 
The Fallen One might not have to lie at all - or she 
could twistthe truth justenough so thatany reasonable 
person could believe it. All the while, the Nephandus 
draws her target further away from dissenting voices. She 
encourages the target to get angry 


actually 


Chapter Five: Ascension Warriors 


Ner - " 
Wise 


$ 
hol 


LÀ 


< 


, SIN Q 


The Cauls 


Metaphysical black holes, the Cauls separate a mere 
Infernalist or pawn from the true Nephandi. Secured 
in hidden strongholds often called Labyrinths, Cauls 
resemble giant placentas, grotesque vaginas, or 
distorted organs of obscene function. Each Caul, it's 
been said, is a portal to the Absolute Void. If there 
really is a Great Chain of Being, then the Cauls are 
the space between those links. 


A person must enter the Caul willingly. People who get 
shoved in against their wills die in sublime agony. The 
budding Nephandus suffers too... suffers excruciations 


beyond human imagination. In the end, however, he 
emerges from the Caul transformed. He might look just 
as he did before, but his mind and soul have turned 
inside out. From then on, the person he once was is lost. 


Supposedly, a Caulis a one-way trip. You can't undo its 
effectin one lifetime. Folks who believe in redemption insist 
thatreincarnation or Divine Grace can reverse the Caul's 
inversions; other magespointto the widderslainte, whose 
poisoned souls follow them through various incarnations. 
Whatever the truth might be, a Caul nurtures pain and 
gestates oblivion. The person who emerges from one has 
spent a season beyond Hell and bears that experience 
like a soul-brand through at least one lifetime, however 
long that life might be. 


her own power. Thus, force is a last-resort tactic unless the 
Fallen have stacked the odds toward overwhelming success. 


Dark Arts 


To Nephandi, magick is the power of the Absolute. 
They channel the Void through their intentions and rites, 
and because that power comes directly from the End of All 
Things, it’s theoretically more potent than any other form of 
magick. In game terms, of course, it’s all the same thing. The 
Fallen, however, view their Arts as ultimate manifestations of 
nothingness. 


Fallen mages embrace the most nihilistic paradigms 
imaginable: Everything is Chaos, an Illusion, a One-Way Ride 
to Oblivion. Might is Right, and anyone who can’t accept that 
fact deserves to be prey for those who do. At the lower levels 
of experience, many Nephandi still hold onto dark beliefs: 
they’re ultimate predators, warriors of Satan, brave inheritors 
of forbidden knowledge, and so forth. Those who survive to 
reach the higher (or lower) reaches of their Path, however, have 
such illusions torn away from them. The aswadim understand 
that they've become vessels for the Absolute, living avatars of 
cosmic oblivion. 


Lesser Infernalists make pacts with malignantentities. Signing 
away bits of their souls, they assume handfuls of petty, hardly 
even magic powers. A few Awaken, but most do not. Given weird 
investments like goat legs or flaming breath, these Infernalists 
believe they have power but fall pathetically short of True Magick. 


232 Mage: The Ascension 20" Anniversary Edition 


Awakened Nephandi area different breed. The Caul seals 
their pact and Awakens them if they hadn’t been Awakened 
before then. To them, power flows through the Qlippoth: the 
nine shells of the Spheres, regarded as the shadow side of 
Creation. Again, in game terms, these Qlippothic Spheres are 
exactly the same thing as the usual nine Spheres. A Fallen 
magus, however, regards those powers as the Nine Keys to Hell, 
or Nine Shadows of the Absolute, whose total essence forms the 
tenth Sphere, the Absolute. Supposedly, total understanding 
of each of these Fallen Spheres unlocks dark godhood and 
brings the seeker to a new level of existence which few have 
seen and from which no one can supposedly return. 


Tools of Maleficia 


For the most part, Nephandi mages use the same tools as 
other mages: art, rituals, instruments, and activities that focus 
a mage’s Will. For Nephandi and other Infernalists, however, 
those tools and actions become maleficia: injuries, offenses, 
and crimes. And so, their tools and rituals concentrate on 
hurting people, twisting symbols, and inflicting as much harm 
as possible under the circumstances. 


Although they also employ plenty of subtle tools - eye 
contact, soft words, caresses, and other apparently innocuous 
things - the primary ritual and castings of infernal mages take 
conventional tools and then drench them in blasphemy. Dances 
become obscene; prayers invoke demonic powers; self-sacrifice 
goes to horrific extremes, and as for the sacrifice of others... well, 
we'll simply say that the victims who get off with a dagger to 
the heart are the luckiest ones around. (See the Art of Desire, 
Dominion, and Maleficia entries in Chapter Ten, p.573-580.) 


Castings and Resonance 

As the name implies, malficia is intended to harm people. 
Nephandi use their Arts to sow discord, weave temptations, 
produce enticing goods, charm people, and generally do things 
an honorable mage would not attempt. When necessary, 
infernal pyrotechnics - firestorms, black lightning, tornados, 
and so forth - back up more subtle Effects. Nephandi even 
heal people if it serves their purposes to do so... although the 
definition of healing, and the techniques involved, probably 
won't be very pleasant. (See, for instance, the New Youth 
Foundation, above.) 


Asaresultofboth the mage's intentions and the Olippothic 
energies behind these Arts, Fallen mages almost always leave 
tainted Resonance behind. Unless they take some measures to 
cloak their identities (and often even then), Nephandi magick 
creates a metaphysical bad taste in your mouth. The effects 
might be minor (chills in the air, wilted plants, weird buzzing 
sounds, and so on) but could get ugly (withered limbs, singing 
insects, a thick stench of brimstone, that sort of thing) when 
major magicks get involved. 


Because Nephandi are master infiltrators, the Fallen prefer 
to avoid showy displays of Olippothic Art. A true Black Mass is 
arare thing in this group, and if one is staged, it's probably for 
the benefit of Satanist pawns or perverse thrill-seekers. In many 
cases, such mages prefer to use tools thatseem innocuous: a black 


Future Fate: Nephandic Victor y...? 


The idea that the Fallen are secretly pulling everyone else's strings is almost as old as Mage itself. It can be found between 
the lines from The Book of Chantries onwards and is stated outright in Technocracy: Syndicate, Void Engineers, 
and Guide to the Technocracy. That concept certainly explains large portions of the Ascension metaplot, not to 
mention the World of Darkness asa whole. Still, if you're not sure about perching your chronicle on the edge of corruption, 


you could assume one of the following options: 


* The Fallen are in charge: Yep, they're winning. They run the Technocracy, influence the mortal world, and have 
taken the Traditions and Crafts to the brink of extinction. In Werewolf: The Apocalypse terms, the Wyrm's got this 
world in its coils and has damn near squeezed everything to death. Only a heroic effort from mages of all kinds can 


save the world, and things really don't look good. 


The Nephandi have the upper hand: They command frightening amounts of influence, poison the Inner Circle, 
and present the biggest challenge this world might face. Still, there's hope, and a determined resistance can hunt them 


down and drive them out. 


The Nephandi are a minor threat: The Council/ Union alliance successfully exiled the Fallen after World War Il. 
Isolated pockets of Nephandi still exist, but a mage has more important things to worry about. The rotten state of the world 
is the Technocracy's fault or humanity's failure, not a Nephandic victory. They're scary but they don't run the show. 


As always, Storytellers, keep your true choice secret from your players. That way, yov'll add an edge of suspense to the tale. 
After all, they're reading this stuff too, and now that they've seen it here, they might start seeing Nephandi everywhere... 


candle in the room, a perfume prepared with infant blood, a gun 
that’s been used to murder a priest, and so forth. Barabbi mages 
use the same tools and rituals they'd employed before... though 
with slightly more extreme and destructive applications. The 
Progenitor who conducts particularly excruciating experiments 
and the Dreamspeaker who calls upon especially nasty spirits 
both embody the Nephandic approach to the Arts. 


Remember that saying, “The end justifies the means?” 
That’s how so many Nephandi get away with the things they 
do. It’s especially obvious in the Technocracy, where Black Suits 
torture Reality Deviants as a matter of course or Pharmacopoeists 
drug kids up with psychoactive chemicals in order to get them 
to behave normally. It’s true even in the mortal world, though, 
where rock stars talk about armed revolution or pundits shame 


people that their audience has been told to despise. When 
“ Ys . " " . 

extreme” is a marketing strategy and illusion becomes reality, 
it gets easy to slip malficia and other corruption into popular 
culture. Maybe it is really just talk, or only a game. But when 
hate and selfishness, violence and obscenity become real life... 
and perhaps they always have been that way... the tools and Arts 
of malficia become easy to employ. 


Mages have always been extreme by nature... so if a certain 
mage is a bit more extreme than others, who's to say she's 
actually a Nephandus? Where and how do you draw the line 
unless you can see into her soul? 

It's pretty hard to do that, really. 


Which is why the Fallen are so very good at what they do... 


Chapter Five: Ascension Warriors 233 


mr" 222 - 


Part ?1: The Mad 


The dementia of our age is obvious: the removal from 
our primal roots, the complex interplay of technological 
consumption, the fear-based marketplace blasting perpetual 
alarms into every sense we possess. From the kaleidoscope 
madness of sensory overload to the lockout isolation of self- 
absorbed withdrawal, our world feels like Humpty Dumpty 
on a oneway trip with gravity. Naked emperors dictate our 
selfimage, casting out a hall of mirrors that reflect nothing 
resembling the truth. Like monkeys in a nitro lab, we appear 
to exist on a constant verge of self-annihilation. 


“Sanity is a mask,” she says. “It keeps your light 
inside so you don’t wash away the air.” 

Witch-House unfurls her long tendril wings, 
glittering with spots of cobalt iridescence. The cloud 
of amber fireflies sends a jumble of soft-bright signals 
flashing across our chests. My bare skin tingles with 
the prickling light, cast across the contours in a liquid 
spray. Her antlers crackle with suppressed electricity. 


“I used to swim through sanity,” she adds, her 
voice drifting like worried flames. The fireflies pulse 


in time with her words. “Until I came to the bridge In such a world, the Mad Ones may be the sanest folks of all. 


of glass. Under that bridge, I could hear words falling like leaves from 
a thousand trees, their stems cut loose by the inevitable blade.” Witch- 
House tugs at the hem of her shadow, like a shy little girl in front of 
strangers. “They told me to let my light run free. So I opened my mouth 
and the fireflies came out.” 


Clumped around the edges of my sight, crowds of devoted souls 
gather, gleaming in our common madness. Around us, the air is melting, 
curling away from us like oil across water. Somewhere far away, the 
muffled voices scream like grass beneath a mower's blade. Witch-House 
glances through me. The amber lights skitter in the depths of her eyes. 
Each light, I see, is a galaxy dying in the pulse of an electric sun. 


Magick itself is a form of madness, too. In order to perform 
it, amage must possess - or be possessed by - an understanding of 
reality that defies the current standard. He or she must believe so 
strongly ina personal vision that the vision in question becomes 
reality. The language of pathology has words for conditions 
like that: Schizophrenia. Delusion. Disconnection. Sociopathy. The 
human animal fears people whose reality overrules their own... 
and with good reason, too. Madness can be terrifying, especially 
when it reaches out to change your world. 


And so, the Marauders exist in a Zen state of paradox: 
enlightened mages embracing sanity through perpetual 


dementia. Whether they choose that state consciously or have 
it chosen for them by forces beyond their control is a question 
for philosophers. The Mad Ones simply ARE: they exist, they 
are mad, and their madness is both singular (each Marauder 
is a reality unto himself) and collective (they all share a similar 
connection through their disconnection from everybody else) 
all at once. 


Beneath us all, the earth cries welcomes, praying for the deliverance 
we bring... 


Oncertain Principles 
In a mad world, madness becomes sanity. 


And let's be honest - our world is crazy. 


Straight-Shooting 


In game terms, all Marauder characters exist in a permanent state of Quiet — the magickal insanity detailed in Chapter 
Ten, pp. 554-561. Unlike other mages, they can't recover from this state. Although a given Marauder might slide up 
or down the Quiet scale (see the sidebar How to Make Yourself Mad, below), he’s stuck on the cracked side of the 
reality mirror. That condition grants Marauders a sense of tragic terror mixed with an apparent — though not perfect — 
immunity to Paradox. Because they themselves are paradoxical, these mages carry around their own personal reality 
zones... and when their zones override everyday reality, really weird shit occurs. 


For the most part, Marauders are personified plot devices, tossing out the usual rules whenever they appear. Although 
a brave Storyteller might allow player-character Marauders (again, see the related sidebar), the Mad Ones typically 
arrive, drop a boatload of havoc in the middle of a story, and then disappear, leaving a mess for the main characters to 
clean up. Such living catastrophes work best when they serve as dramatic devices. The more bound by rules she is, the 
less mysterious and frightening a Marauder becomes. 


The Mad Ones alter the landscape whenever they appear, so a little bit of them goes a long way. Even so, Marauders 
can inject pathos, horror, satire, and tragedy into your chronicle. Used carefully, they could even bring in a bit of comedy, 
although the Storyteller should avoid “Clown-Shoes Marauder Syndrome” (see the sidebar Running Wyld), if only 
because such goofiness trivializes mental illness and the dramatic potential of Marauder characters. Although they excel 
at wrecking stuff, the Chaos Mages also provide a cracked-mirror perspective on magickal existence... a perspective 
that becomes far more clear when that crazy-quilt walking bazooka suddenly reveals his innate humanity and the fate 
that might greet any mage whose grasp of reality slips too far. 


234 Mage: The Ascension 20" Anniversary Edition 


Confused? Join the club. By definition, Marauders confound 
definition. Complex antibodies to the disease of rationality, 
they re less irrational than counter-rational - uncertain principles 
hovering in a six-dimensional cat-box suspending life and death 
and all things in between. The more you try to quantify them, 
the more you find yourself chasing shaggy-dog tales that in some 
sense grow from the base of your own spine. 


Inshort, Maraudersare the clap ofsingle nonexistent hands 
whose echoes penetrate all layers of the Real. 


Putting aside the puzzles for a moment, each Marauder 
is essentially a universe of one - a mage so disconnected from 
Consensus Reality that he functions in a bubble of self-con- 
tained cosmos. Sometimes, that cosmos fits so neatly into the 
Consensus that the Marauder remains inconspicuous until he 
does something that reveals his true nature; at other times, a 
Marauder moves so far beyond the Consensus that her mere 
presence within Consensual Reality melts its borders and makes 
its colors run. Like mundane mental illness, a Marauder's 
madness slips between the cracks of the world around that 
person, either seeping in and rotting the surroundings through 
slow disintegration or else settling into the vulnerable areas 
and then cracking them like a sudden freeze through deep-set 
currents of ice. 


Metaphysically speaking, Marauders appear to be agents 
of Dynamic chaos. All mages change reality, but the Wyld 
Ones become change incarnate. If Technocrats personify 
Stasis, Nephandi embody Entropy, and the Traditions and 
Disparates follow Paths of Balance, then the Mad ride the winds 
of Dynamism through the structures that get set up and torn 
down by the other factions. Flux, not structure, is their essential 
nature. Although they might nestle in the broken corners of our 
world, their activities disrupt the Tapestry wherever they appear. 


In the Kingdom of the Mad, 
All Men are Sane 


Madness has been with us always, whirling on the edges of 
intellect and art. The insights of consciousness contain seeds of 
chaos too. If imagination is the gift of human sentience, then 
that same imagination can turn back upon itself, burying its 
fangs and emptying its poison into the very thing that makes it 
work. Just as magick, faith, and technology allowed the human 
species to ascend from rough beginnings, so too did insanity 
undermine those achievements. Maybe that's a lesson to us all: 
don't get too proud, because pride can bring the whole thing down on 
your head. Or perhaps it's just a built-in flaw... or, worst of all, 
the true measure of Enlightenment: the madness waiting on 
the edge of understanding. 


Drifting From the Baseline 


What do we mean by “madness”? Essentially, it’s a 
disconnection so profound that it becomes dangerous. An 
insane person - Marauder or otherwise - endures a mental 
state in which consciousness and perception become their 
own worst enemies. Baseline reality - the shared fiction that 
most of us agree is real - drifts away from that person; she 


Chapter Five: Ascension Warriors 


235 


perceives and reacts to a different reality than the one most 
people experience. That disconnection could be as drastic as 
gibbering hallucinatory mania or as subtle as an obsession that 
devours every other priority. (For details, see Baseline Reality 
in Chapter Ten, p. 554.) 


Madness is part of the human condition. Everyone has a 
bit of it, and mages have more of it than most folks. Throughout 
history, people have regarded dementia as a backhanded blessing 
from powers beyond human comprehension. Sages, seers, 
and prophets are essentially insane by most standards, if for 
no reason other than their expanded perceptions and bizarre 
devotions. As a result, crazy people have often been seen as 
“touched” - by gods, by faeries, by exposure to some great and 
secret truth that mortal minds are too fragile to withstand. And 
though those things might not be true of the average mentally 
disturbed person, they're certainly true of the Marauders. The 
things that brand them as dangerously un-sane also reflect a 
deeper level of Awakening. It's been said that the Mad Ones are 
the most truly Enlightened mages alive... and that observation 
might even be correct. 


Historically, the term maraud comes from a name given 
to wild tomcats and, by extension, to vagabonds who attack 
without warning and leave devastation behind. When a pack of 
11%century Chaos Mages attacked the Hermetic Covenant of 
Fuar Drochit, turning the stones to flowers and setting fire to 
the wells, one chronicler referred to them as “ravaging marauds 
like unto the mad"... and both names stuck. Since then, many 
other upheavals - some featuring coordinated efforts, most based 
in the actions of one or two high-powered Marauders - have 
burned the Mad Ones into the collective memory of Awakened 
society. Even the Nephandi, normally fond of chaos, fear the 
unpredictable Chaos Mages... perhaps because no other faction, 
noteven the Technocracy, suffers more violence at their hands. 


Perception and Actualization 

Folks who study Marauders often divide them into two 
categories: actualized Marauders, who externalize their delusions 
and reshape the world around them with that madness; and 
perceptual Marauders, who internalize their delusions and move 
inconspicuously among the Masses. The first type is more 
obviously dangerous, the second type more ominous because 
you never know just who or where they are. 


Actualized Marauders warp reality in their vicinity, inspiring 
the chaos that makes Wyld Mages so fearsome. Such mages tend to 
pull other people - Sleepers and Awakened alike - into the sanity 
sinks that well up around them. These often-unwilling allies add 
to the localized insanity, especially when they start believing more 
in the Marauder’s vision of reality than in the one they inhabited 
a few moments earlier. This phenomenon, in turn, often creates 
more Marauders... madness, in such cases, is indeed contagious. 


Perceptual Marauders keep their madness inside, often 
without knowing that they are, in fact, insane. Such Mad Folk 
remain under the radar, trickling out their craziness in small 
but meaningful ways. One might envision herself as a secret 
agent in enemy territory, playing a role that could cost her 


236 Mage: The Ascension 20" Anniversary Edition 


life; another believes himself to be the reincarnation of John 
the Baptist, seeking a reborn Christ; and a third strips off her 
clothes and introduces herself as the Train Goddess, assuring 
the rush hour crowd that they’re all in good hands with her. A 
handful of these Marauders suppress magick with their mere 
presence, ironically enforcing the Consensus to which they 
don’t actually belong. 


The apparent leaders of Marauder bands - folks who, in 
recentyears, seem to have become more common - tend to follow 
the perceptual mode; their reality includes other Marauders, 
but they’re sane enough to function among the Masses and 
direct their madder cousins through working strategies. The 
infamous Robert Davenport (again, see below) is one of these 
midnight rabbits, moving through everyday reality with the 
insight ofa Marauder seer. In the aftermath of the Avatar Storm 
(assuming that it ever occurred), these silent Marauders make 
up the majority of the Earthbound crew, and the more overt 
Marauders remain on the far side of the Gauntlet, bursting 
through for quick errands and often burning out in the process. 


Regardless of their particular insanity, the Marauders as a 
whole seem to play out a mad masque, whose nature remains 
hidden even to them... and though their mortal selves remain 
clouded by that defining madness, their Awakened souls display 
a form of sanity whose implications leave other mages cold. 


Rhymes Without Reason 

So is there a Marauder endgame? What, if anything, looks 
like Ascension for the Mad? That’s one of countless enigmas. 
You see, there doesn’t appear to be any rhyme or reason 
behind this loose-knit faction. They have no headquarters, no 
gospel, no council, protocols, or spokesmen beyond the eerie 
fellowships they occasionally form with like-minded lunatics. 
Unlike those other factions, the Mad Ones hold no reliable 
influence among the Masses. An individual Marauder might 
be rich or powerful, but she doesn’t dictate strategies for the 
group as a whole. One Chaos Mage might view Ascension as 
communion with the Child-Soul of Jupiter, whereas another 
views himself as damned to a Hell where everyone is dead 
and he'll always lose... and yet, he cannot simply surrender to 
hopelessness because enough faith might just win his salvation 
after all. There is no apparent uniting goal, perhaps because 
Marauders - like many questing mystics - regard the journey, 
not the destination, as the ultimate Enlightenment. 


Despite their collective name (a name imposed by others, 
almost never accepted by the Mad Mages themselves), each 
Marauder is a faction of one. And this singular perspective 
might be the purest view of the Cosmic Mystery. The other 
groups and factions could be seen as filters for a transcendent 
Truth too vast and terrible for the human mind to conceive 
without breaking. Marauders, though, have no such filters... or, 
if they do, then the filters are internally chosen, not externally 
imposed. These mages have seen something behind the sun, 
peeked beyond the masks of Divinity, puzzled out the riddle 
at the end of the universe... and that insight has driven them 
to a sanity that appears as madness to everybody else. 


The Tragedy of Madness 


Folks who see only the crazy side of Marauderdom 
miss a simple, vital fact: underneath the madness, every 
Marauder is an Enlightened human being who got burned 
by cosmic Truth. Each one, then, isa person who had 
dreams, loved ones, aspirations, and a life... and 
might perhaps, in some strange way, still have 
them. In mostcases, the Mad have children, 
mates, lovers, friends, comrades. Insanity 
might have driven wedges between those 
mages and their companions, but those 
ties were there once and probably still 
linger inside the madness. 


So when the vortices of reality-warping 
bugfuckery start sweeping away the Consensus, 
there'sstillahuman being wrapped up in thatstorm. 
That fact doesn't excuse the things a Marauder does 
or make him any more moral or good (human beings, 
asa rule, are pretty awful), but it renders that force of 
insane devastation tragic in the classic sense of that 
term: an example of greatness brought low by disaster, 
evoking pity and fear in all those who behold his fate. 
And it's that sense of tragedy which makes Marauders 
the cracked mirrors of the Awakened world - fearsome 
examples of the treacherous Path all mages pursue. 


Fusions, Cabals, Confluxes, 
and Solitary Madness 


Unlike the other factions, the Mad have neither rank nor 
organization within their collective dementia. Although a few Mad 
Ones might hold titles like the Obsidian Archduke or Resplendent 
Dragon of the Thousand Tongues, Marauders live in their own mad 
little worlds. 


Even so, certain types of loose confederations exist 
within the Wyld world. Classified by outsiders, these rough 
bands of cooperative lunacy collect like-minded crazies into 
effective (if often temporary) groups: 


Cabals 


Like other mages, the Mad often gather into small, sympathetic 
groups geared toward common purposes. In such cases, the Marauders 
share just enough communal insanity or cause to unite them for short- 
term collaboration. A Mad cabal (sometimes called a hatch, murder, pack, 
mosh, knot, or storm) tends to gather around a central focus - perhaps 
a shared origin, enemy, or concept of reality - mitigating the various 
Quiets of its individual members long enough 
for those mages to cooperate with one 
another. Witch-House, for example, tends 
to attract allies and followers through 
her messianic charisma; many of 
her followers get swept up in her 
firefly gospel, sometimes Awakening 
through the revelations she brings. Asa 
result, Witch-House often brings a few allies 
with her when she appears in public, generating 


V ow 


Chapter Five: Ascension Warriors 237 


a cult of weirdness that turns many of her prophecies into 
headlines on the next news report. 


Fusions 

A shared Quiet - often generated by a single experience - can 
instigate a fusion: a group of Marauders whose insanities mesh 
well enough to link them together. A group of kids Awakened by 
Witch-House, for instance, might share her view of the world... or 
perhapsa perspective that’s not quite like the oneshe experiences but 
exactly like the one shared by that fusion’s individuals. Essentially 
a Mad collective, each fusion group shares a mental bond between 
each member, allowing those mages to speak without words, finish 
each other's sentences, understand one another's madness, and 
act with the barely-conscious instincts of a wolf pack. According 
to Hermetic theory, fusion Marauders share a common Avatar 
or perhaps dance on the strings of several collaborating Avatars, 
united toward a purpose the mages themselves do notunderstand. 


Confluxes 


More often, the Mad get drawn into subconscious flash 
mobs of common purpose. Essentially, strangers come together 
through forces of probability, subconscious cues, or outside 
influence from a greater source. Those strangers act in separate 
yet collaborative fashion and then go their separate ways, often 
unaware that they've just shared an experience with their fellow 
Marauders. No one's quite sure exactly what it is that causes 
a conflux of Marauders to form, but the results can be quite 
disconcerting. If Witch-House, Pillory, Mother Goose, and 
the Wyld Ones all collided in the same space - each unaware 
of the other party's presence - the inevitable chaos would 
signify a conflux. 


Unlike fusions and cabals, a conflux holds no common 
perception of reality. Its members might not even realize that 
the other ones are involved in whatever madness they create. 
Again, the individual Avatars probably have some covertagenda 
in place; to the mages involved, however, those actions remain 
as mysterious to the Marauders as they do to the outsiders 
they affect. 


Ringleaders 

A handful of Mad ringleaders seem to understand the 
weird forces that unite Marauders; Robert Davenport may be 
the most notorious ringleader, although the unknown parties 
behind the Bai Dai and the Sitrin appear to share his ability 
to steer Wyld Mages in collective directions. Those secrets, 
however, may be the exclusive province of the Mad. Other non- 
Marauder mages have tried to guide Marauder groups toward 
a desired purpose... and without exception, those experiments 
go poorly for everyone concerned. 


Solitary Madness 

For the most part, though, Marauderdom appears to be a 
solitary Path. Despite the occasional collectives that form and 
dissolve among the Mad, the various Quiets that define this 
condition lead to alienation. An individual Marauder might 
share the occasional errand or community, but unless she 


238 Mage: The Ascension 20" Anniversary Edition 


belongs to a fusion, that situation is almost always temporary. 
This faction is composed largely of individuals whose Paths 
intertwine just enough to earn an imposed label from outsiders 
who'll never understand what goes on at the cracked side of 
the mirror. 


Mad Tactics 


When the Mad Ones go to war, their arsenals range 
beyond physical weapons (guns, bombs, spiked clubs, and so 
forth) and mere magickal destruction. The tactics that have 
bedeviled other mages for roughly a thousand years include 
certain refinements that only the Mad understand. Other 
mages can observe them, study them, occasionally even mimic 
them, but can never employ them with the surety of the Mad. 


(For the associated game systems, see the sidebar Tactics 
and Rules.) 


Paradox 

Rumor has it that Marauders are immune to Paradox, but 
that’s not quite true. Although their madness shields them from 
its worst effects (see How to Make Yourself Mad for details), 
the Wyld Mages do invoke Paradox energies. It’s just that the 
backlash tends to hit someone else. And that’s how the Mad 
Ones use Paradox as a weapon. 


Marauder Quiet insulates a mage from Paradox backlash; 
deep Quiet provides thick insulation. Like lightning, the energies 
and backlash seek a conductive target - and non-Marauder 
mages make great lightning rods. Thus, truly crazy Marauders 
invoke wildly vulgar magicks, and then they stand by while 
some other mage takes the backlash. That trick never gets old... 
unless, of course, you’re the mage playing Ben Franklin’s Key 
in a Marauder’s thunderstorm. 


Sanity Sinks 

Madness is contagious. When a powerful Marauder sets up 
shop, her madness soon overwhelms the local sense of reality. 
People begin to see themselves the way that the Marauder sees 
them, like actors in her personal passion play. Her delusions 
become their delusions. The cop directing traffic suddenly sees 
himself as a 1*century centurion; the kids playing Frisbee 
become, in their own minds, ragged beggars tossing around a 
dead cat; the fast-food cashier imagines himself as a naked slave 
in the kitchen of some demented, giant clown. For the most 
part, these sanity sinks affect Sleepers more than they affect 
mages; really potent madness, though, can overwhelm even a 
mage's sense of reality. 


Such sanity sinks begin with a sense of creeping weirdness; 
little things favor the Marauder’s perception of them, rather than 
the normal way they appear to the sane folks in the Marauder’s 
sink. Soon madness, as the song says, takes its toll. Although a 
perceptual Marauder - one whose Quiet stays inside of her - 
doesn’t radiate this reality warp, a strong actualized Marauder 
can soon turn other people crazy, if only for a little while. In 
extreme cases, these converts can become long-term allies, 
cultists, or even - if they Awaken - new Marauders. 


Under most circumstances, it’s best to leave Marauders as Storyteller characters. This way, the Storyteller gets to decide 
what a Marauder can and cannot do and sidesteps the potential headaches of Paradox-resistant player characters. 


That said, a strong and ethical roleplayer COULD evoke some fascinating stories by facing the challenge of a mage 
who goes Marauder and feels his world slip away. Given the right gaming troupe, this MIGHT provide dramatic tension 
and a host of roleplaying challenges. Therefore, we offer the following suggestions to players and Storytellers who can 
approach the subject with balance and creativity. 


First of all, read the extensive rules for Quiet given in Chapter Ten, as well as the Marauder-specific rules presented in 
this section. For gameplay purposes, an Awakened character who enters Quiet and reaches Level 6 may go Marauder 
atthe Storyteller's discretion. At that point, the mage either becomes a Storytellercharacter and the original player makes 
a new mage, or the mage becomes a player-run Marauder IF the Storyteller allows that as an option. In both cases, 
the mage is permanently buggo. Unless the Storyteller allows for a miraculous recovery, that character goes ‘round the 
bend and becomes one of the Mad. 


Once the character has become a Marauder, his original Quiet gets switched out for Marauder Quiet: he’s always 
insane now, but the degree of that insanity depends upon the degree of his Marauder Quiet. That Trait, however, can go 
up and down, depending on the events within the story. Certain things may drive the character more sane or less sane, 
but he’s never totally sane in the usual sense of things. 


A Marauder's base Quiet depends upon that mage's usual disconnection from Consensus Reality. Robert Davenport, for 
instance, is pretty lucid: he can interact with most of the world, though he remains convinced that his wife and daughter are 
still alive and that his Avatar is actually his wife (who occasionally speaks through him). At times, he views his surroundings 
as a faerie-tale landscape in which he's the hero. Davenport's base Quiet, then, is low — between 2 and 3, depending 
on his situation. Pillory, on the other hand, remains wrapped in an eternal nightmare that’s disconnected from anything 
like baseline reality. Her base Quiet, then, is 5 — grossly distorted in every way imaginable. Such Marauders are merely 
a step or two away from complete metaphysical dis-integration. A permanent rise above that level will destroy them. 


Quiet Trait Degree of Insanity 


AINOT 


A few simple but notable differences between the Mad One's reality and the reality experienced by 
other characters. Davenport, for example, refuses to believe that his tamily is long dead. 


Grotesque distortions of time, space, identity, and form. The Marauder perceives a reality that’s related 
to the normal one, but it has many significant differences that the Avatar must "translate" before she can 
interact with the world at large. 


Consensual Reality ejects the Marauder into the Umbra. Exiled beyond Consensus Reality, the Mad 
One exists only in distant Otherworldly Realms. If she gets any madder than this, she'll drop out into 
the Deep Umbra. What happens after that is a mystery for the ages. Theory holds that Marauders who 
Ascend to this degree of madness become veritable gods within the Onerae Dream Realms. 


Oddly enough, Marauders of Quiet 5 or higher appear to be immune to the effects of Disembodiment. 
Does that mean that physical existence is tied to forms of sanity, or that some forms of madness transcend 
physical existence...? 


Cults, Allies, and Disruption whose vision of reality fits their own. Actualizing Marauders 
tend to grow their own cults and networks, whereas perceptual 


Lunacy loves company. Especially in a world that’s crazy to 
Marauders attract friends, lovers, and would-be saviors. 


begin with, Marauders often find themselves with kindred spirits 


Chapter Five: Ascension Warriors 239 


Although many Wyld Ones fit the lone whacko stereotype, 
others gather cults and alliances from among the Masses, the 
Night-Folk, and occasionally even among other mages who 
might not realize that their friend is one of the Mad. 


Silent Marauders often become agents of disruption, 
joining other factions, earning the trust and affection of 
their comrades, and then bringing the whole thing down on 
everybody's heads. Naturally, this tactic requires an illusion 
of sanity on the part of a Marauder - obviously demented 
ones cannot infiltrate such organizations. As the saying says, 
however, it's always the quiet ones (or perhaps the ones in 
Quiet...) that you have to look out for. Perceptual Marauders, 
or ones whose Quiet allows a fair measure of interaction with 
the world at large, can infiltrate a group and then blow it up 
or tear it down from the inside out. (For an example, see the 
character Hive in Appendix I.) 


Zooterrorism 

And then there's the Marauder specialty: zooterrorism, also 
known as dropping a manticore on your neighbor’s doorstep, 
ringing the bell, and running away laughing. Granted, the 


doorstep is probably the local Technocratic Construct, the 
manticore won’t survive the experience, and the Paradox will 
dropa metaphysical anvil on somebody's head from a great height... 
but really, this sort of thing creates a memorable impression, so 
it's got a long and honorable pedigree among the Mad. 


Magickally speaking, a zooterrorist Marauder opens up 
a portal between the Earth and an appropriate Otherworldly 
Realm, calls a Bygone through the gate, and lets nature take its 
course. Compassionate Marauders often stick around to even the 
odds between the rampaging beastie and the local Technocrats, 
but more callous Mad Folk (like the Bai Dai) simply let chaos 
rule the day. The near-inevitable Paradox backlashes, meanwhile, 
pound unlucky mages into the pavement, which just adds to the 
overall effect of a pissed-off dragon at the local Progenitor lab. 
Although the Avatar Storm makes this tactic more dangerous 
than usual, powerful Marauders still resort to zooterrorism when 
nothing less than a harpy swarm will send the desired message. 


Reality Vortices and the Bigfoot Effect 


On the flipside, a powerfully actualized Marauder can skew 
the localized reality in such powerful ways that even technology 


Running Wyld 


Whether or nota player gets to keep his character after a mundane Quiet level of 5 depends on the Storyteller's judgment. 
Ultimately, the Storyteller decides. If she decides to adoptthe Marauder as a regular character, though, several important 
elements come into play: 


Take Madness Seriously 


If and when a mage goes Marauder, please leave the clown-shoes in the closet where they belong. Yes, gaming should 
be fun, but playing a Marauder for laughs cheapens insanity, Marauders, and your chronicle as a whole. Beyond that 
consideration, though, remember that Marauder madness is a curse, not a superpower. Real-life mental illness tends to 
have catastrophic effects on everyone involved, and it hinders people in many vital ways, from basic social interactions 
to the pervasive feeling that your entire life seems unreal. 


On that topic, beware of emotional triggers in your gaming group. Insanity qualifies as mature content, and it’s not 
suitable for all Mage groups. Chapter Seven offers suggestions about handling sensitive subjects in your game. Beyond 
the potential pitfalls of running an insane character in your chronicle, simply treat your Marauder like a human being 
whose life has been transformed by his disconnection from everyday reality. He might be checking into the Lovecratt 
Hotel, but he’s still recognizably human... which, of course, provides all kinds of glorious dramatic potential for a great 
roleplayer to embrace. 


Secretly Mad 


Marauders and Nephandi top the mystic hit list. Most mages share a "kill on sight" perspective on the Fallen and the 
Mad, if only out of self-preservation. A continuing Marauder character (whether or not he’s run by a player) should 
probably remain secret: the players might know that he’s Mad, but the characters should not. Mages who willingly run 
with the Mad Ones soon have other Awakened folks gunning for the entire group. Sure, they might be sticking with their 
friend out of love or loyalty, but no other mage will care. Like the proverbial rabid dogs, those characters will be hunted 
down and wiped out. And so, the Mad One should be as subtle as his Quiet allows him to be. If he acts out too often, 
his comrades will be forced to put him down. 


Who’s Crazy? 


Mage traditionally treats Marauders as forces of nature. Sometimes, though, a Mad Mage has deeper ties to the player 
group. Maybe he’s a parent... or a neighbor... or a mentor, lover, or child. He might be a cabal-mate whose Quiet 
overcomes reality... or a long-time rival or enemy whose madness gives him a scary new edge. A Sleeper associate might 
Awaken into Marauderdom or be pulled into a sanity sink by an insane mage. In short, a Marauder can be anyone... 
and almost anyone could 9o Marauder, too. As the Joker says in The Killing Joke, all it takes is one bad day... and the 


World of Darkness is full of really bad: days. 


240 


Mage: The Ascension 20^ Anniversary Edition 


Marauder characters invoke special rules. Although 
the main rule systems are described in Book III, we've 
presented those special Marauder rules here for easy 
reference. For details about the rules themselves, see 
Chapters Eight, Nine, and Ten. 


Paradox and the Mad 


Marauder characters enjoy a certain relationship with 
Paradox and its effects: 


ickla are handled r ame . (For details, 
see p. 502, and remember that coincidental 
magick is relative.) 


Quiet Insulation: Every point in Marauder Quiet 
insulatesthatcharacter fromfive points ofbacklash. A 
character with Quiet 3, then, is immune to 15 points 
of backlash, whereas one with Quiet 5 is immune to 
25 points. 


Compounded Insanity: When a Marauder's 
player botches a vulgar magick roll, that character's 
Quiet increases by one. As an optional rule, the 
Quiet might increase by one level for each 1 that 
gets rolled. 


gets drawn into the dance. Video cameras, cell phones, and other 
recording devices shut down (a common occurrence), record 
indistinct blurs of unidentifiable activity, or else transform 
completely into related but dissimilar objects - say, an iPad 
into a clay tablet and stylus - before transforming back to their 
original configuration once the Mad One leaves the scene. 


Such reality vortices help conceal a Marauder's existence 
and activities as well as subvert reality with the Bigfoot effect: 
that annoying cryptozoology quirk that blurs images of 
Nessie, Bigfoot, and UFOs that appeared with perfect clarity 
when photographers took their pictures. Whether this means 


Chapter Five: Ascension Warriors 


24l 


Optional Rule: Sanity Sinks 


As the main text says, Marauder delusions can be contagious. As an optional rule, certain actualized Marauders can 
infect other people with their madness. 


Creeping Weirdness: Whenever an actualized Marauder spends a few minutes in the presence of otherwise 
sane Sleepers, the players for those characters should make. Perception + Awareness rolls, difficulty 6. If a player 
rolls successfully, the character retains her usual perspective. If the player fails, the character begins to drift into the 
Marauder's way of seeing things, adopting the Mad One's delusions as her own. And if the player botches, then the 
bystander immediately enters the Marauder's weird little world... and doesn't find anything unusual about that at all! 


Lure of Dementia: If an actualized Marauder spends a scene or more in the presence of other sane characters 
(other mages, Sleepers, Night-Folk, etc.), the Storyteller rolls the Marauder's Arete while the players of those other 
characters roll their Willpower. This is a contested roll, with a difficulty of 6 for all players. 


Ifthe Marauder wins the contest, each success for the Marauder converts one Willpower point from the other characters 
to the Marauder's viewpoint. Once every point of a given character's Willpower has been converted, that character 
enters the Marauder's Quiet — seeing what he sees as the Marauder sees it. Essentially, mages become temporary 
Marauders (without the usual benefits), and non-mages become cultists of the Mad One. 


Usually, the other players roll once per scene. Physical touch — especially prolonged contact — from the Marauder forces 
the targeted player to roll each turn. 


Insanity Clause: Neither this creeping madness nor the lure of dementia affect Night-Folk who are already insane. 
Malkavian vampires, Black Spiral Dancer werewolves, other Marauders, psychotic hunters, ghosts, mummies, and 
fae ofall kinds remain totally immune to those delusions. Other characters can resist the effects by exerting Mind 1 
magick or by invoking mental Disciplines or Gifts to protect their minds against the madness. 


Regaining Sanity: Once a character leaves the Marauder’s presence, the madness starts to fade. Generally, a 
character can regain her sanity by the end of a given story unless the Mad One has been reinforcing those delusions. 
(See below.) Other characters can bring that person’s sanity back more quickly through Mind magick or other forms 
of therapy, but prolonged madness might demand prolonged recovery. 


Sanity Sink Merit: If the Storyteller allows Marauder player-characters, then the sanity sink effect must be purchased 
as a 7-point Merit. This is not an automatic gift for every Mad Mage. 


Demented Revelations 


Through horrific, seductive, or other engaging methods, a Mad One can try to blast another character’s sanity using the 
Things Man Was Not Meant to Know option described in Chapter Nine, p. 407. This sort of coercive madness 
involves roleplaying and Storytelling and can provide really dramatic episodes in your chronicle. Obviously, it tends to 


deepen the effects of a sanity sink, leaving mental scars that might never heal. 


that Consensus Reality smoothes out little wrinkles or that 
Marauders were involved with some of history’s more notorious 
cryptozoological events (they probably were...) remains open to 
debate. In any case, certain Wyld Mages do tend to warp reality 
ona technological scale. Although the Traditions, Disparates, 
and Technocracy wind up having to conceal Marauder incidents 
on a fairly regular basis, the Bigfoot effect appears to nullify a 
multitude of sins. 


Magick and the Mad 


Marauder madness blows open a person’s sense of 
possibility. Whereas other mages study practices handed down 
through mentors and fellowships, the Mad often manifest 
wild powers through explosions of enlightened potential. 
Aside from the Awakened mages who go Wyld, Marauders 
display the sort of power that saner mages work years or even 
decades to achieve. 


242 Mage: The Ascension 20^ Anniversary Edition 


Wild Talent 


In a spontaneous burst of expanded dementia, a Mad 
One can rip holes in the Gaundet or split into half a dozen 
selfaware selves. How? Through Wild Talent, described in 
Chapter Ten, (pp. 527-528), as "a sudden burst of controlled 
(and uncontrollable) magick." This talent essentially runs wild, 
dragging the mage along to clean up the mess. For most mages, 
such displays happen once or twice in a lifetime, if even that 
often; for certain Marauders, though, they're a way of life. 


In game terms, this sort of magick is the Storyteller's 
playground. She can have it do whatever seems most dramatic 
atthe time, leaving the Marauder's normal magick to the usual 
rule systems. Again, see that Chapter Ten entry for details. 


Insane Focus 

For the average mage, belief provides the foundation 
for the willworker's focus. Practices and tools help the mage 
guide that belief toward magickal acts. For the Mad, however, 


Enlightened insanity provides the focus. A Marauder's Arts well 
up from that crazy-pool, and so she might not use instruments 
Or practices at all - just explosions of demented Will. 


That said, most Mad Ones do use practices and tools... 
typically ones that make sense only to each individual Marauder. 
One might use words, another uses toys, and a third employs 
chalk drawings that she scribbles onto notebook paper and 
then chews up before vomiting a spell. As always, the focus 
depends upon the insanity. A Mad Mage uses things that fit 
into his personal view of reality. 


Mages who go Mad after belongingto other groups typically 
retain their original beliefs, tools, and practices. Now, however, 
those instruments and paradigms get warped in bizarre ways. 
A Virtual Adept Marauder might use broken computer gear 
or an Etch-a-Sketch; a Hermetic could employ obsessive glyphs 
and chants of insane complexity and fifth-dimensional math. 
A Mad Ecstatic could eat bugs, and a Mad Progenitor makes 
Dr. Frankenstein look like Neil DeGrasse Tyson. Those Mad 
Ones still practice magick, but it's a bent form of their original 
practice, reflecting their permanent delusions. 


Marauder Resonance 


The Mad weave their madness into everything they do. As 
a result, each Marauder has powerful Resonance, rippling the 
Tapestry with lunatic phenomena. Actualized Marauders send out 
mad echoes: weird quirks of the environment, strange weather, 
bent musical notes that come from no visible instrument, and 
other twists of Reality’s tail. Perceptual Marauders, in contrast, 
send out tiny waves of unease and dread; such people feel wrong 
but don’t distort reality in such obvious ways. 


Eventually, though, the Madness becomes too strong for 
the Tapestry to endure. Low-key Marauders, like Davenport, 
might keep a low profile on Earth for years or even decades. 
Few Mad Ones, however, are that sane. More often than not, 
the truly powerful Marauders retreat into the Otherworlds, 
get swallowed up by Umbral Realms, or explode in brilliant 
flares of glorious insanity, projecting echoes of their dementia 
to the universe at large. 


The Dream Lords: Marauder Oracles? 

When Marauders reach a pinnacle of madness, their 
essence leaps from the confines of reality and soars into the 
Void. No force on Earth can hold them then - every element 
of flesh or spirit dissolves into the whirling Wyld. Sometimes, 
however, visitors to the Onerae - lasting Realms among the 
Dream Zone - report seeing strange gods whose wishes 
transform those dreamscapes to suit unearthly whims. Could 
these Dream Lords be Mad Oracles, advanced beyond material 
reality yet still held in the gravity of the Real? Given that the 
Dream Realms are the stuff of incarnated consciousness, the 
concept of Quiet Bodhisattvas within those Realms makes a 
certain degree of sense. 


(For more about the Onerae, see Lasting Realms and 
Dreaming Gods, Chapter Four, p. 101) 


The Mad Masque? 


So what, if anything, does Ascension look like to the 
metaphysically insane? Is there a Path for the Mad that leads 
to some ultimate transcendence? Might the Marauders have 
a vision for the world at large? The answers - assuming they 
exist - remain mysterious to all but the maddest of seers... 
and because they're insane as well, their observations should 
be taken with several barges full of salt. 


Still, there do appear to be forms of Ascension for escapees 
from reality's confinement. After all, the illusion of sanity can 
be a sort of prison from which Enlightenment allows release. 
What other people see as hopeless dementia might instead 
be transcendence from a Gnostic cosmos in which reality is 
a torturous delusion - a Mad Masque pretending to be real. 


Perhaps, on an individual level, each Marauder gets a 
glimpse behind the scenes at this cosmic farce. It could be that 
this insight has driven them insane. It could also be, however, 
that such insight has made them the SANEST people in the 
World of Darkness. Paradoxically, both states may be true: sanity 
is madness, and the greatest Enlightenment burns too bright 
to be considered sane. 


Ascension, then, is an eternal laugh at the cosmic joke, 
endless applause for the Mad Masque in which each living thing 
holds a role. Perhaps that one hand clapping at the end of the 
universe is the transcendent essence of the Great Marauder 
Soul. And if, after all these centuries of struggle and war, the 
Marauders really do have the last laugh, their collective punch 
line could involve ripping down the curtain that masquerades 
as the Tapestry... and revealing, in the end, that nothing is what 
it ever appeared to be at all. 


Fragments of a Greater God 

Clearly, the World of Darkness is a sick joke perpetrated 
upon its inhabitants. No divinity could be cruel enough to 
bestow a constant struggle of absurd miseries upon its children. 
As the theory goes, this cosmos is a sadistic toy crafted by insane 
gods. Beyond them, however, a vast Creator offers comfort 
to the prisoners of this Earthly prison... and the Mad Ones 
are his angels, ministering to the innocent souls caught up 
in this Gnostic thrill-ride. It's a weird theory, sure - but like 
we said, this world is insane, so who’s to say that the Angels 
of the True God aren’t actually sane folks whose Awakening 
allows them to see past the illusions of this rotten Earth and 
embrace a sanity that only looks like madness when you see 
it through our eyes...? 


In a world torn apart by Ascension Warriors, perhaps 


madness really is the key to Ascension - an ultimate transcendence 
beyond this World of Darkness. 


Chapter Five: Ascension Warriors 243 


IN A4 


/ 
l 
1 


Z re 


Aig M: 
WIL ’ Ly 
/ "Wh 
AU 2: 
an a ciui — i 
RRS- 
i 
4 


A Made. 


— 
p v 
> 


wei), y 1. Mi 
ey) —— 
DAES 


< 
= 
tra /.4 
j A 
^ " | y * 
> y Sime 


Chapter Six: 


Creating, the 
haracter 


If you would create something, you must be something. 


- Johann Wolfgang von Goethe 


Seven of Cups 


Associations: Temptation; delusion; sensation; fantasy; 
illusions; withdrawal ... 


Slaughter laughed, then drained the last of the chocolate wine from his 
glass. “You really need to leave those losers you hang with and join with 
some real power, Iphigenia. You know my group would welcome you.” 


He looked attractive enough, with his long, fashionably shaggy 
black hair that fell into deep green eyes rimmed with kohl. Everything 
from fingernails to top hat was black. A few silver chains highlighted his 
Goth glory. She had once visited his apartment, a place where the only 
variation was the exact shade of black displayed on everything from his 
bed sheets to his toilet. She had laughed aloud when he asked her to hand 
him “that black thing.” 


Iffy smiled, amused by his conformity. Encouraged, he continued: 
“Come on, Iffy," he taunted. “Your problem is you don't believe in 
anything.” 

Now she was annoyed. Small and slightly chubby, with curly dark 
blond hair, pink cheeks, and sky-blue eyes that screamed of Midwestern 
corn-fed normalcy, she glared at him. Why did he bother with her anyway, 
when she dressed as she did? She preferred brilliant greens and pinks. 
And her roller skates - the old-fashioned kind that tightened with a 
key, fit over her high, green boots. Several gold pocket watches woven 
together with red and pink roses sat atop her abundant curls. 


"Actually," she snapped, “you are totally wrong. As usual. It isn't 
that I believe in 'nothing;' it's that I believe in everything. Or at least, a 5 
the possibility of everything.” 


Chapter Six: Creating the Character 245 


BY a e 


She leaned closer. “I believe in freedom, in romance, in 
dreams and great struggles against seemingly unbeatable foes 
and glorious victories that give us all the right to be who we are 
without apology.” 

He laughed louder. "Seriously? You sound like you're about 
to break into some Disney intro theme-song!” 

“And you don't approve.” Iffy sat back, twirling her hair, 
plucked one of the roses from her homemade tiara, and began to 
denude it one petal at a time. 


“Not really,” he admitted. “No.” 


“Goodbye, Slaw.” She pulled the petals clean in a single 
sweep of her fingertips. “Sorry, but you bore me.” 


Smiling sweetly one last time, she rose gracefully from the café 
table. Lifting her brilliant crimson parasol to shade her from the 
sun, she skated away down the grimy city street while Slaughter 
sat at the table, looking as though he'd just lost something but 
couldn't put his finger on what it might have been. 


The Human Side of Power 


You’re not helpless. If a single sentence could 
sum up Mage: The Ascension, it would be 
that one. No matter who you're playing or how 
hopeless your struggle appears, your mage is 
never withoutsome degree of power. And so, as 
you create your Awakened alter-ego, remember 
this: Your mage can make things happen, even 
in the most awful circumstances. 


Although Mage is (in)famous for its 
metaphysical weirdness, it's the human core of 
each Awakened character that makes Mage truly compelling. 
Mages, regardless of alliance or affiliation, are passionate human 
beings: they love, they fear, they strive for huge and tiny goals. 
They feel emotions and sensations with an intensity that non- 
mages rarely understand. The Arts that define their powers also 
open their senses to perceptions far outside normal human 
experience - the first level of every Sphere, after all, reveals a rich 
new spectrum of reality. In the immortal words of Rob Zombie, 
mages are “more human than human,” and they are all the more 
human because of that excellence. 


It's the human side of power that brings Mage's epic scope 
toan intimate human level. Without it, the Awakened Ones are 
just jumbles of complicated stats that pitch lightning around. 
The moral urgency of the Ascension War and its ponderous 
effects feel more vital when they're rooted in human needs. 
Just as we do, mages need to feel some measure of security, 
comfort, accomplishment and love in their lives. The skills 
they learn, the Arts they master, the groups they join, and the 
goals they pursue all reflect the things they want and need - 
the challenges they face and the tools they employ in order to 
meet those challenges. 


In short, they're a lot like us. 


Stages of Creation 
Like the other large chapters in this book, this chapter has 
been divided up into several sections: 


* Part I: Creating Your Character (pp. 254-265) covers 
the essential steps involved in crafting your new mage. 


* Part II: Character Traits (pp. 266-335) presents the 
various game Traits that define what your character can 
and cannot do. 


Ma$e: The Ascension 20^ Anniversary Edition 


* Part III: Character Progress (pp. 335-339) shows the 
ways in which your mage can grow, change, and prosper. 


Within those sections, other sections handle the other 
elements - most especially the different sorts of Traits and 
their related rules. 


Some of the rules throughout the following chapter 
contradict the systems given in previous editions of Mage. 
Although your Storyteller will be the final arbitrator about 
the rules used in your particular Mage chronicle, consider the 
following rules to be official and definitive as far as the Mage 
20 series is concerned. 


Before We Begin... 


As you scan this chapter, noting the many Traits that'll 
define your mage in game terms, remember this: all of these 
Attributes, Skills, Backgrounds, and so on are innate parts 
of the human character you’re creating. Like magick, they’re 
extensions of the person who uses them. On a meta level, then, 
they’re all extensions of you, as well. By keeping that personal 
connection to your character's human core, you'll take a bunch 
of abstract Traits and make them real. 


There's a sort of power in that act... and yeah, a sort of 
magick, too. 


Traits 


Traits represent the in-game capabilities of your mage. 
Measured in dots - usually along a scale of 1 to 5 - they reflect 
the character's relative ability and tell you how many dice to roll 
when determining what your character can do. For each dot 
in the appropriate Trait, you take one die to determine your 
chance ofsucceeding ata given task. Added together, these dice 
become your dice pool (further detailed in Chapter Eight, p. 
385). The more dots you have, the bigger your dice pool and 
the greater your ability. 


Trait Ratings 

When you build your Mage character, you spend certain 
amounts of points on various Traits. The exact amounts depend 
upon the Trait in question. We'll get into the specifics later on; 
for now, just remember that most Traits range between one 
dot and five dots. A zero-dot rating in a Trait reflects the total 


absence of that characteristic, whereas six dots or more in an 
Ability, Attribute or Background reflects an inhuman degree of 
expertise. Certain Traits - Arete, Willpower, Quintessence, and 
Paradox - range from 0 to 10 or more. Aside from Willpower, 
non-mages don't have these Traits at all. 


For the majority of your Traits, think of your character's 
abilities along this range: 


X No Capability 

° Poor/ Novice 

ee Average/ Beginning Professional 
coe Good/ Experienced Pro 

coe Exceptional/ Highly Skilled Pro 
ceceo World-Class 


eeeee e Beyond Normal Human Range 


Most folks range between 1 and 3 in their various 
Attributes and between 0 and 3 in assorted Abilities. So when 
you're deciding what your mage is especially good at, select a 
few Traits that represent her most outstanding features, then 
find the things she's not as good at and assign the remaining 
points accordingly. 


Getting Started 


A few things to think about before we get started: 


e TheAwakened come from all walks of life. Assuming that 
you've got the knowledge to play such characters (see p. 
258), your mage could be anyone: a Silicon Valley engineer, 
a housewife from Madrid, a Bejing orphan or a student 
from Sao Paulo. He might be gay; she might be virginal; 
ze might be transgender. Your mage could be Sunni 
Muslim, Roman Catholic, a Wiccan neopagan, or even 
anatheist. Although most mages Awaken within their first 
25 years or so, you could decide to play an elderly dude 
who's just had a major change of life. Magick knows no 
age, creed, gender, or ethnicity. You personally might be 
familiar with a middle-class American or European life, 
but your character can hail from anywhere. 


* Even so, you've got a limited amount of points to spend 
when you first create your mage. This way, your chronicle 
follows a group of peoplewholearn and grow, as opposed to 
a pack of demigods turning their world upside down. Your 
Storyteller might decide to give you more starting points 
in order to run a higherlevel game. In general, though, 
you're starting small and working upward from there. 


e Yourmageis probablya beginner - not totally unprepared 
for her adventures, but new to this whole Awakened 
deal. Your Storyteller might even begin the chronicle at 
the Awakening itself, running you through a prelude that 
features your character’s introduction to the world of 
magick. (See The Prelude, p. 262.) In general, though, 
the following character creation process assumes that 
your character has a small amount of experience and 
training - enough to leave her familiar with the basics 
but not quite ready to level mountains with her Arts. 


* Storytelling games are collaborative, not competitive. In 
this medium, winning involves telling a kickass story 
with your friends. Design and play your mage with an 
eye toward creative cooperation. Sure, you can try to run 
a moody sociopath who destroys everyone he knows just 
for giggles. Unless every other player consents to be your 
butt-monkey, though, that'd probably be a very short, 
unhappy chronicle. 


Working Together 


Collaboration provides the key to an enjoyable chronicle. 
The characters might be at each other’s throats, but the players 
ought to be havinga good time. In that spirit, sit down with your 
Storyteller and fellow players to hash out a shared foundation 
for your adventures. Come up with a chronicle concept that 
has room for everyone. Create a group of characters who have 
compelling reasons to stick together, and offer them ties to 
unite them as a whole. 


As the Storyteller, give your characters common ground; as 
the player, decide why that common ground’s important to your 
mage. A group composed of a right-wing Nevada survivalist, an 
executive from Singapore, a wealthy New York liberal, and an 
elderly recluse from Tibet might offer up fascinating roleplay 
opportunities, but it'd be hard to keep that gang together for 
more than a session or two. So before you whip up a Fallen 
Man in Black, figure out why your characters should get 
together, stay together, and risk everything they hold dear in 
order to face death - and worse - as a team. You could craft 
the most ingenious hero in the history of roleplaying, but if 
the game falls apart because there's nothing at its center, then 
your efforts - and the efforts of everyone else involved - will 
have been wasted. 


In short, work together for mutual enjoyment. Your 
characters and chronicle will last longer if you do. 


Chapter Six: Creating the Character 247 


H 


ja 


"mi 


4 
O 


ak 


Nd 


T 


pm > 


N 
7 
Lg 


umo. 7 


f Character Traits and Terms 


Despite the wide range of options, most Mage characters 


have the following Traits: 


A. Name: On your character sheet, list the name by which 


no g 


g 


your character is known when the chronicle begins. That 
name might change later on, but it's the way he thinks 
of himself at the start of your game. 


. Player: That'd be you. 


Chronicle: Many gaming groups give their chronicles a 
name or title. If your troupe uses a specific title for this 
chronicle, put that on your character sheet as well. 


Nature: An archetype that describes your character's 
true self, Nature goes above... 


. Demeanor: ...Demeanor, the archetype that reflects how 
ze presents zeself to other people. This social image could 
be very close to the mage's inner Nature, but it might 
also present a very different mask to folks who don't 
know your character well. Information about Natures 
and Demeanors starts on p. 267. 


F. Essence: An Awakened Avatar tends toward one of 


four different Essences. These primal forces guide each 
mage, shaping magick, behavior, and destiny in subtle 
yet pervasive ways. The Essence entries begin on p. 266. 


G. Affiliation: Mages tend to be social creatures. The 


m 


— 
. 


Affiliation Traitreflects your character’s overall allegiance 
(Traditions, Technocracy, Disparate), and the next entry 
defines her particular group within that affiliation. 


Sect: This entry deals with a specific group, like the 
Order of Hermes, Progenitors, Wu Lung, and so forth. 
You can find the various sects and specific details about 
them in the previous chapter. 


Concept: A shorthand description of the overall idea 
behind your character. Is he a Cranky Recluse? Is she 
an Ass-Kicking Gutter Punk? Catch the tone of your 
character in a handful of words and then use that as 
a foundation for the other Traits. For some potential 
concepts, see p. 250. 


Attributes: À character's innate physical, social, and 
mental Traits go by the collective name of Attributes. 
Those Trait descriptions begin on p. 273. 


K. Abilities: The common range of Talents, Skills, and 


Seg ay o 


248 Mage: The Ascension 20" Anniversary Edition 


Knowledges that reflect a character’s personal and 
professional capabilities are collectively referred to as 
Abilities. Ability listings begin on p. 275. 


B 
bt 


L. Spheres: The nine Spheres represent aspects of reality 
that mages can manipulate. Details about these powers 
can be found in Chapters Two and Ten. 


M. Backgrounds: Mages enjoy a wide range of personal or 
group-based benefits. The majority of those benefits are 
open to any Awakened character, although a handful of 
them are restricted to certain groups. These Background 
Traits entries begin on p. 303. 


N. Other Abilities: Beyond the typical Abilities (that is, 
the ones listed on the character sheet), your mage could 
have a number of specialized Abilities too. These Traits 
appear in the Other Abilities section and can be found 
from p.289 onward. 


O. Arete: The enlightened force of Will that allows 
Awakened characters to employ magick gets summed 
up in a Trait called Arete. Details begin on p. 328. 


P. Willpower: There's a reason mages are often called 
willworkers; their unusual strength of confidence and 
conviction gives them high Willpower Trait ratings. For 
more details, see p. 330. 


© 


Quintessence/ Paradox: A spectrum of opposing Traits, 
the Quintessence/ Paradox wheel shows how in or 
out of tune your mage’s energy is with regards to the 
rest of reality. When your mage absorbs Quintessence, 
mark these boxes clockwise from the dot onward; 
when the character accumulates Paradox, mark them 
counterclockwise from the dot. This way, the wheel 
reflects the conflicting forces within your mage. Further 
information begins on p. 331. 


R. Health: When the slings and arrows of outrageous 
fortune (and enemy characters) make their mark upon 
your mage, you make your own marks upon the Health 
chart. Ranging from Bruised to Incapacitated, this Trait 
reflects the effects of injury. For details, see Chapter 
Nine, p. 406. 


S. Experience: Throughout the course of the chronicle, your 
mage accumulates experience points that you get to spend 
on new or increased Traits. Information about Experience 
begins on p. 335. 


An extended character sheet (available online, due to 
space concerns) features space for Merits, Flaws, equipment, 
and other details. The primary Traits, however, character sheet 
included in this book, and the following steps and entries 
explore them all in detail. 


DNA 4 Dea A AALE 


^ 


Name © Nature: Affiliation: @ 
Player: Demeanor: Sect: 
Chronicle: @ Essence: Concept: o 
© Attributes 
Physical Social Mental 
Strength — e0000 Charisma | | €0000 Perception. 60000 
Dexterity — 0000 Manipulation €0O00OO [Intelligence |.  eO0O0OO 
Stamina __ 0000 Appearance |  €0000 Wis . | | 0000 
@ Abilities 
Talents Skills Knowledges 
Alertness __ _OOOO0O Crafts OOOOO Academics _O0000 
Art OOOOO Drive .— OOOOO Computer — 00000 
Athletics . » OOOOO Etiquette .  OOOOO Cosmology OOOOO 
Awareness SO QOQOOO Firearms QOOOO Enigns | | | OOOOO 
Brawl OOOOO Martial Arts OOOOO  Esoterica OOOOO 
Empathy_ J— OOOOO Meditation__ OOOOO Investigation OOOOO 
Expression. QOOOOO Mele = |  OoOOOO law  — . 400000 
Intimidation _ OOOOO Research OOOOO Medicine |. 00000 
Leadership . 00000  Steadth OOOOO Occult OOOOO 
Streetwise OOOOO Survival OOOOO Politics . |. 00000 
Subterfuge  — OOOOO Technology ».  OOOOO Science OOOOO 
—— — — Spheres 
Correspondence OO0000 Life . OOOOO Prime OOOOO 
Entropy. — 00000 Matter . . OOOOO Spirit . OOOOO 
Forces . | OO0000 Mind | ~~  OOOOO Time OOOOO 
Advantages 
® Backgrounds © Arete @ Health 
"EE — ... OO000 e00o0000000 Bruised -0 LI 
= — ...OOOO0O0 Hurt -| | 
—— < Q Willpower Injured 4A BH 
ERN ooooo 9200000000 Wounded 2H 
100000 L1 E1 EJ EJ DJ L1 E31 El E31 E] Mauled 2 O 
Crippled -5 0O 
, ; Incapacitated O 
Q Other Traits © Quintessence 
urn 
LL —OOO000 o? Q o 
LLL — 00000 o o 
— 00000 .H o Ó Experience 
LL OOOO FA s 
LL —OOO000 
——————— 00000 Paradox 


TLIC AC ENCINAR 


Step One: Concept and Identity 
Decide identity and motivation; choose concept, 
Affiliation, Essence, and archetypes. 


Step Two: Select Attributes 
Place initial dot into each Attribute. 


Prioritize primary, secondary, and tertiary Attribute 
categories (Physical, Social, Mental) (7/ 5/ 3). 


Rate Physical Traits: Strength, Dexterity, Stamina. 
Rate Social Traits: Charisma, Manipulation, Appearance. 


Rate Mental Traits: Perception, Intelligence, Wits. 


Step Three: Select Abilities 
Prioritize Abilities as above (13/ 9/ 5). 
Choose Talents, Skills, Knowledges. 
Check Secondary Abilities for specialized Traits. 
No Ability may be higher than 3 at this stage. 


Step Four: Select Advantages 
Choose Backgrounds (7). 


Define focus (paradigm, practice, instruments). 


Step Five: Finishing Touches 


Record Spheres (6, with the Affinity Sphere receiving 
the first dot). 


Record beginning Arete (1), Willpower (5), Quintessence 
(Avatar rating) and Paradox (0). 


Spend freebie points (15). 


Describe appearance/ impression, quirks, culture, beliefs, 
Avatar, motivations, identity. 


Sample Concepts 
* Activist - Journalist, blogger, lobbyist, malcontent. 
* Artist - Writer, dancer, painter, musician. 


* Athlete - Team player, personal trainer, physical artisan, 
thrill-seeker. 


e Caretaker - Parent, teacher, social worker, medical 
professional. 


* Criminal - Gang member, con artist, drug dealer, thief. 
* Executive - Tycoon, manager, facilitator, power-player. 


* Guardian - Cop, security guard, conspiracy theorist, 
social watchdog. 


* Intellectual - Scholar, professor, philosopher, social critic. 
e Kid - Child, student, innocent, gutter-punk. 


e Laborer- Factory worker, sales clerk, roadie, construction 
worker. 


Mystic - Priest/ ess, hermit, shaman, enlightened weirdo. 


250 Mage: The Ascension 20" Anniversary Edition 


Character Creation Process 


e Night-Owl - Bartender, bouncer, club-goer, celebrity. 


* Rebel - Vagabond, outlaw, urban tribalist, subculture 
devotee. 

* Technician - Mechanic, lab tech, craftsman, computer 
geek. 


* Warrior - Solider, mercenary, vigilante, prophet. 


Essences 
* Dynamic - Passionate force for progress and change. 
* Static - Grounded agent of secure stability. 
e Primordial - Elusive figure of primal mystery. 


* Questing - Wandering dreamer of new horizons. 


Archetypes (Nature & Demeanor) 

See pp. 267-273. 
* Activist - You fix a broken world. 
* Benefactor - You've got the power to help, and so you do. 
* Contrary - You invert order to reveal greater truths. 


* Crusader - You're a frontline fighter for a better 
tomorrow. 


* Hacker - You upgrade things by taking them apart. 
* Idealist - A greater Truth awaits us, and you know what it is. 
* Innovator - Your imagination drives progress forward. 


* Kid - Innocent and playful, you inspire others to take 
care of you. 


* Loner - You need no one else. 

* Machine - Weakness is for lesser beings. 

* Mad Scientist - True science knows no bounds! 
* Martyr - It's your pleasure to serve. 


* Monster - You'retheunapologeticshadowin the mirror 
of your world. 


* Prophet - Speaking truth to power is your life's work. 
* Rogue - Rebellion is your gospel and your fame. 

* Sensualist - Sensation is your drug of choice. 

* Survivor - No matter what happens, you endure. 


* '[raditionalist - As far as you're concerned, the old ways are 
best. 


* Trickster - You make the world your toy. 


* Visionary - You see beyond the obvious and chase a 
greater vision for us all. 


Factions 

The Affinity Sphere entry under each group gives the 
default Sphere for this sect. Some groups have more than 
oneSphere listed, butonly one Affinity Sphere may be chosen 
per character. 


2 a ll À——————"—cs ——————— —— I———— a — oT o o€7 OU OŘ RR 


* The Traditions seek a return to the days of High Magick or a 
newdawn of mystic potential. Bitter enemies ofthe Technocracy, 
they appear to have been losing the battle for reality. 


* The Technocracy enforces global order under their 
Enlightened guidance and protection. Dedicated to wiping 
out Reality Deviants, they've spent over 500 years at war 
with the mystic Traditions. 


* The Disparates protect their ancestral ways, nurture their 
chosen people, and disdain this war that has caused untold 
misery. Often dismissed in the battle for reality, these groups 
have largely gone underground and now begin to band 
together for mutual protection. 


The Nine Traditions 
See (pp. 148-165). 


e Akashayana/Akashic Brotherhood - Masters of mind, body, 
and spirit through the Arts of personal discipline. 


Affinity Spheres: Mind or Life 


* Celestial Chorus - Sacred singers who give a human Voice 
to the Divine Song. 


Affinity Spheres: Prime, Forces, or Spirit 


* Cult of Ecstasy/ Sahajiya - Visionary seers who transcend 
limitations through sacred experience. 


Affinity Spheres: Time, Life, or Mind 


r * Dreamspeakers/ Kha'vadi - Preservers and protectors of 
both the Spirit Ways and the Earthly cultures that have been 
looted, abandoned, and oppressed. 


Affinity Spheres: Spirit, Forces, Life, or Matter 


* Euthanatoi/Chakravanti - Disciples ofmortalitywho purge 
corruption and bring merciful release from suffering. 


Affinity Spheres: Entropy, Life, or Spirit 

* Order of Hermes - Rigorous masters of High Magick and 
the Elemental Arts. 
Affinity Spheres: Forces 


e Society of Ether/Sons of Ether - Graceful saviors of scientific 
potential. 


Affinity Spheres: Matter, Forces, or Prime 
¢ Verbena - Primal devotees of rough Nature and mystic blood. 
Affinity Spheres: Life or Forces 


* Virtual Adepts - Reality-hackers devoted to rebooting their 
world. 


Affinity Spheres: Correspondence/ Data or Forces 


The Technocratic Onion 
See (pp. 186-195). 


* Iteration X - Perfectors of the human machine. 
Affinity Spheres: Forces, Matter, or Time 


* New World Order - Custodians of social order and global 
stability. 
Affinity Spheres: Mind or Correspondence/ Data 


E 
P. e 
Es "— -— C-——" —— —— 


m wa 


ZA 


owe Z7 


Progenitors - Innovators dedicated to the potential of 
organic life. 


Affinity Spheres: Life or Prime 


Syndicate - Masters of finance, status, and the power 
of wealth. 


Affinity Spheres: Entropy, Mind, or Primal Utility 


Void Engineers - Explorers and protectors of 
extradimensional space. 


Affinity Spheres: Dimensional Science, Correspondence, 


or Forces 


The Disparate Crafts 
See (pp. 202-223). 


Ahl-i-Batin - Seers of Unity through Divine connection 
and subtle influence. 


Affinity Spheres: Correspondence or Mind (never Entropy) 


Bata'a - Inheritors of voodoo, dedicated to restoring a 
broken world. 


Affinity Spheres: Life or Spirit 

Children of Knowledge - Crowned Ones devoted to 
alchemical perfection. 

Affinity Sphere: Forces, Matter, Prime, or Entropy 


Hollow Ones - Dark romantics laughing in the face of 
ruin. 


Affinity Sphere: Any 

Kopa Loei - Defenders of Nature, the Old Gods, and 
their culture. 

Affinity Sphere: Any 

Ngoma - African High Magi, sworn to restore what's 
been taken from their home and people. 

Affinity Spheres: Life, Mind, Prime, or Spirit 


Orphans - Self-Awakened mages surviving in the 
shadows of other sects. 


Affinity Sphere: Any 
Sisters of Hippolyta - Guardians oftheSacred Feminine. 
Affinity Spheres: Life or Mind 


Taftáni - Middle Eastern mystics shaping the gifts of 
Allah and the Arts of man. 


Affinity Spheres: Forces, Matter, Prime, or Spirit 
Templar Knights - Bastions of chivalry in a corrupt age. 
Affinity Spheres: Forces, Life, Mind, or Prime 


Wu Lung - Preservers of heavenly wisdom, order, and 
nobility. 


Affinity Sphere: Spirit, Forces, Matter, or Life 


Ma$e: The Ascension 20^ Anniversary Edition 


pan —— j ! " — 


Abilities 
Primary Abilities 
See (pp. 275-289). 


* Talents: Alertness, Art, Athletics, Awareness, Brawl, 
Empathy, Expression, Intimidation, Leadership, 
Streetwise, Subterfuge 


* Skills: Crafts, Drive, Etiquette, Firearms, Martial 
Arts, Meditation, Melee, Research, Stealth, Survival, 
Technology 


* Knowledges: Academics, Computer, Cosmology/ 
Subdimensions, Enigmas, Esoterica, Investigation, Law, 
Medicine, Occult, Politics, Science 


Secondary Abilities 
See (pp. 289-300). 


* Talents: Animal Kinship, Blatancy, Carousing, Do, Flying, 
High Ritual,Lucid Dreaming, Seduction (optional: Hobby) 


* Skills: Acrobatics, Archery, Biotech, Energy Weapons, 
Hypertech, Jetpack, Riding, Torture (optional: Profes- 
sional) 


* Knowledges: Area Knowledge, BeliefSystems, Cultural Savvy, 
Cryptography, Demolitions, Finance, Lore/ RD Data, Media, 
Pharmacopeia/ Poisons (optional: Expert) 


Backgrounds 
See (pp. 301-328). 


* Allies - Friends who'll help you out. 
* Alternate Identity - An established alias. 


* Arcane/ Cloaking - Mysterious ability to remain 
unrecognized. 


* Avatar/ Genius - Embodiment of the Awakened/ 
Enlightened Self. 


* Backup - Agents you can call upon in emergencies. 
* Blessing - Strange powers gave you an uncanny gift. 
* Certification - Special permits for special things. 


* Chantry/ Construct - Mystic or Technocratic 
stronghold. 


* Contacts - Information sources and social networks. 
* Cult - Group of dedicated believers. 

* Demesne - Personal inner dream-space. 

* Destiny - Inspiring sense of great purpose. 


e Dream/ Hypercram - Ability to tap into Abilities you 
don't normally possess. 


* Enhancement $ - Cybernetic or biotech improvements 
to your body. 


Fame - Notoriety in the Sleeper world. 


Familiar/ Companion - Non-human helper with special 
abilities. 

Influence - Social clout in the mortal world. 

Legend - A potent archetype connected to you. 
Library - Access to special information. 


Mentor - Awakened/ Enlightened elder with a bond 
to you. 


Node - A place of power that's more or less in your 
possession. 


Past Lives - Helpful memories from prior incarnations. 
Patron - Influential benefactor with helpful resources. 
Rank - A title of importance among the Masses. 
Requisitions * - Access to Technocratic hardware. 
Resources - Financial credit, cash flow, and property. 
Retainers - Skilled followers. 

Sanctum/ Laboratory $ - Special place to work your arts. 


Secret Weapons * - Guinea-pigstatus with Technocratic 
inventors. 


Spies - Information networks. 
Status - Favored position among your peers. 
Totem $ - A powerful spirit ally. (Shamanic characters only.) 


Wonder - A Talisman, Fetish, or Device that contains 
its own reality-bending power. 


* Available only to Technocratic Union characters. 


$ Costs double the usual amount of points. 


Spheres 
See (pp. 512-527). 


Correspondence - Understanding of the connections 
between places, spaces, and things. 


Entropy - Study of mortality, probability, and chaos. 
Forces - Command over elemental energies. 


Life - Influence over organic beings and the physical 
structures of living bodies. 


Matter - Control of inert materials, objects, and solid 
elemental structures. 


Mind - Influence over emotions and thoughts, including 
theabilityto project consciousness from one's physical body. 


Prime - Control over primordial energies. 


Spirit - Contact with Otherworldly spaces and entities; 
considered an Artby mystics and aScience by Technocrats, 
though in game terms it's all the same thing. 


Time - Perception of, and influence over, temporal 
states and time-based phenomena. 


Technocratic Spheres (optional rules) 


Data - Tracing connections through information. 


Dimensional Science - Hyperphysics of alternate 
dimensions. 


Primal Utility - Employment of quantum valuation 
energies. 


Freebie Points 


Trait Cost 

Attribute 5 per dot 

Ability 2 per dot 

Background 1 per dot 

Sphere 7 per dot 

Arete A per dot (Max. Total: 3) 
Willpower 1 per dot 


Quintessence 1 per four dots 
Merit 


Flaw 


cost as per Merit 


bonus as per Flaw (Max. Total: 7) 


Experience Costs 


Trait Cost 

New Ability 3 

New Sphere 10 

Affinity Sphere current rating x 7 
Other Sphere current rating x 8 
Arete current rating x 8 
Attribute current rating x 4 
Ability current rating x 2 
Background* current rating x 3 
Willpower current rating x 1 


* Storyteller’s option; Backgrounds might not be raised by 


experience points. Also, Backgrounds that cost double the usual amount’ 
cost current rating x 6. 


Chapter Six: Creating the Character — 253 


= La = 
K : 
le: 


uc cu 


E 


A 


Dv 7T 
f 


Part l: Creating Your Character 


The many elements of a Mage character boil 
down to five simple steps, outlined on this 
Character Creation Chart: 


Step One: 
Concept and Identity 


Start off your character with a single 
question: Who are you? A cybernetic hardass? 
A desperate runaway? A corporate shark? 
This brainstormed image gives you a basic 
foundation for that character’s identity. 


Follow that up with another question: Is that who you were 
when you first Awakened, or has Awakening made you the person you 
are today? Awakening, after all, is a life-changing event. After it, 
no matter how much she tries, a mage is never quite the same 
person again. By asking yourself whether your mage had that 
essential identity before the Awakening or if she acquired that 
identity as a result of Awakening, you can trace the effects of 
Awakening on the character you create. (This is especially true 
if your Storyteller runs a prelude adventure; again, see p. 262.) 


And finally, ask one of thesimplest, mostimportantquestions 
of all: What do you want? This last inquiry supplies motivation, the 
driving force of any intriguing character. Once you figure out 
what your mage wants out of life, the universe, and everything, 
you've got a handle on what she'll do in order to get it. 


Concept 

Your answers to those questions provide the concept, a guide 
and key for every other element of that character. This concept 
also reveals the human side of your mage; our corporate shark, 
after all, might be a Syndicate Manager, a Ngoma officiator, a 
Hermetic wizard, or an Etherite visionary. At heart, though, 
he's a creature of the corporate realm, with magicks, skills, and 
alliances that make him better at his job. A handful of potential 
concepts can be found on the Character Creation Process chart, 
though you can feel free to make up your own concepts too. 


Once you've figured out your basic concept, use that as a 
sort of blueprint to guide the mage's eventual development. 
Noone, no matter how uncomplicated she might appear to be, 
is a static, unchanging stereotype. Sure, our corporate raider 
might look like a typical Wall Street asshole; he might even 
start off his career as the sort of one-percenter scum you'd like 
to see dragged behind a team of mules and then shot. Maybe 
he even thought of himself in those terms, gazing in the mirror 
of his richly-appointed bathroom every morning on his way to 
work. What if, however, that Wall Street predator has a change 
of heart? What if he Awakens to a greater reality? What if he 
never really was what he appears, on the surface, to be? Maybe 
he's pretending to be a simple-minded corporate monster 
while actually pursing a totally different agenda... or perhaps 
he is a corporate monster, a monster whose Enlightened Path 
includes dealing in the fine Art of Desire. 


254 Mage: The Ascension 20" Anniversary Edition 


Now we're moving on from a simple concept to a complex 
character. 


Affiliation 


Most mages have some affiliation: a faction to which they be- 
long. In player terms, you can choose from among the Traditions 
- mages belonging to the Council of Nine Mystic Traditions; 
the Technocracy - agents of the Technocratic Union; or the 
Disparates who refuse to join either of the other supposedly 
important factions. Marauders are too chaotic and bizarre to 
fit in with groups of other willworkers, whereas the Nephandi 
remain dedicated to bringing the other groups down. Thus, 
neither option works well for player characters in an ongoing 
Mage chronicle. (A Storyteller might allow a player to create a 
Marauder or Nephandus. We don't recommend that, though, 
as such characters invite serious headaches into your game.) 


Affiliation gives your characters common ground and a 
basicreason to cooperate. Although mystics from the Traditions 
and Disparate sects might cooperate with each other, the 
Technocracy has little tolerance for Reality Deviants. A chronicle 
based on the adventures of a Dreamspeaker spirit-walker, an 
imperious wizard from the Wu Lung, a dedicated Templar, 
and a Void Engineer space marine might sound like fun, but 
it'd probably turn into a Reservoir Dogs-style kill zone before 
the first story ends. When you're crafting characters for your 
group, choose character affiliations that allow your mages to 
share a room without offing one another on general principle. 
(See Working Together, p. 247.) 


Once you've decided your character's affiliation, decide 
which sect he calls his own. A Tradition mage might belong 
to the Order of Hermes, the Virtual Adepts, or some other 
related sect; a Technocrat could hail from Iteration X or the 
New World Order; a Disparate mage could join the Ngoma, 
hang with the Hollow Ones, or shape his own destiny among 
the unaligned Orphans. The choice will reflect your mage's 
Arts, goals, and company. Although he might change it in the 
future, that sect is a vital element of the character's identity at 
the beginning of the chronicle. 


Essence 

Even more vital to your mage's core identity is his Avatar's 
Essence: the inner drive that shapes his approach to life and 
magick. This mystic inner self provides you with a rough script 
for your mage's overall personality. A Dynamic mage, for 
instance, would pursue her goals with intense passion, whereas a 
Pattern-oriented one would strive for stability and permanence. 


By the way, it’s worth remembering that every Mage character 
should haveatleastonedotin the Avatar Background. Strong Avatars 
(thatis, ones with more dots in that Trait) will express a more potent 
sense of Essence through the mage. A character with only one dot 
in his Avatar will feel occasional stirrings of his Dynamic Essence, 
for example, and one with Avatar 5 would be so Dynamic that he'd 
rarely sit still for more than a few minutes at a time. 


Archetypes: Nature and Demeanor 

Based on those tendencies, each character has personality 
archetypes: a Nature and Demeanor that represent the ways she 
interacts with her world. Nature reflects the character’s inner 
self, whereas Demeanor represents the way she presents herself 
to other folks. Depending on the character, these two Traits 
could be pretty similar or wildly divergent. Our corporate 
shark, for example, might present himself as a Crusader who's 
building a better world; under that Demeanor, though, he's 
actually a Trickster who delights in upending the expectations 
of his officemates. 


A mage's Nature usually depends a lot upon his Essence. 
That tendency influences what the character truly wants and 
values. Throughoutthe chronicle, you'll refresh your character's 
Willpower Trait by doing things that reinforce his Nature and 
gratify the needs of his inner self. 


The Demeanor, on the other hand, can be a total facade. 
It could be an honest reflection of the mage's inner landscape, 
but it probably isn't. Even the most integrated people protect 
their true selves from public view. Especially in the treacherous 
world of the Awakened, folks who reveal their intimate truths 
- in effect, giving the world a true name to use against them 
- are pretty rare. 


Taken together, these related elements tell you a lot about 
who your character is, what she needs, how she conducts herself, 
and who her friends and enemies might be. A corporate shark 
going by the name of Malcolm Jamal Leonard could bea Ngoma 
Trickster who’s using his executive position and his Crusader 
Demeanor to infiltrate and undermine large corporations in 
pursuit of a bottom line that no one understands except him. 
His Questing Essence inspires him to build a better world... 
after he’s finished knocking down the masters of the current 
one and enriching himself and his allies in the process! 


Once you know who your character is, then go on to figure 
out what she can do. 


Step Two: Attributes 


Attributes reflect your character’s innate physical, social, 
and mental capabilities. Ranging from one to five dots, these 
Traits provide the basis for the dice pools you use in order to get 
things done. The Physical category features Strength, Dexterity, 
and Stamina. Charisma, Manipulation, and Appearance make up 
the Social category; Perception, Intelligence, and Wits comprise 
the Mental Traits category. As mentioned earlier, each dot in 
one of these Traits represents one die you roll when attempting 
a task. The more dots you have, the better you are with the 
Attribute in question. 


All Attributes start off with a base rating of 1. You get points 
to spend when raising them up from there during character 
creation. When you do spend those points, however, you need 
to prioritize the importance of your Physical, Social, and Mental 
Attributes. In your primary category, you get seven points to 
spend; in your secondary field, you get five; the lowest priority, 
the tertiary group, gets a mere three points, which obviously 
don’t go far. You can use freebie points (see below) to raise those 


initial ratings, but doing so is pretty expensive, so choose your 
attributes with the idea that your character will be stuck with 
them for a little while once the chronicle begins. 


All of your chosen Traits must be rooted in your character 
concept and history. For example, our Wall Street Trickster 
might work out at the gym, but his real strengths are based in 
the Social and Mental categories. 


Let’s say that Malcolm does work out regularly; his Strength 
rating (3) is pretty decent, with average Stamina (2) and a fairly 
poor Dexterity (1). His secondary Mental Traits are higher 
overall than his tertiary Physical ones; a Wits rating of 3 puts 
him ahead of most of his peers, and an Intelligence of 3 makes 
him smarter than the average person. 


It’s the Social Traits, though, that make Malcolm a 
formidable presence. His seven primary Attribute points become 
Manipulation 4, Charisma 4, and Appearance 2. Malcolm’s 
a decentlooking dude, if somewhat clumsy, but he could sell 
dirt to a farmer and leave that guy thinking he’d gotten the 
better end of the deal. 


The concept, then, shapes your point-spending priorities, 
and the Trait numbers give you some insights into the way your 
character comes across. 


Step Three: Abilities 


Inthesame vein, the Ability Traits represent your character’s 
Talents (innate aptitudes, honed by exercise), Skills (abilities 
gained from training and practice), and Knowledges (intellectual 
pursuits backed up with experience). Like Attributes, these 
Traits have points allocated into primary, secondary, and 
tertiary groups. Your primary Abilities get an initial 13 points, 
with nine points given out for secondary Abilities and five 
points left over for tertiary Abilities. Freebie points can raise 
the initial ratings... which is a good thing, considering how fast 
those points can go out the door. Unlike attributes, Abilities 
start with a base rating of zero. 


When placing those initial points, there’s another 
limitation: You can’t place more than three dots into a single 
Ability. Later, during Step Five, you might drop a few freebie 
points into a three-dot Ability in order to raise its rating by 
another dot or two. To start with, though, you can give your 
character ratings between 1 and 3 in the various Abilities. 
Considering just how many Abilities there are in Mage 20, it’s 
a good idea to identify your priorities ahead of time. 


Secondary Abilities 

Mage 20 features avast range of Abilities - the core Abilities 
most characters encounter, and three groups of secondary 
Abilities that reflect specialized expertise. Some of these Traits 
demand certain concepts - the average elementary-school 
student, for example, won’t know how to fly. 


As with Attributes, the Abilities you choose will depend a 
lot on your character concept. Let’s go back to our Wall Street 
Trickster. Sure, Malcolm knows a lot about Finance, Subterfuge, 
Law, and probably Computers. He’s not likely to use Energy 
Weapons, though, and his Firearms Skill would depend upon 


Chapter Six: Creating the Character 255 


| 
| 
d 


Ne No 7^: 


s 


ga Pal 


256 Mage: The Ascension 20" Anniversary Edition 


whether or not he’s spent time at a shooting range. He works 
out, so he might have several dots in Athletics. Is he Streetwise, 
though? Maybe so, but probably not. Malcolm’s life story will 
tell you about the Abilities he has at the start of the game, 
and the chronicle reveals which ones he gains in the course 
of his adventures. 


Step Four: Advantages 


Beyond the things we are and the things we learn, there are 
the things we acquire by way of money, social connections, and 
sheer luck. In game terms, these Traits are called Advantages: 
things that set your character apart from other people. 


Again, Mage 20 offers a huge selection of Advantages; no 
one can have them all, and certain characters can’t get certain 
Advantages, period. Thankfully, you've got seven points to spend 
on Background Traits, and your mage’s magickal focus doesn’t 
cost points at all. Like Abilities, these characteristics depend on 
your concept and backstory. Although an executive, a housewife, 
and a homeless girl will have very different resources, no Mage 
character is without some sort of Advantage. 


Backgrounds 


Money? Connections? An Avatar strong enough to blow 
the doors off your mind? Welcome to the wonderful world of 
Background traits. Once you've taken care of your character’s 
Attributes and Abilities, it’s time to figure out the sorts 
of things she can draw upon when need be. Malcolm, for 
instance, obviously has Contacts, Influence, and Resources; a 
gutterkid could have nothing but a dazzlingly potent Avatar 
and a mystic Treasure she snatched when no one was looking. 
You can augment the initial seven Background points with 
freebie points during Step Five. Background Traits are cheap, 
and certain characters can have lots of them if their concepts 
allow for such luxuries. 


Focus: 
Paradigm, Practice, and Instruments 

As revealed in Chapters One, Two, and Ten, magick is 
an extension of the mage. Belief guides the Arts that shape 
reality. Thus, your character's focus is an essential part of who 
she is and what she can do. 


In previous editions of Mage, the term "focus" referred to 
the various tools a mage used in order to cast magickal Effects 
or Procedures. In Mage 20, focus becomes a collective term 
for a character's belief, or paradigm; his associated practice; and 
the instruments that go with both. A Hermetic wizard's focus, 
therefore, would be the High Ritual Magick practice and a 
number of beliefs and tools associated with that practice. 


Focus also provides one of the defining differences between 
a mystic mage and a Technocrat: A mystic might eventually 
learn to transcend his focus, but a member of the Technocracy 
is indoctrinated so firmly into her focus that she cannot leave it 
behind withouta major change of beliefs. Technomancers aligned 
with mystic groups - the Virtual Adepts, Society of Ether, and 


other science-based willworkers whose worldviews are somewhat 
flexible - mightgrow beyond their tech-based focuses in time, but 
it takes significant effort in order for them to do so. Tech-based 
reality favors tech-based Arts, but only the most Enlightened 
tech-based mages can escape the focus of their views. (For details, 
see Character Progress at the end of this chapter.) 


A new Mage character needs a focus comprised of at least 
one paradigm, one magickal practice, and no fewer than seven associated. 
instruments. (Seven's a mystically significant number.) You can 
combine existing paradigms and practices into new ones, or 
add new instruments, if the Storyteller agrees and if that hybrid 
practice and its tools fit your character concept. In time, your 
mage's Arete rating can rise high enough to put those tools aside. 
In the beginning, though, a focus for his magick - however he 
defines that magick - is absolutely required. 


What sort of focus could you employ? For an example, let's 
use Malcolm Jamal Leonard, our Wall Street Trickster. Combining 
the ancient High Ritual Magick of his ancestors with a high-tech 
version of the Art of Desire, Malcolm focuses his intentions 
through a mix of both. His tools include complex diagrams 
based in sacred mathematics, crafted to look like spreadsheets; 
prepared amulets he gives as gifts to business partners; carefully 
chosen words; the purification baths he enacts each morning; 
prayers he offers to the higher powers; the rituals he conducts 
behind closed doors; the specially tailored suits he wears; and the 
commanding presence he brings to everything he says and does. 
Even Malcolm's gym routines include selfperfection exercises 
that no one, except perhaps another mage, would recognize as 
magickal acts. Through these tools and practices, he focuses his 
intentions and brings magick into his world. 


For detailed listings of paradigms, practices, and 
instruments, see Focus and the Arts in Chapter Ten (pp. 
565-600). 


Step Five: 
Finishing Touches 


A mage must have magick, and so the final step of character 
creation deals with the Traits that define his magickal capacity. 


Mage Revised introduced the Resonance Trait, a 
reflection of the metaphysical feedback that surrounds 
Awakened characters. Because this Trait had not been 
featured in earlier Mage editions, it’s considered an 
optional rule. For details, see 


A collection of specialized Traits, Merits and Flaws 
confer benefits and liabilities beyond the usual character 
creation process. For a selection of Merits and Flaws, 
see Appendix Il, 


Spheres 

The nine elements of reality provide the keys to magick. 
During character creation, your mage gets six dots to place in 
the Spheres of your choice... with a few provisions, of course. 


All mages begin with one Affinity Sphere: the Sphere that 
character understands best. Generally, this Sphere is associated 
with a mage's first experience with magick: a person who 
Awakened by suddenly commanding a thunderstorm would 
have an affinity for Forces, whereas one who was Enlightened 
when she tried to bring her squashed dog back to life would 
feel an affinity for Life. The first Sphere dot you place is your 
Affinity Sphere. 


Your character must have at least one dotin one of her group's 
Affinity Spheres. You can choose anyallowed Spheres foryour mage, 
so long as you place at least one dot under your group's Affinity Sphere as 
well. A Verbena character, for instance, must take Life or Forces as 
at least one of those initial six dots, whereas a Chakravanti mage 
needs at least one dot in Entropy, Life, or Spirit. Malcolm, being 
a member of the Ngoma, can have potential affinity Spheres of 
Life, Mind, Prime, or Spirit. Given Malcolm's concept, the player 
prefers Mind and takes that Sphere as Malcolm's affinity. 


The other provision is this: Your beginning Sphere ranks 
cannot be higher than your character's Arete rating. A mage 
with an Arete of 2, say, can't have Life 3. You'll probably want 
to hold back on assigning those Sphere dots until after you 
decide on your next Trait. 


Arete 


One cannot work magick without Arete, the excellence 
reflecting your character’s Enlightened Will and understanding. 
Non-mages do not have Arete at all - the Trait reflects an 
Awakened state of being. In game terms, you'll roll this Trait 
when casting magickal Effects. A beginning mage gets one free 
dot in Arete. Additional dots must be purchased with freebie 
points. Note that additional dots are rather expensive, so a high 
Arete Trait limits your other options. During character creation, 
you're limited to a maximum Arete of 3. As mentioned earlier, 
achronicle usually begins, by default, with inexperienced mages 
who grow throughout the course of the tale. 


Let's say that our friend Malcolm has an Arete rating of 
3; most of his freebie points went into getting that rating, but 
it makes him a pretty effective mage. Mental influence is his 
primary approach to magick, so his player places that first dot 
into Mind and then adds two more into that Sphere, giving 
Malcolm an impressive Sphere rank of Mind 3. As the player 
puts the other three dots into Life 2 and Entropy 1, our Wall 
Street Trickster gets the ability to read people, minds, and 
probability with devastating clarity... and to bend people to 
his will before they even realize what's going on. 


For details about Arete, see pp. 328-329. 


Willpower 

Magick demands Will, and so this Willpower Trait 
represents your character's determination, confidence, and 
drive. A starting mage begins with a Willpower rating of 5, 


and you can add more dots with freebie points. As always, this 
Trait rating depends upon the character concept; it's a good 
bet that Malcolm has a Willpower of 6 or perhaps even 7, but 
the gutter-kid we mentioned earlier would have a Willpower 
of 5 - unusually stubborn by most standards, but unfocused 
when compared to the disciplined executive. 


For details about Willpower, see pp. 330-331. 


Quintessence and Paradox 

The raw essence of Creation, Quintessence flows through 
a mage's Avatar. Paradox, on the other hand, contradicts your 
mage's place in the universe. The Quintessence and Paradox 
Traits oppose one another across a wheel. The first grants 
your character a mystic edge, whereas the other places your 
mage in jeopardy. The interplay between these related Traits 
is explained further under the entries for Quintessence and 
Paradox (pp. 331-333). For now, give your mage a Quintessence 
rating equal to his Avatar Background Trait (Avatar 4 equals 
four Quintessence, for example), with no Paradox points. Don't 
worry - you'll have plenty of time to earn some soon enough! 


Freebie Points 

Finally, there are freebie points - that handful of points 
that allows you to raise or purchase other Traits. A beginning 
character gets 15 of these points to spend, although taking 
Flaw Traits (see sidebar) might give you a few more points to 
work with. Malcolm's player, as we'd mentioned, put most of 
his points into Arete. Where you choose to put them is your 
own call. 


Some Traits cost more freebie points than others. The 
Character Creation chart has an entry for the various traits 
and their associated freebie point expenditures. Again, Arete 
cannot be bought higher than 3, and Spheres cannot be raised 
above the Arete rating. 


Spark of Life 


Witha few more flourishes, your character's ready to begin 
the tale. Filling out the concept with several non-Trait details, 
you'll turn that character sheet into an engaging alter-ego with 
her own stories to tell. 


Appearance and Impression 

When your mage walks into a room, what is it that people 
see? First impressions are important, so decide what kind 
of impression your character makes. This sort of thing goes 
beyond mere looks, although a person's appearance is usually 
the first thing folks notice; such impressions, however, extend 
to the other senses too. Does he smell like Axe? Does she have 
asmoker's cough? How does your character move? Dress? Act? If 
he's attractive (as in the Appearance Trait), how is he attractive? 
Lean build? Tight abs? Deep eyes? A killer grin? Is she rich, poor, 
rich trying to look poor? Those choices come across in the way 
she dresses - in whether she wears the clothes or whether the 
clothes wear her. Be as specific as you want, maybe down to 
the type of tshirt he's got on or the brand of jacket she slings 
over her shoulder. In short, decide the overall impression your 


Chapter Six: Creating the Character — 257 


IA 7 


mage projects in person, and have fun with the little details. A 
memorable character makes vivid impressions on her world. 


Quirks 


Part of that impression involves quirks: the little (or not-so- 
little) eccentricities that mark your character’s personality. Maybe 
he massages the back of his neck when he’s feeling nervous; 
perhaps she sings Journey songs when she thinks no one’s 
listening. Quirks not only humanize our budding demigods 
but also offer potentially amusing (or potentially tragic) plot 
hooks for later events. Maybe your witch’s talking cat starts 
singing Journey songs when your mage is trying to seem cool, 
or maybe the neck-massaging hitman reveals his nervous tic at a 
tense moment during negotiations. Everybody, even those folks 
who seem utterly cool, reveals a quirk or two once you get to 
know them. By creating a few idiosyncrasies for your character, 
you provide a bit of color for that impressive bunch of Traits. 


Culture 

A fundamental element of a person’s identity, culture 
provides a catch-all way of taking into account things like 
ethnicity, gender, religion, social class, national heritage, chosen 
lifestyle, political affiliations, and so forth. So when you're 
laying out your character's background, ask yourself where he 
comes from, how he views himself, what he does for fun or 
money, and what sort of company he keeps - and why. Is he a 
middle-class Asian-American Goth? A working-class farm kid 
from rural Canada? Does she love anime... and if so, what kinds? 
Is your mage intergendered, transgendered, asexual - and how 
has that identity affected that person's life? As individual as we 
might strive to be, we are the products of our cultures - both 
the cultures we grow up with and the cultures we choose. Our 
political affiliations, religious beliefs, sexual relationships, and 
social interactions all shape our identities. So how have those 
elements shaped your mage? 


Roleplaying the Other 


A Storytelling game allows you the opportunity to be someone you're not. And for some folks, that opportunity includes 
the chance to play a person of a difterent culture, age, gender, ethnicity, creed, or social class. If and when you take 
on such a role, though, please treat it with respect. Especially when it comes to portraying folks from a marginalized 
group, it's easy to slide into insulting stereotypes even when you're trying not to do so. To avoid such pitfalls, base your 


role and play on humanity, not stereotypes. 


On a deeper level, use your role as an opportunity to examine the assumptions, privilege, and prejudices of your own 
cultural reality by flipping that perception around.and looking.at it from another side. If you're a guy playing a woman, 
consider what it's like to actually be a woman. Are you white? Then consider the ways in which society treats people 
whose default descriptor is "they're black.” Taken seriously, a culturally different role can open your eyes to sides of life 
you didn’t recognize before. And although that might not change the reality of your experience, it might adjust the way 


you look at other folks who aren't like you. 


(For some hilarious examples of how notto play the Other, check out the movie Gamers: Dorkness Rising, in which both 
the gender-bent chaos mage and the screaming monk make this point better than we ever could.) 


Gender Identity 


Although gender identity and sexual orientation have never been as clearly defined as cultural conservatives like to 
believe, the 21* century has seen an unprecedented awareness of sexual and gender possibilities. And even though this 
freaks the living hell out of certain people, there's more freedom these days to express and explore potentials beyond 


just male and female heterosexual polarities. 


Mages have always bent preconceptions around their little fingers. Throughout fime and culture, cross-dressing, gender 
inversion, and intersexuality have been regarded as magical tools or dispositions, ways of transcending the expected 
order. Some cultures referred to gay or transgendered mystics as two-souls, rebises, androgynes, or hermaphrodites, 
after Hermaphroditos, the double-sexed son of Eros and Psyche. Other cultures recognized the blending and crossing 
of genders as an expression of mystic power, a link to gods like Odin or Dionysus, whose genders were just masks to 
shed when necessary. People being people, of course, such associations were often unfavorable. The codes of Leviticus, 
which remain with us even now, are thought by some authorities to have been condemnations of non-Jewish — and thus, 


to the Hebrews, unholy — practices and creeds. 


Over the last few decades, a combination of civil rights activism and human rights awareness has chipped away at the 
old ways. A gay or trans person in the new millennium can be more open now than he/ she/ ze/ they could have been 
in previous decades. And between the old associations of mystic power and the new freedom to transcend gender roles 
without getting burnt at the stake for it, the idea of gender identity is more fluid - and more magickal — than ever before. 
Especially in queer, polyamorous, transhumanist, neotribal, and psychedelic cultures, it’s often more unusual to be 
conventionally "straight" than itis to hold, embrace, and enjoy the hell out of an identity outside the traditional polarities. 


The point? You don’t have to limit yourself to rigid male or female polarities, either in Mage or in real life. Be who you 
want to be. There’s magick enough for everyone. 


258 Mage: The Ascension 20^ Anniversary Edition 


NS | 


Belief, Focus, and Paradigm 

Mages are not passive about their beliefs; instead, they 
believeso strongly in their convictions thatthose beliefs reshape 
reality. In a way, the Ascension War is a religious war - not 
so much a fight between creeds as a showdown between belief 
systems. Therefore, your character's beliefs are vital parts of 
who she is. So what, then, does she believe? In one God? Many 
gods? Which gods? Or perhaps no god beyond the supremacy 
of science? Check the Common Mage Paradigms section in 
Chapter Ten (pp. 568-572) and decide whether one of them, a 
mix of them, or none of them applies to your character's beliefs. 


Once you know what your character believes in, you'll have 
some idea about his take on magick. Your mage's affiliation 
and concept can also point you in the right direction - after 
all, the Society of Ether attracts weird scientists, not Siberian 
shamans. Those clues sketch out the mage's magickal practice 
and suggest the tools he uses to focus it. 


Those tools, too, will depend on your mage's concept. 
A mad scientist would use formulas, gadgets, and labs full of 
cool gear; an urban-artist witch would call the corners, employ 
herbs, and shape her spells through art. Those tools, in turn, 
suggest the Abilities your character uses to employ them. She 
uses blaster-rifles? That'll emphasize her Energy Weapons Skill. 
Does he perform ritual dances? Then that'll emphasize the Art 
Talent instead. 


Malcolm Leonard uses secret rituals, complex designs, and 
personal charm to set his magick in motion. Which tools, then, 
does your mage use to get things done, and why does she believe 
they'll work for her? The Common Paradigms, Practices, and 
Instruments chart (Chapter Ten, p. 566), features an array 
of choices, and each practice described in that chapter has 
associated paradigms, Abilities, and tools. Select the ones that 
fit your character best. 


Personal Possessions 


On a related note, it's a good idea to figure out what your 
character carries around, keeps close at hand, or has waiting 
for her back at home. Few people, for example, go everywhere 
wearing backpacks full of goodies. Your mage's income, social 
class, pastimes, and so forth will determine the sorts of stuff he 
has at his disposal. A rich businessman, a poor college student, 
an urban skate-rat, and a neighborhood priest will have very 
different homes, clothes, and possessions. 


For the most part, you can assume that your mage carries the 
usual stuff for a person of his or her social class - a wallet, a cell 
phone, some ID, typical clothes, maybe a laptop, thatsortofthing. 
If and when your mage needs ritual- or tech-gear, figure out what 
it is and where he keeps it; cauldrons, wands, and plasma rifles 
aren’t exactly the sorts of things people walk down the street with 
these days. And although focus-instruments don’t cost character 
points, you do need special Background Traits in order to own 
enchanted or hypertech magickal gear. Depending on the nature 
of that gear, it could be easily hidden (an amulet, a debit card) or 
impossible to hide in the modern world (a rune-encrusted sword 


singing “Blood and souls for Arioch!"). That distinction makes a 
huge difference in terms of access and portability. 


Avatar/ Genius 

Then there’s the Awakened Self: your mage’s Avatar (or 
Genius). How powerful is it? How does it appear to him, and 
what does he believe it is? A low-level Avatar Background of 1 
or 2 reflects acompelling nudge or intuition. Higher-level ones, 
however, take stronger and more obvious forms - topping out 
at Avatar 5 - with spirits so real they seem like separate entities. 
Especially if you've gota high Avatar Background, it’s important 
to decide the form and inclinations of that Enlightened Self 
and to decide how the character wraps his head around its 
existence. Depending on his concept, affiliations, and beliefs, 
your mage's Avatar could be anything from a nagging hunch 
to a full-blown imaginary friend leading him toward challenge 
and disaster. 


Motivations 


As we suggested earlier, decide upon your character’s 
motivations. Brainstorm up both short- and long-term goals. 
Now that she’s got magick in her life, what does your mage want 
out of life? A partner? A dog? World peace? A sandwich? No one 
pursues just one single-minded goal, so keep your mage interesting 
by constantly exploring her motivations, the tactics she uses in 
order to achieve them, and the obstacles that stand in her way. 


Mundane Identity 

Mages have to balance incredible powers with day-to-day 
humanity. They’ve got friends, families, lives, lovers, jobs, 
homes, hopes, ambitions, aspirations, maybe kids, and perhaps 
lifetimes’ worth of goodies or trauma they have yet to set aside. 
Especially if the Otherworlds are too remote and dangerous to 
live in, the average mage is still trying to live in the mundane 
world. What elements of that world, then, are important to 
your character? And which elements is he trying to put aside 
so he can get on with his new life? 


The character’s mundane life becomes especially important 
if you're running a mage who's just recently Awakened. In that 
case, she's still sifting through the remnants of the person she 
was in order to find the person she's going to be from now on. 
There are bills to pay, pets to clean up after, friends asking, "So 
what's going on with you these days?" If your character has a 
job, then what does she do and how does she handle it now 
that magick is a force in her life? The conflicts between that 
mundane life and the effects of the Awakening (notto mention 
those pesky HIT Marks smashing through your wall when Mom 
comes by to visit...) have all kinds of dramatic potential. The 
more you know about your character's secret identity, the more 
fun you and your Storyteller can have with its complications. 


Obviously, these finishing touches invite various questions 
and demand creative answers. In the Prelude section below, you'll 
find a variety of questions that can help you find this spark of life. 
And by fleshing out your character this way, you'll turn a bunch 
of stats into a person worth roleplaying for years to come. 


Chapter Six: Creating the Character 259 


7 


7/3 


"A 


eo 


N A, 


oe a 


f 


D 7 


Sample Character Creation 


So, remember that street-kid we'd mentioned 
earlier? That's Camille's conceptfor a character 
named Jinx. Kicked out of her home at age 
16 for getting caught with both her girlfriend 
and her boyfriend in her mother's bed, Jinx 
wound up sleeping under bridges in Seattle. 
Now swept up into gutter-mage intrigues, she's 
the character Camille wants to run in James's 
new Mage chronicle. 


Step One 


Jinx isn't a join-the-club type of girl. Camille decides on the 
concept Wiseass Street Kid with no affiliated sect when the tale 
begins, tagging Jinx as an Orphan mage. James runs a prelude 
session for her, in which the character Awakens after almost being 
run over by a car. That car hits a pothole at the last moment, 
swerving away from the girl and into a lamppost. Camille decides 
that Entropy makes a good Affinity Sphere, and the girl formerly 
known as Nina Harris takes on the street name Jinx. 


Camille decides that Jinx is a restless risk-taker often driven 
to excess. Thatsounds like a Dynamic Essence, so Camille selects 
that Trait for her character. As archetypes, she chooses Rebel 
for Demeanor (“I take shit from no one!”) and Seeker for Nature 
(under her wiseass facade, Jinx is searching for something she 
has yet to be able to explain). Up until this point, she's been an 
easily distracted kid; underneath her apparent ADD, however, 
there's a pilgrim looking for a cause to believe in. 


Step Two 

Jinx is cute, tough, and not stupid, exactly, but not overly 
blessed in the brains department either. Camille chooses 
Social as Jinx's primary Attribute category, Physical as the 
secondary, and Mental as the tertiary. Dividing up the dots, 
Camille puts three into Charisma, two into Manipulation, and 
two into Appearance. With Charisma 4, Manipulation 3, and 
Appearance 3, the kid stands out in a crowd and knows how 
to wrap folks into knots if need be. Camille decides that this 
is both a product of her home-life (Mom's a manipulative, self- 
involved alcoholic) and a major source of her problems: folks 
always want more from Jinx than she feels like giving them. 


Camille then assigns two of her five Physical category dots 
into Stamina, two more into Dexterity, and the final one into 
Strength. Stronger than folks expect her to be, Jinx is more agile 
and tenacious than most people her age. As for the Mental Traits, 
Camille drops one dot each into Perception, Intelligence, and 
Wits. Jinx will refine those Traits on the streets, but for the moment 
she’s no more aware or intelligent than the average person is. 


Step Three 


A lower-middle-class, suburban, American kid, Nina Harris 
didn’t havea lot of chances to learn exotic skills. Camille figures 
that her primary Ability will be Talents, with Knowledges as her 
secondary category and Skills as her tertiary one. 


Mage: The Ascension 20" Anniversary Edition 


Given Jinx’s Dynamic nature and the really high Avatar 
Camille plans to give her, it stands to reason that the new 
mage is uncannily perceptive when it comes to things that folks 
don’t often notice. Camille puts two dots into Alertness, two 
into Awareness, and - because Jinx can be scarily intense - two 
into Intimidation. Like we said, she’s tough, so Camille gives her 
two dots in Brawl as well - Nina’s been beating up boys since 
she was little. Given her physical nature, it makes sense that 
Jinx gets a dot in Athletics as well. After getting kicked out, Jinx 
has become a bit Streetwise; one dot, then, into that Trait. This 
leaves three dots left. Camille goes to the Secondary Talents 
section and finds two that seem to fit Jinx: Carousing, because 
she’s a party girl, and Seduction, which explains a lot about that 
girlfriend/ boyfriend thing on Mom's bed. Camille drops two 
dots into the first, one into the second, and then moves on 
to Knowledges. 


A child of her era, Jinx has fresh schooling and knows 
her way around a computer. Camille puts two of her nine 
Knowledges dots into Academics and two more into Computer. 
Camille figures that Jinx has an interest in Esoterica and the 
Occult; four more dots, then - two into each Knowledge. 
Given Jinx's streets-and-parties experiences, Camille puts the 
final dot into Pharmacopeia; she's not an expert on drugs, but 
she's seen, read, heard, and experienced enough about them 
to understand the basics. 


Five dots leftfor Skill Traits. Camille puts one in Drive (she 
was learning), one into Etiquette (she's good at making friends 
when she wants to), one into Melee (you learn faston the streets), 
and another into Stealth (another healthy skill when you live on 
the streets). Glancing at the Secondary Skills, Camille places 
thatlast dot into Acrobatics: Nina took gymnastics when she was 
younger, and she still remembers a few of the old techniques. 


A few of those Traits could definitely be higher. Camille 
makes a mental note to save some freebie points for Abilities, 
and then moves on to... 


Step Four 

From the outset, Camille had planned to give Jinx a 
powerful Avatar. Five out of seven Background dots go into 
Avatar, reflecting a powerfully Awakened spirit. She spends the 
other two dots on Allies - specifically, on Khan and Synder, two 
of Jinx's badass friends. These two folks watch Jinx's back and 
have been teaching her helpful skills that'll help her survive 
in the Seattle underground. Both are Orphan mages as well, 
and their friendship will help Camille justify new experience- 
purchased Traits for Jinx. 


Camille decides that the potent Avatar takes the form of a 
burning fallen angel named Talon. Seductively female, with red- 
black skin and feathers, Talon encourages Jinx to take chances 
in the name of Risk. As Talon tells it, Risk is an urban goddess 
who favors people who take wild dares and live to tell about 
it. Khan and Synder both spin fire, and they talk about Risk 


as if she was a modern goddess too. Jinx figures that between 
them, they know what they're talking about. Therefore, Jinx 
considers herself a devotee of Risk, an aspect of the Roman 
goddess Fortuna, the Lady of Luck and Fate. 


So is Jinx Pagan? She's not really sure. As a kid, she'd spent 
the occasional Sunday in her late father's Catholic Church. 
That didn't make much impression on her then, and after 
he died in a car accident it made even less. Since that time, 
Jinx has dabbled around the edges of the occult and various 
religions, wondering what, if anything, she believed in. Now, 
between her newfound powers, Talon, and her friends, Jinx is 
sort of an eclectic Pagan, stringing together bits of everything 
in an effort to find something that makes sense. 


For a focus, Camille selects the World of Gods and Monsters 
paradigm and combines chaos magick, gutter magick and witchcraft 
to form her practice. As instruments, she employs dice, booze, 
graffiti sigils, a handful of lucky coins, muttered prayers to 
Risk, offerings of her own blood, meditation, and insane 
stunts dedicated to Risk. Jinx literally offers herself as a 
sacrifice to Risk, employing her Acrobatics, Athletics, 
and other Traits to supplement her magick. In game 
terms, then, her seven focus instruments are art, blood 
and fluids, cards and instruments of chance, meditation, 
offerings and sacrifices, ordeals and exertions, and 
prayers and invocations. Meanwhile, she's 
studying the deeper levels of the Art with 
Khan, Synder, and their friends, with 
Talon as an inner goad, guide, and 
cheerleader. 


Step Five 

Regarding those Arts - 
specifically, the Spheres that Jinx is 
learning - Camille has already selected 
Entropy as Jinx's affinity. She figures that 
Jinx would also be learning Forces (from 
the fire-dancers), Life (as an extension of 
herself), and perhaps Spirit (communing 
with her Avatar and the spirits of the city). 
Depending on Jinx's Arete rating, there 
may or may not be enough points to get 
what Camille envisions for her character. 
So, Camille moves on to... 


...Jinx's Arete rating. Because Jinx is a 
new mage, Camille decides that an Arete of 
2 is good enough for her to start with. That 
way, Jinx has enough power and understanding 
to make things happen, but enough room to 
grow as the chronicle goes on. That decision 
also gives her more freebie points to spend on 
things other than Arete; at four freebies per 
dot, Arete is expensive. With an Arete of 2, 
Jinx is limited to Sphere Rank 2. Camille 
gives her Entropy 2, Life 2, Forces 1, and 
Spirit 1, which grants Jinx minor control 
over probability, allows her to heal herself, 


and lets her see the interplays of Forces and Spirit around her. 
Jinx becomes a young mage with formidable potential. 


Camille continues with the Willpower Trait. As noted 
earlier, Jinx is stubborn but unfocused. Camille gives her the 
base Willpower of 5 and then records Jinx’s starting Quintessence 
and Paradox. That high Avatar rating gives Jinx five points 
of Quintessence, with no Paradox as the game begins. The 
basic Traits are taken care of; now it’s time to spend those 15 
freebie points. 


Four points go to buy Jinx that second Arete dot. Eight 
more points get spent on raising Jinx’s Abilities: buying her 
Acrobatics up to 2 (two points), her Brawl up to 3 (two points), 
and her Streetwise up to 3 (four points). Camille asks James if Jinx 
can get a dot in Area Knowledge: Seattle, since she’s communing 
with spirits of that city. James agrees, so two points buy that 

dot for her. Meanwhile, the Storyteller points out that two 
mage Allies are more powerful and useful than two-dot 
Allies; James suggests making Khan a Mentor instead. 
Camille puts her last freebie point into Mentor, leaves 
two dots in Allies to reflect Synder, and finishes the 
Traits-based portion of character creation. 


Camille has been filling James in on Jinx’s 
history throughout the process. To wind things 
up, she describes her mage as a teenage girl of 

European stock with a bit of Choctaw blood 
from her late father’s side of the family. Jinx 
has chopped her hair intoa roughly chin-length 
shag, dyed it (badly...) purple and blue, 
and accentuated her face with 
various piercings and thick eye 
makeup. Her solid athletic 
build is lost beneath overlarge 
death-metal T-shirts, a gray 
skull-camo hoodie, slashed-up 
black leggings, and her favorite 
ragged Utilikilt. A pair of battered 
Doc Martens complement a 
thriftshop leather jacket several 
sizes too large for her. Although she's 
around 5’7”, she looks shorter because of 
the loose clothing. Jinx has a wolf-pixie grin, 
often highlighted by a fresh bruise on her jaw 
from fighting. Fingerless gloves run halfway 
up her arms, covering her punch-roughened 
knuckles. Jinx looks like trouble, smells like 
a street kid, and makes both those things look 
good. 


She doesn't own much, this young mage, 
but she's had most of her life to learn how to 
get a lot from very little. She shares a squat 
with Khan and Synder, and she spends alot 
of time chatting with spirits and using 
Entropy and Life (channeled with her 
dice, lucky coins, and a few drops of 
blood) to encourage folks to give her 
money when she panhandles downtown. 


Chapter Six: Creating the Character 26l 


IBU 


d 


[| 
c 
] 


XN 


— A 


d 


«t 


Jinx scored a skateboard off a kid named Toby, and now she's 
learning how to ride it. Camille decides to make "Dare Ya!" 
into Jinx's Charisma 4 specialty; this way, she's got an edge 


when daring folks to do something idiotic. Meanwhile, she's 
become a sponge for occult secrets, hidden lore, and new ways 
to survive those long, wet, Seattle nights. 


The Prelude 


Before your chronicle gets underway, it's a 
good idea to have the Storyteller run a prelude 
for each character. This way, the players get a 
strong sense of their character's personalities 
while the Storyteller establishes a bond between 
the player, the character, and the chronicle’s 
world. If, for example, the Storyteller wanted to 
run a tale based on magickal rock bands, then 
a series of preludes for each character might 
involve prior gigs: the audition that leads to one 
character joining the band; the day when one 
musician first sits down with her big brother and learns how to 
play her instrument; or the implosion of a previous band that 
sets the stage for the formation of the one that will dominate 
the coming chronicle. 


A prelude also provides an excellent opportunity to find 
the sweet spots in a character (say, her preference for Irish cream 
or her aversion to tiny dogs) that might not have been apparent 
when the Traits were being chosen or to notice things that don’t 
quite fit once you start to actually play with them (perhaps her 
combination of skateboarding and folk-singing as parts of her 
magickal focus). Best of all, though, a prelude provides a sort 
of Coming Attractions trailer for the main chronicle. Both 
the player and the Storyteller can set up foreshadowing, coin 
catchphrases, introduce supporting characters, or invent little 
details that pay off later on down the road. Idiosyncrasies you 
hadn't imagined back when your mage was a few jots on a piece 
of paper start to emerge when you take on that character's role. 
Once a prelude's underway, your character starts to become 
more you... and you, in turn, begin to invest more of yourself 
into the character. 


As a general rule, set your prelude at some significant 
moment right before or right after your character's Awakening. 
By introducing the immediate impact of magick on your hero’s 
life, you establish a foundation for the budding mage’s beliefs 
about magick. A guy who Awakens during a Catholic Midnight 
Mass, for instance, will have avery different perception of what 
magick is, how it works, and what it means to him than would 
a person who Awakens during a car accident, a rave, or a vision 
quest in the North Dakota hills. Opening the prelude before 
your mage actually becomes a mage also shows you who he was 
back in his mundane days. Was he raised amidst the trappings 
of magick - perhaps as a modern Pagan, the son of a medicine 
man, or the designated heir of a Satanic cult? Maybe he grew 
up working in his mother’s weird laboratory in the garage, or 
as an adopted kid groomed to be a Man in Black. Or was he, 
as so many of us are, raised with the idea that there’s no such 
thing as magic - an idea he had to confront head-first on the 


262 Mage: The Ascension 20" Anniversary Edition 


day that reality exploded all around him? The prelude can give 
you a handle on such questions, showing you the human being 
beneath the Awakened mage. 


Preludes don’t really need dice or rules, nor do they require 
a full gaming session to run. The Storyteller can simply spend 
a few minutes with each player, narrating the prelude situation 
while the player responds in character. By setting up and playing 
out preludes before the actual chronicle begins, the Storyteller 
prepares the mood, tone, and setting of the game she wants to 
run. At the same time, players get opportunities to bond with 
their characters and work out whatever kinks might crop up 
between the player’s vision of his mage and the way that mage 
actually plays out once the game begins. 


Character Questions 

When preparing for a role, an actor does his homework, 
hashing out details that probably won’t show up on stage but 
might inform his performance. In the same vein, we recommend 
answering various questions about your mage before the tale 
begins. This way, you've gota solid foundation for your character, 
turning that list of Traits and facts into a vital, Awakened mage. 


How Old Are You? 


When was your character born? And how old is she when 
magick enters her life? The answers to those simple questions can 
provide major insights into your character’s life and perspective, 
especially if she’s significantly older or younger than you are. 
A character who was born in 1993 has a very different frame 
of reference than one who was born in 1983, 1973, or 2003; 
the music she listens to, the degree of life experience she has, 
the landmark events in the world around her - that character’s 
birth date exerts a profound influence on those and many 
other factors. 


Some folks Awaken as children, some when they’ re middle- 
aged, some even when they’re elderly. The latter, though, is 
unusual. So - at which point of development does your mage’s 
Avatar Awaken? If it happens during childhood, your mage 
could be a problematic prodigy. Adolescence may be the most 
common period for that surge of understanding, which says 
a lot about why many societies initiate their teenagers into 
clerical, mystical, scholarly, trade, craftsman, or military orders. 


Awakening often follows young adulthood, too, usually 
when the impending mage graduates from school, joins the 
workforce, gets married, gets pregnant, or undergoes some 
other significant rite of passage. And then there are the folks 
who Awaken once they've settled into adulthood - typically 
in the wake of some trauma like death, firing, divorce, or a 
major crisis of faith. 


Typically, the Avatar kicks up its metaphysical heels 
somewhere between late childhood and late middle age, 
while a person's still going through hormonal, social, and 
psychological life changes. 


So when you answer questions about your character's 
age, think also about what's going on in his life at that point. 
The answer will tell you volumes about the way that person 
thinks, handles himself, and views his connection to magick 
and Awakened culture. 


Where and How Were You Raised? 


Was your mage cherished as a child? Neglected? Abused? 
Did she grow up in the city, a rural area, the wilderness? Is 
she from somewhere other than the chronicle's location - 
and if so, does she travel a lot, or is this a new thing? Some 
folks spend their lives in a single region, but these days the 
majority of people in an industrial culture travel a lot by the 
time they reach adulthood. Those factors will tell you plenty 
about your character's attitude, Abilities, Backgrounds, and 


beliefs. 


Independent of where your mage grew up, there's the 
question of how she grew up. Was her family rich? Poor? Going 
rapidly from one to the other? Did her parents divorce, are 
they still together, or has one or both parents died? If dead, 
then how did that parent die? What about siblings? Extended 
family? Doting uncles or manipulative grandmothers? For 
better and worse, family shapes us all. Your mage’s relationship 
with her family and upbringing influences the way she handles 
her Awakened life, most especially if she was either sheltered 
and indulged or neglected or abused. The relationships your 
mage builds with her mentor, teammates, enemies, lovers, 
and friends depends a lot on the kinds of relationships she 
had with the people who raised her and the circumstances 


of that childhood. 
When Did You Notice You Were... Different? 


Even before the Awakening, mages tend to have very 
odd lives. Weird events surround them, and weird people 
sometimes show up, offering to “train the Chosen One” or 
trying to get that future mage to “accept the Truth before it’s 
too late!” Your mage might notice faeries in the woods, sense 
ghosts, or feel an affinity toward certain types of technology. 
Think about the sort of things that might have happened to 
the mage before the Avatar manifested in all its glory, and 
then tie them into your prelude and your character's beliefs. 


Who Have Your Important Friends Been? 
Everyone's got people who make huge impressions in 
their lives. So who did that for your mage? Was it the kid 
you used to play Dungeons & Dragons with in middle school? 
The boy next door you had a secret crush on, long before you 
knew how to deal with such things? Were there kids you hung 
out with after school, or a secret club where your friends met 
up, away from everyone else you knew? Important friends 
grow and change, coming into and going out of our lives. 
Some folks stick around for the long haul, whereas others 


Chapter Six: Creating the Character 


263 


make their impact on us at significant times and then fade 
into distant memories. Figure out who the significant people 
in your character's life have been. Those people will matter in 
some way, even if they never show up in the chronicle itself. 


What Were You Brought Op to Believe? 


As we ve already seen, belief is one of the most vital factors 
in a mage's life. So, speaking as the character, what were the 
beliefs you were raised with, how have they changed (assuming 
they have changed), and how do they shape the person you've 
become? Are you rebelling against your parents’ religion, or 
perhaps against their lack of one? Were you raised by Pagans? 
Fundies? Strict adherents of a religious creed, or pure scientific 
materialists with no time or patience for such nonsense? What 
philosophies were you raised to accept? Did you take them to 
heartor run them over with your own ideological steamroller? 
The Arts you pursue and the tools you use to focus them come, 
in many ways, from the beliefs you embraced or rejected in 
your pre-Awakening life. 


How Did You First Encounter Magick? 


So did your character accept what was happening when her 
Avatar finally showed up and showed her what was possible? 
Or is she nurturing doubts about such things even now? How 
did her Awakening occur? Was it dramatic? Traumatic? Slow 
and gradual, or an unexpected blast of That Which She Could 
Not Deny? Obviously, an Awakened person does accept the 
existence of “magick” in some form - without that acceptance, 
she couldn’t do the things she does. How, from your character’s 
perspective, did you come to that acceptance? And does your 
character even call what she does magick? 


(If your character possesses the wild talent described 
earlier in this book, check out the associated rules in Chapter 
Ten, pp. 527-528.) 


Do You Have a Sense of Destiny? 

Assuming that your mage accepts his place in the world, 
ask yourself where he sees himself fitting into it. Does he drift 
through life, taking on whatever it throws at him, or does he 
have specific future plans? Does she regard herself as a Chosen 
One, or is she resigned to being one mage among many? Does 
your fantasy counterpart view himself as the next Harry Potter, 
Merlin, or Anton LaVey? Does she consider herself the last line 
of defense against hordes of cosmic horror? Especially if your 
character has the Destiny Background, questions about what that 
destiny might be can lend extra urgency to your mage’s quest. 


How Do Your Beliefs Determine Your Focus? 
Belief shapes practice, and practice determines tools. 
An Enlightened mechanic probably tinkers with devices and 
instruments, memorizes manuals, and employs gauges and shop 
space in order to get things done. An Ecstatic artist might paint 
himself with weird designs, drop acid, and throw himself off 
a cliff in order to master the secrets of Awakening. How does 
your character focus his Arts and put his beliefs into practice? 
Remember that it’s your character’s beliefs, not your game system 
knowledge, that guides your focus tools. Sure, it might be more 


264 = Mage: The Ascension 20" Anniversary Edition 


convenient in a game«sense for you to choose a pendant, some 
gloves, a jacket, and a pair of sunglasses as your tools, but unless 
there's some compelling reason your character should believe in 
those tools (say, a bit of modification in a New World Order 
arsenal), they're probably not good focuses for your mage's Arts. 


How Did You Meet Your Mentor(s)? 

Who's the person who taught your character the things 
he needed to know? A friend? A lover? Perhaps the bully who 
beat you up after school until you blew her across the parking 
lot and she stood up, dusted herself off, and said "Finally! I 
was wondering when you'd show me what you had to offer!" In 
short, decide who opened the doors to your mage's Awakened 
life and then showed him (or is still showing him) how to walk 
through them without getting knocked ass-over-teakettle by the 
things he didn't know. 


How Did You Join Your Faction? 

Here's a key question for any mage: What inspired, or 
forced, you to join the group you belong to these days? Were 
you recruited by a charismatic Syndicate Manager? Seduced 
by a charming Ecstatic? Did the Chorister priest offer comfort 
when your world caved in? Were you raised in a Verbena family 
group and groomed to join that ancestral Tradition? Had you 
perhaps belonged to one group, only to defect to another? Were 
you maybe kidnapped by one sect from your original group, 
and then indoctrinated, willingly or otherwise, into joining 
the new team? Did you make a radical conversion, like going 
from the New World Order to the Akashayana or vice versa? 
Or did your original group betray your trust, lose your interest, 
or reveal a side of themselves that you refused to live with? In 
a situation where certain factions can and will kill members of 
rival groups - a situation that's not always a case of Traditions 
versus Technocracy - this is no simple question. The allegiance 
you choose often defines your mage's life among the Awakened. 


How'd You Meet Your Current Associates? 

Speaking of the company you keep, how did your character 
firstencounter her immediate companions... and why does she 
stick with them now? Are they friends? Bandmates? Lovers? 
Relatives? Do they work together by the command of some 
higher authority, are they allies of convenience, or are they 
stuck with one another until the current crisis ends? Do they 
get along well, or are they gritting their teeth each time they 
put their lives in each other's hands? If the latter, how can a 
mage trust her companions, and how long does she think that 
trust will las? As mentioned earlier, in the Working Together 
section, your characters need a compelling reason to cooperate 
with one another. The more engaging you make their reasons 
for association, the tighter the group will be and the stronger 
your chronicle's foundation will be as a result. 


How Do You See Your Avatar and 
the Relationship Between You Both? 

Isyour mage's Avatar a tormenting spirit? A cosmic trickster’? 
A future version of himself? Does he see the Inner Genius as 
a vision of Einstein, a floating multicolored fractal pattern, 


or a spectral whiteboard that keeps erasing and then writing 
on itself? Does he hear voices, like Joan d'Arc? See cloaked 
figures or sixxarmed weirdoes? Does he argue with his Avatar, 
dismiss it as a hallucination, or tremble as the Voice of God 
cuts into his very soul? The vision of your mage's Avatar, and 
the relationship between the Genius and the mage, remains one 
of the most significant elements of Awakened life. Especially 
if your character has a high Avatar Background Trait, take the 
time to figure out how the mage views that Awakened Self, 
deals with it, and fits it into the worldview he possesses... or, 
perhaps, understand how that world possesses him. 


How Do You Now Deal With the Mundane World? 


Surely your character doesn't hang out with mages all 
the time. Her family, her friends, her co-workers, even the 
folks she meets at the bar or while shopping - there must be 
some unAwakened souls among them. How, then, does she 
relate to people who can't warp reality with a thought, people 
whose lives revolve around Justin Bieber or their next dentist 
appointment, not around plasma guns or Horizon Realms? As 
most cops, soldiers, or musicians will tell you, it's hard to build 
a normal life when you've experienced things that most folks 
never dream of facing - harder still when your daily life involves 
a side of reality few people ever see. It's a real trick to interface 
with the unAwakened world when a mage has faced screaming 
horrors or blood-drenched Reality Deviants. How, then, does 
your mage manage that feat? The answer will tell you a lot of 
things about her personality, priorities, and perspective... not 
to mention her eventual goals in a War that remains hidden 
from unAwakened eyes. 


Player Questions 


Okay, so we've figured out how your character ticks. Now 
what do you want from this character? Answering a few short 
questions can help you get a stronger handle on your own 
motivations for playing this particular mage in this particular 
game. You don't have to puzzle out every element of your 
fantasy persona in exacting detail. If, however, you all know 
what you want ahead of time, then you, your Storyteller, and 
your fellow players will have a better plan for creating a game 
that's fun for everyone concerned. 


What Do You, the Player, Want to Play? 

Sowhatsort of character speaks to you in Mage? Asteampunk 
Frankenstein? A slick wizard in a thousand-dollar suit? A tattooed 
death-mage? A smartass dude or chick in a black leather trenchcoat, 
clove cigarette clenched between your teeth? Those archetypes 
- and many more besides - speak to our imaginations. When 
you pick one of them and say "I wanna play that!”, then you're 
essentially, as Jim Morrison put it, taking a face from the gallery 
and walking down the hall with it. The more conscious you are 
about your selection, the better an idea you'll have about what 
to do with it when the game begins. 


How Do You See Your Character Growing as the 
Chronicle Goes On? 


On a similar note, what sort of stories do you want to 
tell with this character? Warped satires? Tragic romance? Do 
you want to kick the shit out of all the fuckers you can't deal 
with in real life? Or are you cool with whatever the Storyteller 
throws at you? Knowing your expectations ahead of time can 
help both you and your Storyteller meet those expectations. 
If you don't know what you want to do, after all, then how 
can your Storyteller meet those expectations with an exciting 
and fulfilling tale? 


Beyond those initial challenges, your fantasy persona will 
grow and change. One of the truths in Mage, after all, is that 
magick transforms you even as you transform your world. Do 
you see your mage becoming a great Master? A renegade? A 
madman? Will she venture into the Otherworlds or clean up 
her corner of the neighborhood? In a way, such questions plot 
your character's destiny. If you have some idea where you want 
it to lead, then you have a chance to shape its path... and to be 
surprised by the things you never saw coming until they hit. 


How Is This Character an Aspect of Your 
Real-World Self? 


On a deeper level, the things we create become reflections 
of our selves. When you choose that archetypal mask and mold 
it to your own wishes, it becomes a part of you. Sure, Mage 
is, on many levels, just a game; it’s fiction, and please don’t 
ever lose sight of that fact. Still, the fantasies we embrace say 
a lot about the people we are in real life - the things we want 
to accomplish and experience, the fights we wish to win, the 
values we cherish or reject when we've got the opportunity to 
do so safely. 


A roleplaying game presents safe space for such fantasies. 
You won'tbreak your neck if you fail your character's climbing 
roll. Knowing that, what does the mage you want to play say 
about the person you want to be? Where are the connections 
between your fantasy persona and the real you? What is it 
about the archetype you've chosen that speaks to some aspect 
of yourself? Best of all, how can the things you experience 
vicariously through your imaginary creation benefit you in 
your day-to-day life? In real life, there are gamers out there 
who learn history or culture, who travel to new places or dare 
real-world challenges, because of the inspiration they find in 
games. That's powerful stuff, and although you should be 
careful with it (we do not recommend breaking into office 
buildings to crack the Curse of the Fox News Zombies), you 
can enhance your real-world life by examining the places 
where imagination takes you. 


Ask yourself, then, as you craft your mage: How is she 
like me, and how am 1 like her? The answers may surprise you, 
challenge you, and perhaps even change your life. 


Chapter Six: Creating the Character — 265 


IASA 


J 
| 
ard 


Part Il Character Traits 


As we mentioned earlier, the various Traits reflect the game 
systems side of your character's abilities. Through a collection of 
dice, represented by dots, you determine the mage’s success or 
failure, as well as his overall strengths and weakness with certain 
kinds of tasks. Although certain types of Traits, specifically 


the Essences and Archetypes, don’t have dots or dice pools, 
all the following characteristics deal with the gaming side of 
your mage and tie into the systems featured throughout Book 
III, in Chapters Eight, Nine, and Ten. 


Avatar Essences 


As we've seen earlier, the Essence reflects the 
personality of your mage's Avatar. By extension, 
it also influences the mage himself. In many 
regards, the Essence gives you a general scriptfor 
, : . $ " 
your character's behavior. His goals, his habits, 
the way he approaches life and all its mysteries - 
all may be guided by the mage's Essence. 


The Awakened themselves disagree about 
the role, nature, and purpose of an Essence. 


Reincarnationists view such tendencies as 

the legacies of past lives, whereas big-picture 
metaphysicians point toward the Metaphysic Trinity and the spaces 
between its forces. Technocrats dismiss such mystic rubbish, seeing 
instead the psychological profiles of Enlightened personalities. 
There are folks who see Essence as directives from Almighty God, 
and others who speak of Pure Ones who continually reincarnate 
their cosmic identities in Earthly vessels. As with magick itself, 
the truth about your mage's Essence will depend - at least in that 
character’s eyes - on the beliefs he holds about his place in Creation. 


Most often, the Avatar and its Essence reveal themselves as 
personality quirks, subtle nudges, dreams, hallucinations, déja vu, 
and feelings ofsomethingorsomeone beingjust rightor totallywrong 
to the mage in question. A Dynamic Essence mage feels restless, 
driven, impassioned, and hyperactive; his Pattern companion might 
be more settled, reliable, one of those good head on her shoulders 
types with a solid approach toward life. A Questing vagabond rarely 


sticks around one place for long, and the enigmatic Primordial soul 
gazes at her surroundings with eerie calm and an agenda no one else 
can fathom. Despite broad connections between the four Essences 
and the Ascension War factions - Dynamic for Marauders, Pattern 
for Technocrats, Questing for the Traditions, and Primordial for 
the Nephandi - all four Essences can be found in every faction... 
including the ones who want no part of that War. 


The stronger the Avatar, the greater its influence; one or two 
dots in Avatar manifest as simple hunches, whereas four- or five- 
dotones achieve full-blown identities. An Avatar’s manifestations 
are often tied to its Essence nature. Although human beings 
seem more complex - defined more by Nature, Demeanor, and 
personal choice than by cosmic forces - the Avatars that push 
mages themselves often display the Essence in obvious ways. 
Dynamic Avatars take ferocious forms, driving their mortal hosts 
like children before demonic whips. A Pattern Genius could 
manifest as that feeling of rightness when a carpenter grabs his 
hammer and a gazes at a stack of planks. The Questing Avatar 
might blow through a mage's hair like an eternal breeze, cooling 
her skin even in the still desert air, whereas the Primordial Avatar 
pools deep ina wizard’s subconscious, filling his head with visions 
that defy definition yet demand answers in the light of day. 


During the age of High Magick, the Essences were identified 
by elements (Dynamic/ Fire, Pattern/ Earth, Questing/ Air, 
Primordial/ Water) and mythic creatures. Viewed by some mages 
as diagrams of the soul, these tendencies appeared to be marks 
of predestination. And although modern mages often assert 


Genius Eidolons: The Fechnocratic Essence 


Operatives of the Technocratic Union refuse to accept superstitionist babble about avatars and essences. Such concepts 
are merely the archaic excuses for perfectly understandable psychiatric phenomena. Still, even the most hardened 
scientists must accept overwhelming evidence, so the concept of Eidolons — constructs of a person's Enlightened Genius 


- remains an open secret among Technocratic personnel. 


For all practical purposes, Eidolons and Essences are exactly the same thing. But in the world of Mage, perception 


and belief are the foundations of reality. Thus, a Technocrat or former Technocrat will utterly deny the existence of a 
metaphysical soul essence. Reality Deviants may have their silly little soul-faces, but a good Technocrat knows what such 
things really are: wisps of imagination wrapped around perfectly sensible expressions of Genius! 


Even so, Technocrats don't like to discuss these wisps of imagination. Oh, it’s acceptable to mention one's dreams upon 
occasion, but a Technocrat who discusses dreams as if they mean something may soon find himself in hot water. Dreams, 
then, are where Genius Eidolons run wild. If and when such phantasms manifest in clear view during waking hours, a 
smart Technocrat will keep such fancies to himself if he knows what's good for him... which, of course, he does. 


266 = Mage: The Ascension 20" Anniversary Edition 


that “I am no one's pawn,” there does appear, at times, to be 
a greater force - or perhaps four or five forces - manipulating 
mages toward some greater end. 


That fifth force, Infinite, remains enigmatic. Sages say that it 
must exist, but if it does, no one's actually seen it. In game terms, it's 
hard to saywhatan Infinite Essence might look like. We recommend 
that player characters probably shouldn’t have such an option, but 
perhaps aweird Storyteller character could embodythatsortof Avatar, 
staring at the world with eyes and heart that reach past mere human 
understanding and into realms even mages can’t yet comprehend. 


Dynamic 

The Dynamic Essence embodies Change itself. Manifesting 
asa mercurial temperament, passionate emotions, restless drive, 
and fickle spirits, Dynamic Avatars compel their mages toward 
daring experiences. Such people are never boring company! A 
Dynamic mage might drag you out for a night on the town that 
includes hijacking a taxi, skateboarding down a railroad track, 
and slumping into bed just after dawn with a huge grin (or a 
terrified grimace) on your face, just to wake up a few hours 
later and see what trouble you can get into next. 


In more subtle forms, this Essence inspires curiosity, 
impatience, and sudden flashes of brilliance. Appearing in 
the form of shadows, whispers, and poor impulse control, it 
goads a mage to treat every day like an adventure. At higher 
levels, à Dynamic Avatar can nag a person mercilessly, leaving 
half-finished projects and shattered relationships in the wake 
of a mage who rarely sits still for long. 


Pattern 


Thevery opposite of Dynamism, the Pattern Essence provides 
stability and order. If Dynamism is fire, then Pattern is stone. 
Pattern mages approach things with deliberate intent, speaking 
slowly and taking time to consider the potential risks and benefits 
of a task. Manifesting as calm temperament, sound logic, stable 
emotions, and authority figures (often in dreams, perhaps as 
people only the mage herself can see), Pattern Avatars settle the 
capricious whims of reality into solid, dependable forms. 


Because every war needs fortifications and dependable 
souls, the Pattern Essence is a valued asset. Such Avatars inspire 
their mages to be prudent, constructive, and trustworthy - real 


bricks, to use the British slang. Honor, stability, and good 
judgment are hallmarks of such people. If they seem stodgy or 
uninspired, it's simply because other people are too shortsighted 
to recognize a true friend when they have one. 


Primordial 


Before light and order existed, Primordial Chaos was 
the Essence of the universe. Even now, that eternal enigma 
beckons to the human soul in the shape of eerie and often 
sinister Avatar-forms. Manifesting as shadows; half-heard cries; 
swirling vortices of pulsating energy; or the disconcerting figures 
of madmen, ghosts, and squamous things, this Essence reflects 
the depthless reaches of cosmic potential. Mages connected to 
this Essence tend to be abrupt and secretive, or else seductive 
in ways that Fallen souls can best appreciate. 


A Primordial mage loves mystery. Like deep water, she seeps 
into hidden places and defies easy understanding. Whereas 
Pattern people are bricks or stone, Primordial folks are riptides 
and dark pools. The few Technocrats who favor this Essence 
understand that no science can penetrate the richest mysteries 
of the universe; they'll give lip service to technology, but they 
always keep a few extra cards up their sleeves for the time when 
the light fails and order becomes a punch line in the cosmic jest. 


Questing 

Wherever windmills beckon, you'll find Questing mages 
preparing to tilt. Vagabonds and errants, pilgrims, and pioneers, 
these people prefer the open road and a worthy cause. Epitomizing 
Balance in the Trinity, this Essence avoids extremes. Questing 
Avatars tend to manifest as yearning; wanderlust; bright spots on 
the horizon; and people, beasts, or entities associated with travel. 
One might look like a stray hound, another like a kaleidoscope, 
and a third like a hitchhiker on the side of the road. Whereas 
the Primordial mage curls up in the shadows, the Questing 
mage straps on her backpack, straps on or discards entirely her 
shoes, and heads off to face adventures in the Great Unknown. 


“Call Me the Breeze” makes a good theme song for such 
characters. Their Avatars draw them ever onward. Sure, these 
souls might seem friendly and fun enough; in time, however, 
they'll disappear into the rising dawn, secure in the knowledge 
that someone else will follow the trails they've blazed. 


Personality Archetypes: 
Nature and Demeanor 


Archetype means "ruling impression." In Jungian 
terms, it refers to certain significant figures that 
inspire human tales and behavior. For Mage, 
the personality Archetypes provide roleplaying 
guidance, offer potential motivations, and give 
you a way of contrasting your mage's outer guise 
with her inner truth. Think of them as a Tarot 
deck of sorts: a series of symbolic figures that 


reflect human experience. A Trickster Archetype, for instance, 
represents the clown whose tricks conceal a deeper lesson, inspire 
caution, and point out just how vulnerable you might be if you 
don't keep your wits about you. 


As we saw earlier, each Mage character has two Archetypes: 
theobvious Demeanor and the inner Nature. These Archetypes 
could be similar, but will rarely be the same; even the most 
honest people need their secrets, after all. From your character's 


Chapter Six: Creating the Character 267 


E^ ins 


AE ai 


perspective, Demeanor is how you present yourself to other 
folks, and Nature is how you see yourself when all your masks 
come off. In the ruthless world of the Awakened Ones, it's 
dangerous to let people know too much about you, so pick your 
character's mask carefully - he'll be wearing it for quite a while. 


Demeanor Traits are easy enough to change - you juststart 
acting differently and choosing new priorities in life. Nature, 
on the other hand, is difficult to change. It takes a life-shifting 
circumstance to cause such transitions, and you might not 
even recognize yourself in the mirror when such a shift occurs. 


In game terms, the Nature also provides you with an 
opportunity to refresh your Willpower Trait. When you 
accomplish something that's in tune with your Nature, your 
Storyteller might give you one to three Willpower points to 
replace the ones you've spent over the course of the story. This 
benefit applies only to refreshing a depleted Willpower Trait - 
you don't get new Willpower dots for acting according to your 
Nature. When you purchase new Willpower dots, however, you 
can help justify that boosted Will if you've been successfully 
following your Nature. 


Every Archetype has its strengths and weaknesses. Consider 
thatstrength to be the inner spark that inspires you to persevere 
when things get rough. Your Archetypal weakness, on the other 
hand, reflects a personal flaw - some obstacle in your Path to 
Ascension and a stumbling block in daily life. Both aspects 
combine to make you, for better and worse, the person you are. 


The entries below offer a sample of the potential range of 
Awakened Archetypes. Feel free to create new ones that suit 
your character's personality and vision, so long as those new 
Archetypes have strengths, weaknesses, and a way to restore 
your Willpower when you kick ass, take names, and fulfill the 
purpose of your Nature. 


Activist 

The world is broken. Help fix it. Speak truth to power, dig 
up secrets, call people out on their shit, and reveal your plans 
for a better world to anyone who will listen. While apathetic 
cowards sit back and tune out, you step up and do whatever 
needs doing. Sure, folks might consider you a pain in the ass, 
but at least you're making a difference! 


Action is your greatest strength. You're not one to sit things 
out. There's no time to waste on mindless self-indulgence and 
noroom to stay scared of what might happen. The wolf's already 
halfway through the door, and you refuse to let that bastard win. 


Even so, your constant Outrage wears thin. There's never 
room to sit back and enjoy life. As far as you're concerned, 
complacency is a sin. Your fury's justified, of course, but it gets 
old all the same. Before you can truly Ascend, you've got to 
balancerighteous pyrotechnics with calm acceptance. Life never 
has been - and never will be - perfect. Finding a place of serenity 
within your storm is an essential part of your transcendence. 


- Regain Willpower when you successfully confront abuse, 
right wrongs, or reveal an actual conspiracy and, by doing so, 
bring it down. 


268 Mage: The Ascension 20" Anniversary Edition 


Benefactor 

It’s a cruel world, but you make things easier. Generous 
sometimes to a fault, you supply whatever you can provide: 
money, advice, protection, maybe just ashoulder when someone 
really needs to cry. You can’t just turn blind eyes to suffering 
and need. It’s your moral duty to do whatever you can do to 
make things right. When things get tough, you call upon your 
inner White Knight and charge in, bringing gifts, guidance, 
and occasional force when nothing else will do. 


Altruism is all too rare, especially in the World of 
Darkness. Helping people is your pleasure. Magick, as far as 
you're concerned, is a tool for helping folks less fortunate than 
yourself. To do less is an abuse of the powers you possess. 


On the flipside, though, you often feel Obligation even when 
you're notactually needed. This, in turn, can become resentment 
- both on your part and on the parts of people who now feel, 
rightly or wrongly, that they owe you. Sometimes, you just need 
to back off, chill out, and let people do things for themselves. 
Martyrdom isn’t always the best Path toward Ascension. 


- Regain Willpower when you provide help that someone 
else desperately needs. The key here is that desperate part. 
Teaching Sunday school isn’t meeting that level of need; if you 
used your Arts to assist autistic kids, however, you’d clearly be 
making a difference in their lives. 


Contrary 


Inversion is an essential part of real life. For every rule, 
there must be exceptions. You live to turn things inside out, 
undercutting assumptions by showing their weak foundations. 
You're the Devil's Advocate, pointing out flaws by embodying 
the opposite of what folks expect. 


A successful Contrary displays Insight; your inversions 
succeed because they point to a deeper truth. If you're serious 
about this path (that is, if you're an actual Contrary, not simply 
an asshole), then you're a jester with a clue. That ability to see 
beyond appearances is extremely useful in the Awakened realm. 


Andyet, your perpetual Subversion can be annoying, intrusive, 
and outright destructive. Certain assumptions really are true, and 
inverting them doesn't provide any particular wisdom. If you 
seriously want to reach beyond appearances, you have to realize 
thatyour own contrariness can be its own limitation. True wisdom 
comes through a balance between rejection and acceptance. 


- Regain Willpower whenever your inversion of expectations 
leads folks to realize how false those expectations had been. 


Crusader 


People need a hero, and you're there to fill that role. Driven 
by a higher purpose - religious conviction, moral ethics, a 
philosophical ideal - you strive for a better world. The sword 
you wield might be more symbolic than literal: a scientist or 
teacher can be a Crusader too. The struggle, though, is what 
defines you. A better future must be built upon the foundations 
of our flawed world, and your duty compels you to demolish 
the obstacles so that reconstruction can begin. 


Youradmirable Zeal propels you through every challenge 
you face. Lesser souls might falter, but you will not. 


Fanaticism, though, is the mark of a Crusader. Your 
convictions leave little room for compromise. When everything 
looks like a nail, it’s hard to stop hammering. Until and 
unless you learn to temper your enthusiasm and question 
your own assumptions, you're just chasing shadows of your 
own extremism. 


- Regain Willpower when you accomplish some great 
deed in the name of your higher goal. As a player, you need 
to define what that higher goal is, and then follow it even 
when it hurts you. A true Crusader's beliefs are not governed 
by convenience. 


Hacker 


Every system is a locked vault, and you've got the keys. If 
you don't have ones that work, you'll make new ones - that's 
half the fun of life, after all! Puzzles excite you; limits just piss 
you off. Especially given the sheer amount of abuse that's 
built into any system, the world needs folks like you to tear 
down impediments and set reality free. 


Imagination is your greatest strength. You see things 
not as they are, but as they could be once you get done with 
them! Driven to dismantle existing systems and then put 
them together in interesting new shapes, you tend to pepper 
your compulsions with sincerely-held philosophy. You're not 
a vandal, for crying out loud - you're a visionary who refuses 
to accept shit sandwiches handed out as lunch. 


Sometimes, though, you go too far. Perversity leads you 
to tear apart things that weren't broken... things that may, 
in fact, have been better left alone. Although it might seem 
philosophically valid to tear down the wards on a wizard's 
lab, those wards might have been laid that way for reasons 
you didn't understand until it was a little too late. 


- Regain Willpower when you detect a flaw in some 
important structure, system, or device, or else when you 
puzzle out a way to improve something that was supposedly 
designed well to begin with. 


Idealist 


Cowards accept what is. You know how much better 
things will be once the flaws in the system have been purged. 
Guided by a great ideal - spiritual devotion, political 
philosophy, scientific theory, compassionate humanity - you 
refuse to remain shackled by defeatism. Your Ideal is correct. 
You know this to be true. Now is the time to bring it about. 
Once you do, everyone else will see just how wrong they've 
been... and how right you are. 


Conviction is your life's blood. Whether you'rea scientist 
chasing inspiration, a theorist assured that this theory cannot 
fail, a religious devotee, or some other sort of Idealist, you 
possess near-unshakable faith in your ideal - the kind of faith 
that shapes reality. 


Like most fanatics, though, you're Dogmatic to a fault. 
Blind to any potential flaws, you'll fight - sometimes literally 


ELLIOTT13 


bou -E 


1 
Ld 


Chapter Six: Creating the Character 


269 


DE ai x 


- to assure the truth of your beliefs. All mages are idealists to a 
point; in your case, though, this devotion seems stifling. When 
(not if, when) reality falls short of your ideals, you might wind 
up depressed, violent, or - as with many Marauders - insane. 


- Regain Willpower when your beliefs are tested to the 
breaking point yet do not fail. 


Innovator 


There’s always a better way. You spend your life looking 
for methods and inventions that improve on what has gone 
before. Sure, past achievements are wonderful enough... but if 
you just add this, shift that, approach the issue from this other 
angle instead, then you'll make a good thing that much better 
or fix an obvious flaw in a promising design. 


Creativity is your strong point. No practice, tool, or 
traditional method is too good for improvement, especially 
not at this crucial point in human evolution. Let other people 
follow the established paths - you're busy drawing up the next 
road toward a goal most folks don't even know exists. 


Your Restless Unorthodoxy, though, can get you in 
trouble. Especially if you belong to a sect or faction based on 
established results and protocols (the Technocracy, the Hermetic 
Order, the Akashayana, and so on), your innovations might be 
someone else's heresy. Many mages have been burnt at stakes 
both literal and symbolic for doing the things you do, and a 
missed step could make (an) ash of you. 


- Regain Willpower when your inspiration leads to a 
helpful new breakthrough. 


Kid 

Either young in years or young at heart, you give the 
impression of needing to be taken care of by older, wiser folks. 
That impression may be deceiving, but you're glad to use it to your 
best advantage. You could bean actual child - somewhere between 
post-toddlerhood and late adolescence - or chronologically an 
adultwith a childlike personality. Whatever your actual age might 
be, your concerns are simple, capricious, and typically self-involved. 


There’s a kind of Innocence to you, and it provides the 
source of your strength. People want to protect that sense of 
wonder and hope and tend to offer you a compassion they 
might not feel toward other folks. 


The extreme of innocence, though, is Immaturity. Trusting 
too easily, acting too rashly, jumping into things without 
considering their potential consequences... you're guilty of all 
these things and more. You can slide from charming child to 
spoiled brat in the space between two heartbeats, and the traits 
that inspire people to take care of you can become infuriating 
as well. If and when you want to reach a higher state, you'll 
have to put certain childish things aside. 


- Regain Willpower when you bring out the nurturing side 
of someone who doesn't normally care much for other people. 


Loner 


Fuck the world. Everything you need in life you've got inside 
yourself. Even in the middle of a crowd, you're alone... or at least, 


270 Mage: The Ascension 20" Anniversary Edition 


you feel that way. People don't understand you, and you don't care 
enough to try to understand them. It's not that you're a sociopath 
or anything (although you just might be one) so much as it's that 
you just don't connect with that whole social animal thing at all. 


Self-Reliance is your blessing. You're so used to doing 
everything yourself that you rarely depend on another person's 
aid. Ascension, so far as you understand it, is a solitary task, 
so why bother asking for assistance with that goal? 


Trouble is, your Disconnection cuts you off from empathy 
and the wealth of human experience. Until and unless you let 
down the barriers and connect with other living things, you're 
doomed to a lonesome and limited existence. 


- Regain Willpower when you achieve some meaningful 
goal without help from anyone else, especially if your 
accomplishment benefits other people too. 


Machine 

Flesh is weak. You are not. Whether or not you're an actual 
cyborg, you have the relentless drive ofa Terminator on PCP. Flaws 
do not concern you. Limits are for the mewling meatbags known 
as human beings. Compassion is for weaklings. Fatigue is for lesser 
entities. If and when you fall short of perfection, you understand 
that such failure is just a challenge to do better next time. 


A Diligent, Stoic creature, you push yourself to the limits 
of endurance. Everything you do is done to exacting standards, 
without complaint or hesitation. The Technocratic Union loves 
operatives like you. 


As far as other people are concerned, however, you're Creepy 
and Prone to Burn-Out. Whatever illusions you harbor about 
your perfection, you’re as flawed as any other mortal thing. Even 
machines have limits, and unless you learn to acknowledge 
your own, you're headed toward the scrap heap, not Ascension. 


- Regain Willpower when you transcend the limits of 
mere flesh, bone, and steel, accomplishing something that no 
one else has managed to do. 


Mad Scientist 


Science is nota field for cowards and fools. You understand 
that technology expands only when brave souls such as yourself 
dare the unthinkable and push past the established norms of 
hidebound preconceptions. Yes, those cowards and fools do 
falter when they behold the scope of your temerity. Let them! 
Just as Vesalius defied taboos when he performed dissections 
or Galileo challenged the Church with his discoveries, so too 
must other visionaries stand firm and expand the reach of 
science... visionaries including, of course, yourself. 


You do, in fact, have Vision. It’s probably your greatest 
strength. Pursing that vision despite all obstacles, you move the 
boundaries of reality through sheer determination. 


Problem is, you are Batshit Insane. There are reasons 
that other people have not dared the things you do or, if they 
have, that they’re reviled names in the Halls of Infamy. The 
Technocracy, Virtual Adepts, and especially the Etherites might 
depend upon minds like yours, but they also keep a wary eye 
out for the times when you'll go too far - because you will. 


- Regain Willpower when you successfully bend the rules 
of your technomancer sect while still applying something that 
seems oddly like science (see the sidebar SCIENCE!!!, p. 
290) and manage to avoid invoking Paradox. This feat should 
feature a bizarre stroke of ingenuity that shouldn't work and yet 
somehow does. (Simply using magick does not count - after all, 
you're not some kind of sorcerer!) 


Martyr 

It's your glory to sacrifice yourself for the greater good. 
Precisely what this greater good looks like is up to you. It's 
probably based ona religious creed - possibly, but not necessarily, 
Islam or Christianity. Then again, you may want to give your 
all for a secular cause you believe in, maybe a political ideology, 
a philosophical ideal, or simply the opportunity to be heroic 
in ways only you can perform. This sacrifice doesn't have to be 
fatal, though it'll probably wind up being terminal eventually. 
Until then, you tend to put yourself in a position to suffer so 
that someone else might thrive. 


Sacrifice is a mighty thing in magick. The willingness to 
surrender one's self to a greater end is one of the most obvious 
(and famous) Paths toward Ascension. 


That said, such Self-Deprecation can have unfortunate 
consequences far beyond simple hazards to your health. 
Martyrs tend to get on people's nerves, wind up being taken 
advantage of, and deal with abuse that has nothing to do with 


the greater good. Worse, perhaps, people like you often resent 
the beneficiaries of their sacrifice, many of whom might not 
want you to sacrifice yourself at all. 


- Regain Willpower whenever you manage to make a 
noticeably positive difference in someone else's situation by 
giving deeply of yourself. 


Monster 

Heaven lacks glory without the threat of Hell. It's your 
noble chore, then, to be the Agent of Infamy. An obvious choice 
for Nephandic mages (though not, by a long shot, exclusive to 
their kind), this Archetype embodies unapologetic villainy. As 
Voltaire (the singer, not the philosopher) put it, “It’s so easy 
when you're evil"... easy, fun, and satisfying! 


You Reveal Dark Truths that many people are afraid to 
face. When you show up, Pollyanna runs screaming for the 
hills. Your existence undercuts the comfortable lies of polite 
society. Anyone can play a hero, but a memorable villain is 
worth his weight in blood. 


The problem, of course, is that you're Depraved. There 
might be a heroic heel-turn in your future, but that's unlikely. 
Chances are, you're headed for the Cauls; if you haven't Fallen 
with the Nephandi already, you probably will soon enough. 


- Regain Willpower by performing spectacular acts of 
heartlessness and ruin. 


Chapter Six: Creating the Character 271 


f 


f 


D 7 [E 


Prophet 

Speaking capital T Truth, you bring a sacred message to a 
wounded world. That message might not necessarily be religious, 
though it's at least got religious undertones. Regardless of its 
nature, it's capital Important in ways that simple opinions 
could never be. Traditionally, a prophet becomes the chosen 
representative of Truth, throwing light into shadowed corners 
and forcing folks to look at their own hypocrisies. It's not an 
easy cross to bear, but Truth will not be denied for long. 


Insight is your greatest strength. Prophets tend to see 
things that are hidden to most people: secrets, omens, visions 
of the future, and so forth. Even if you lack the blessing/ curse 
of prophecy, few mysteries escape your sight. 


Ruthlessness is the traditional flaw of prophets. Driven 
by their vision of Truth, such people tend to be impatient, 
fanatical, and defiant of mortal power. You'll probably score 
lots of points for guts, but you might find those guts roasting 
on a spit in some ruler's torture garden. True prophets often 
meet unhappy ends... and they tend to take their followers 
down with them when they go. 


- Regain Willpower when you speak Truth to power and 
inspire a successful change. 


Rogue 

You make rebellion look good. More than just some scruffy 
malcontent, you challenge convention with stylish dispatch. 
Attitude is your first, last and middle name, and it’s the only 
label you accept. You give not one precious fuck for authority, 
and when you finally head towards that Big Dirt Nap, you plan 
to go out laughing. 


Defiance is your life’s blood, the pillar of your soul. 


Your problem, though, is Selfishness. So dedicated are 
you to your own individuality that you’ll ignore the concerns 
of other folks. Before you can become a valuable part of your 
society (much less a candidate for transcendence), you'll have 
to learn to let go of your own whims and take the bigger picture 
into account. 


- Regain Willpower whenever you manage to score a 
victory against the forces of oppressive authority. 


Sensualist 


Sensation is a drug to you. The jittery rush of adrenaline, 
the caress of this week’s lover on your skin, the raspy pull of 
a brush through messy hair, even the dull burn of a broken 
heart - you chase those dragons with bright abandon. The 
obvious choice for an Ecstatic mage, this compulsion finds 
new expressions in the Art of magick. The first thing you learn 
in each Sphere, after all, is perception. For someone like you, 
that’s all the reason in the world you need in order to learn 
each Sphere and savor its sensations. 

Receptiveness is your gift. Your devotion to sensuality 
inspires you to challenge yourself. You're not shy about sharing, 
either, and your delight in even the most painful stimulations 
can get other people to explore them with you too. 


Mage: The Ascension 20" Anniversary Edition 


Hedonism is your curse. Those indulgences can drive you 
to do stupid, reckless, selfish things. You tend to haul other folks 
along with you for the ride, and although you might cherish the 
resulting agonies, your companions are less likely to appreciate 
them... or you... after a few disasters. 


- Regain Willpower when you get a chance to revel in 
some potent sensual experience... especially if you get to share 
with someone else. (Novelty, though, is key; when you do the 
same thing over and over just to get a rush, that rush fades to 
boredom in no time.) 


Survivor 


Nothing stops you. Hardened by previous ordeals, you’ve 
developedasense of self-preservation that keeps you going when 
lesser souls surrender to the odds. You've got little patience or 
sympathy for people who won't do whatever it takes to endure 
hardship. "Shut up and step up or get the fuck out of my way" 
is your motto. Other folks might not make it through, but their 
weakness won't lead to your death. 


Perseverance is your defining trait. You do what you need 
to do with what you have to work with. Obstacles are just 
logistics, and excuses never healed a broken leg. 


Your weakness, though, is a profound Callousness. You've 
shut down so much in order to keep going that folks often 
wonder if you feel anything at all. 


- Regain Willpower whenever you survive a difficult 
situation through stubborn cunning and a refusal to give in. 


Traditionalist 

Devoted to tradition, you preserve the legacy of bygone 
wisdom. New ideas are shaky, untested by time, and thus flawed. 
The Old Ways often are best. They were good enough for our 
ancestors, and they'll begood enough for future generations too. 


Your Consistency is a virtue. Especially in an age like ours, 
in which novelty defines mainstream culture, it's good to have 
someone as authentic and dependable as you. 


Rigidity, though, can destroy you. Stasis tends to lead 
to Entropy, especially where mages are concerned. Though 
your dedication to tradition is admirable enough, you'll need 
to learn some flexibility if you want to adapt in this age and 
eventually transcend it. 


- Regain Willpower when your efforts prove the value of 
old-fashioned ways. 


Trickster 

The world is your plaything. People are your toys. A Lord 
or Lady of Misrule, you work an eternal scam against the dull 
background of everyday existence. Unlike the Contrary, you're less 
interested in political subversion than in personal gratification. It's 
notthatyou don'tcareaboutyour companions - you do. Still, when 
life is one big joke, it's better to be the setup than the punchline. 


Cleverness is your claim to fame. Your tricks display 
considerable flair. Unbound by typical concerns, you upend 
the order of gods and kings. Nothing holds you back except 
the few scruples you might actually possess. 


Untrustworthiness is your crown of thorns. Charming as 
you might be, there's an edge to you that smart people perceive. 
Your own tricks often backfire on you too, leaving you with 
less than you'd had at the beginning of that scheme. If and 
when you want something better for yourself, you'll need to 
know when to stop laughing and start taking ownership of 
your actions and their consequences. 


- Regain Willpower when your clever plans result in a big 
gain for you and your companions ora big loss for your enemies. 


Visionary 

Beyond typical perception, there's something more. You 
see it, though few other people do. Even by mage standards, 
you're a radical seer. Though you spend lots of time and energy 


chasing your vision, that deeper goal is worth whatever its 
search might cost. 


Inspiration guides your steps, inspiring you to see what 
others can't or won't perceive. You visualize some great ideal - 
the return of your people's glory, a world-changing technology, 
a path toward Earth's redemption, that sort of thing - with the 
passion of a true believer. 


Your weakness, though, is Pride in your stubborn search 
for truth. To Ascend, you must learn humility, seeking visions 
that other people can enjoy as well. 

- Regain Willpower when you convince folks that your 
vision is worth their devotion too, or when your actions turn 
your vision into practical reality. 


Aftributes 


When your character’s trying to dance a waltz, 
fast-talk a cop, or find an elusive fact ina pile of 
grimoires, her chances of success depend upon 
innate Attributes. Even if she doesn’t have the 
associated Abilities, her Physical, Social, and 
Mental Traits give her a slim chance of success. 


The core of most dice pools, your Attributes 
follow a human range between 1 and 5. Magick 
and other paranormal sources can raise or lower 
those Attributes beyond that range, but a typical 
willworker rates somewhere between 1 and 4 in his 
Attributes, with exceptional mages rating a 5. The average person, 
by comparison, probably has Attributes ranging between 1 and 3; 
ratings of 4 or 5 are pretty rare, and ones above 5 are essentially 
inhuman. Such high ratings might be common among vampires 
or magical beasts, perhaps, but not among mortal human beings... 
which, for all their power, is what mages essentially are. 


Physical 


Mages tend to favor brains over brawn. Even so, raw 
physicality is a vital part of certain pursuits. Shamans, witches, 
feral shapeshifters, and badass motherfuckers have high Physical 
Traits, often honed by tough lifestyles and demanding practices. 


Strength 


A measure of sheer physical might, this Trait reflects your ability 
to move obstacles, liftthings, and deal out damage with your fists and 
feetalone. High-Strength characters tend to be muscular and massive; 
that said, wiry folks can be surprisingly, even deceptively, strong. 


° Poor: You can lift roughly 40 Ib. (about 20 kg). 
ee Average: You lift around 100 Ib. (about 50 kg). 
ecc Good: You lift around 250 lb. (a little over 100 kg). 
ecce Exceptional: You can lift 400 Ib. (close to 200 kg). 


Outstanding: You can lift 650 Ib. (nearly 300 kg). 


Suggested Specialties: Lean, Deceptive Strength, Raw 
Power, Iron Grip 


Dexterity 

A vital attribute for conjurers, dancers, martial artists, 
and street survivors, this Trait measures agility, coordination, 
reflexes, and physical grace. High-Dexterity individuals seem 
poised and flexible even at rest, whereas low-Dexterity folks 
trip - figuratively and literally - over their own feet. 


° Poor: Fumble-fingers! 
ec Average: Coordinated enough for everyday life. 
eco 


Good: Quick-fingered and sure-footed. 


ecce Exceptional: Flowing poise and animal grace. 


eccce Outstanding: Cats regard you with envy. 


Suggested Specialties: Smooth, Graceful, Nimble, Feline 
Reflexes, Hand-Eye Coordination 


Stamina 


Reflecting toughness, endurance, and your tolerance 
for pain, disease, and fatigue, Stamina is a helpful Trait for 
mages on the go. Although the stereotypical tough customer 
is a massive human tank, wiry folks can be amazingly resilient. 


e Poor: Frail and sickly. 

ee Average: Typically healthy. 

eco Good: Hardy and tenacious. 

cooo Exceptional: Built for the long haul. 


Outstanding: Nothing seems to wear you down. 


Suggested Specialties: Tireless, Tough, Tenacious, 
Inexhaustible, Energizer Bunny 


Social 


The glue that holds human life together, social interaction 
depends upon the following Traits. It's easy to dismiss the 
importance of good looks or social savvy, but smart mages realize 
the inherent magic of sweet smiles and honey-baited words. 


Chapter Six: Creating the Character 273 


A ZA 


Specialties 


Attribute and Ability Traits have an additional element 
that can enhance their effectiveness: specialties. When 
a character has a rating of 4 or higher in a given Trait, 
the player can selecta specialty forthe Trait in question. 
Onrollsthat determine the success of an activity related 
to that Trait specialty, the player counts every 10 rolled 
as two successes, not just one. 


As an example, let’s say that Spider Chase, a Verbena 
flow-artist, has Athletics 4. She’s especially good at 
spinning fiery gear, so her player selects Fire-Spinning 
as a specialty. During a show, Spider executes a 
double-handed spinning toss with two flaming staves. 
The player, Inky, rolls Spider’s Dexterity (three dots) + 
Athletics (four dots), for a total of seven dice. Four of 
Inky’s dice come up as successes, but two of the four 
successes are 10s. Spider, then, has six successes, 
thanks to her specialty. The staves spin high into the 
air; Spider pauses, cocks her head, makes a “Come 
on..." gesture to her audience, and raises her hands 
just in time to perfectly catch both flaming staves and 
continue her dance. The crowd, as they say, goes wild. 


The various Traits below have a number of suggested 
specialties. You can invent new specialties along the 
lines of the suggested ones, so long as the Storyteller 
approves that new specialty. Original specialties 
should not be too broad (Keyboards for a Computer 
specialty) or potentially abused (Inflicting Damage 
as a Strength specialty). And even if you don't start 
off with 4 dots or more in a given Trait, you can still 
choose a specialty for it; certain Traits — like Crafts — 
actually require you to choose a particular specialty. 
That specialty won't grant the additional-success 
bonus until you reach a rating of 4, but it can flesh 
out your character by showing areas of expertise that 
will eventually help your mage excel in future tasks. 


Charisma 


Rooted in the Greek word for grace and favor, Charisma 
reflects the indefinable it that makes some folks stand out in 
a crowd. Game-wise, this Trait measures your presence and 
appeal. You might not be pretty if you have a high Charisma, 
but by all the gods, people notice you! 


° Poor: Faint flower on bland wallpaper. 
ee Average: You seem likeable enough. 
eco Good: Folks feel drawn to you. 

ccoo 


Exceptional: Shiny! 
eccce Outstanding: Your mere presence inspires 
trust, lust, and devotion. 

Suggested Specialties: Charming, Sexy, Bold, Inspirational, 
Sophisticated, Regal 


Manipulation 


Life’s filled with players and pawns. A high-Manipulation 
character knows how to work her end of that spectrum for 


274 . Mage: The Ascension 20" Anniversary Edition 


maximum effect. Whereas Charisma measures presence and 
Appearance reflects looks, Manipulation describes social 
cunning and innate psychology. We manipulate each other all 
the time, but no one likes to actually see the strings attached. 
As a result, a blown roll with this Trait can be disastrous. 


° Poor: No one buys your bullshit. 
ee Average: Folks tend to trust whatyou tell them. 
ecc Good: You're a smooth operator when you 


want to be. 


ecce Exceptional: When you speak, folks listen. 


ecccc Outstanding: "Dance, my puppets - dance!" 


Suggested Specialties: Guile, Charm, Eloquence, 
Emotional Appeals, True Believer 


Appearance 

Never underestimate the power of a pretty face! This Trait 
captures the appeal of sheer physical beauty... or the painful 
lack of it. Appearances can be deceiving, of course, especially 
among mages. Still, we’re hard-wired to respond well to a cute 
butt or a captivating grin. 


° Poor: “Ew.” 

ec Average: "You're okay." 

ecc Good: "Are you a model?" 

ecce Exceptional: "Here's my number." 
LELEA] 


Outstanding: “Make me your love-slave!” 


Suggested Specialties: Cute, Hawt, Captivating, Roguish, 
Adorable, Classic Hollywood Beauty 


Mental 


A mage thinks, therefore she is. Essential elements of any 

HU : : , DB 
mage's Path, the following Traits reflect your character's ability 
to focus, process, and react quickly to mental stimulation. 


Perception 


Magick demands clarity, so a high-Perception mage excels. 
This Trait measures your attention to detail, spatial awareness, 
sensual acuity, and that indefinable instinct that picks up the 
cues your conscious mind has not yet noticed. A reflection 
of intuition and awareness, the Perception Trait reveals clues 
more than it analyzes causes; that scent of roses nearby might 
be a rosebush, perfume, or a love spell's lingering Resonance 
- Perception alone won't tell you which one it is. 


° Poor: “Huh? What...?" 

eo Average: A typical eye for obvious things. 

eco Good: Unusually sensitive to the world nearby. 
eoeee 


Exceptional: A keen sense of your surroundings. 


secco Outstanding: More animal than man. 


Suggested Specialties: Uncanny Insight, Astute, Intuitive, 
Sharp Senses, Hawkeye 


Intelligence 


Perhaps the most vital tool a mage can possess, this Trait 
reflects your ability to process information, retain impressions, 
envision possibilities, and think not merely outside the box but 
perhaps without a box at all. A low-Intelligence character might 
not be exactly stupid, but she's blind to the complexities of life; 
one with a high Intelligence score, on the other hand, can wrap 
his head around sophisticated concepts and slippery facts. Despite 
preconceptions, you don't need schooling to be smart. Still, it 
takes brains to tackle advanced education and study, so characters 
with such backgrounds ought to have a respectable Intelligence. 


° Poor: A birthday candle in a halogen world. 

ec Average: A member of the majority. 

eco Good: Smart enough to hang at the big-kids’ 
table. 

eeeoe 


Exceptional: Utterly Brilliant. 


Outstanding: The dazzling intellect of a born 
genius. 


Suggested Specialties: Book-Learning, Deep Thoughts, 
Bright, Creative, Keen-Edged Mind 


Wits 

Even the deepest minds can be oblivious to change. 
Survival, however, often demands sharp wits. A reflection of 
mental reflexes, this Trait determines your ability to react to 
sudden perils, subtle cues, and the twisted logic that often fills 
a mage's world. Combat Initiative (see Chapter Nine, p. 399) 
depends upon a character's Wits; without them, a great thinker 
might soon become dead meat. 


. Poor: Muddled and scatter-brained. 

ee Average: A master of the obvious. 

ecc Good: Ms./ Mr. Multi-task. 

ecce Exceptional: So quick on the uptake that you 
take other folks down. 

eeccc 


Outstanding: A mental Shiva or Kali. 


Suggested Specialtiess Combat Reflexes, Street Survivor, 
Cunning, Feral, Fox-Witted 


Core Abilities 


Awakened folks command a wide array of 
Talents, Skills, and Knowledges. Although 
certain Traits, called core Abilities, are common 
among mages - and are therefore listed on the 
character sheet - a wide range of specialized 
secondary Abilities can be found after this 
section. The following innate knacks, learned 
proficiencies, and intellectual pursuits are 
essentially defaults in the modern mage's world; 
you won't have them all, but most characters 
are at least familiar with the majority of these Traits. 


Talents 


Inborn affinities refined by practice, Talents reveal a 
character's natural tendencies and life-honed gifts. 


Alertness 


You sense things coming long before anyone else does. A 
combination of keen instincts and sharp thinking, this Ability helps 
you size up situations and respond accordingly. Beast-folk, survivors, 
bright courtiers and battle-honed veterans have high Alertness ratings. 


° Novice: "I've got a bad feeling about this..." 
eo Practiced: Your hackles rise at the first sign of trouble. 
eco Skillful: You catch the threat beneath a 


whispered voice. 


cece Expert: You’ve already noted three attackers 


and mapped four avenues of escape. 


LLLI) Master: Those ninjas might as well be wearing 


pink neon clown suits. 


Possessed By: Spies, Bodyguards, Feral Kids, Street 
Survivors, Shapeshifters, War Veterans 


Suggested Specialties: Ambushes, Instincts, Omens, Urban 
Wastelands, Combat Zones, Covert Pursuit, Warning Signs 


Art 


Also known as Artistic Expression, this Talent reflects your 
ability with a visual or performing art: drawing, singing, acting, 
writing, painting, dance, sculpture, and so forth. Given such 
talents, you can work within your chosen medium to produce 
works of startling power. Depending on your idiom, you might 
create realistic renderings, engaging exaggerations, or wildly 
avant-garde experimental art. Higher levels reflect your ability 
to impress your audience; in art, that means striking a chord of 
Truth in people even when your work isn’t remotely realistic. 


Aswith other related general Abilities, each specialty reflects 
a different medium or field, of artistic endeavor. Each type of 
art - dance, painting, etc. - must be purchased as a separate 
specialty. However, because the principles of art are related 
even when the techniques differ, you can purchase additional 
specialties for only four points, assuming you have at least four 
dots in Art and one specialty already in place. See The Well- 
Skilled Craftsman (p. 279) for further details. 


° Novice: You're creative but unskilled. 

ee Practiced: You've put some time and work into 
your chosen medium. 

ecc Skillful: Professionalartcould beaviablecareeroption. 

LEEKEJI 


Expert: You’re a working pro whose work 
displays fascinating appeal and skill. 


coocoo Master: You'rean acknowledged master of your field. 


Chapter Six: Creating the Character 275 


DNA 


rf 


— 


Optional Rule: Minimum Abilities 


If you focus powerful magick through a specific Ability, as detailed in Chapter Ten’s section Focus and the Arts, then 
it's a good idea to be extremely skilled with that Ability. As an optional rule, the Storyteller may insist that a character 
needs to have at least one dot in the focus-based Ability for every dot he has in the Sphere Rank of an Effect focused 
through that Ability. If, for example, Autumn uses artwork (and thus, the Art Talent) as a focus instrument, then she needs 


to have at least one dot in Art for every dot she has in the Spheres she uses artwork to focus. In short, she can't use 
artwork to focus a Forces 3/ Prime 2 Effect unless she has at least three dots in Art. 


This option demands a certain "minimum competency level" on focus-related Abilities. It may also become too cumbersome 
and/ or complicated to employ in every situation. Even so, we do suggest using this rule for certain Abilities - Computer, 
Do, Hypertech, Martial Arts, Science, and Technology - that are vital elements of a mage's practice. An unskilled martial 
artist, after all, shouldn’t be able to use devastating magickal techniques as extensions of his skill. 


Possessed By: Art Students, Fine Artists, Professional 
Artists, Talented Kids, Dedicated Hobbyists, Reclusive Geniuses, 
Meditative Ascetics, Mages Who Focus Magick Through Art 


Suggested Specialties: Painting, Video, Singing, Acting, 
Dance, Mixed Media, CGI, Model-Making, Classical Art, 
Avant-Garde, Unrefined Intuition, Mad Brilliance, Uncanny 
Truths, Primitive Techniques, specific musical instruments 
(Guitar, Drums, Piano, etc.) 


Athletics 


Fitness is your passion. While other folks sit on the 
sidelines, you’re running races, scoring touchdowns, biking to 
and from work, and developing prowess with intense practice. 
Folks don’t usually picture wizards hanging around the gym, 
but you’re an exception to that stereotype. “A sound mind in 
a sound body" is your motto. What good is it to be a master of 
reality, after all, if your reality involves a fat ass and flabby gut? 


Like Art, Athletics has many different specialties - running, 
climbing, swimming, and so forth. And like Art, Crafts, and other 
broad categories, you can buy specialties to reflect different athletic 
pursuits. (The Well-Skilled Craftsman option applies here as well.) 


° Novice: You were pretty decent in PE class. 

eo Practiced: Regular exercise is essential to your 
life. 

ecc Skillful: You are one fit sonofabitch! 

ecce Expert: Gym-rats and pro athletes take notes 
from you. 

eeccc 


Master: You could qualify for the Olympics... 
and you might actually compete! 


Possessed By: Jocks, Cyborgs, Fitness Gurus, Personal 
Trainers, Professional Dancers, Martial Artists, Underwear 


Models, TV Stars 
Suggested Specialties Bodybuilding, Cycling, Climbing, 


Equestrian, Swimming, Survival Training, Extreme Endurance, Flow- 
Arts, Parkour, Skiing, specificsports (Football, Basketball, Hockey, etc.) 


Awareness 

You've got uncanny perceptions. While alert folks spot 
everyday clues, your instincts cue in on the so-called supernatural 
side of life. Perhaps you've simply got that feeling about things 


276  Ma$e: The Ascension 20" Anniversary Edition 


- some people do, even if they're not Awakened as such. More 
likely, you've spent enough time around the magical world to 
sense its effects in your presence. 


At lower levels, this Talent grants a nebulous perception of 
uncanny phenomena; higher ratings in the Trait reveal auras, 
expose the secretive Night-Folk, and open your eyes to the 
spiritual Periphery. In game terms, you can use Perception + 
Awareness to spot paranormal effects, detect magick, recognize 
Resonance Echoes, and so forth, assuming they’ re within close 
proximity of you. The more successes you roll, the more detailed 
your impressions become. 


For a reference chart of aura colors and textures, see 
Chapter Ten, (p.507). 


° Novice: You possess a gift for spotting hidden 
truths. 
oe Practiced: Magic exists, and you often sense 


its presence. 


eco Skillful: You can see auras, and you understand 
what those colors mean. 


ecco Expert: The supernatural world reveals itself 


to you in disturbing detail. 


eccoc Master: You're so attuned to the mystic realm 


that many folks consider you insane. 


Possessed By: Canny Grannies, Wise Spies, Crazy 
Shamans, Demented Seers, Insightful Kids, Mad Scientists, 
Those Touched By God 


Suggested Specialties: Omens, Auras, Resonance, Weird 
Feelings, Mystic Instincts, Hidden Magic, Spiritual Vidare 


Brawl 


You kick ass. Maybe you grew up hard and mean, or maybe 
you're schooled in basic self-defense. Either way, your fists and 
feet are weapons - probably not deadly, but a lot more effective 
than random swings from unskilled brutes. Not only do you 
know how to fight, but you’re naturally good at it. You’ve got the 
skill, will, and training to hurt someone using nothing more 
than human cunning and animal ferocity. 

(For armed fighting, see the Melee Skill, and for refined 
unarmed techniques, see the Martial Arts Skill. Both appear 
below.) 


Optional Rule: 
Professional Skills and Expert Knowledges 


Human beings master many skills. No list, no matter how expansive, could hope to cover them all. Thus, you could 
incorporate the optional rule of Professional Skills and Expert Knowledges: broad categories of Abilities that aren't 
covered by other Traits in this section. 


Astheirnames suggest, the Professional Skills category includes disciplinesrefined through study and practice, whereas Expert 
Knowledges comprise fields of learning honed by experience. Such Skills range from physical disciplines like Cooking and 
Gambling to mental refinements like Camouflage or Weaponry. Knowledges, in turn, concentrate upon intellectual pursuits 
with practical applications: Bribery, Power-Brokering, Journalism, and so forth. Many of the secondary Abilities described 
in various World of Darkness sourcebooks can be summed up as either a Professional Skill or an Expert Knowledge. 


(The 20^ Anniversary Editions of Vampire and Werewolf feature a third optional category, Hobby Talent, to 
cover innate abilities orm by practice. You can use this category too, although many of the Abilities described in those 
rulebooks — Carousing, Fortune-Telling, and so forth — are more than just hobbies to folks who practice the Awakened 
Arts and Sciences.) 


As with Art, Crafts, Esoterica and so on, each Professional or Expert Ability must be purchased separately; the Professional 
Skill: Cooking does not teach your character how to gamble. If your group uses the Well-Skilled Craftsman option 
(see the sidebar of that name, on p. 279), then that rule applies to these catch-all Skills and Knowledges as well. 


Novice/ Dabbler: You've read a few books or taken a class or two. 


Practiced/ Student: You've studied at a college or vocational school. 


Skillful/ Scholar: Book-learning, combined with practical application, gives you a decent grounding in this 


field. 


Expert/ Professor: You're good enough to teach other students — perhaps even other professionals — what you 
know. 


*-eeee Master: Other experts come to you for guidance. 


Possessed By: Anyone with practical study and experience with the trade 


Suggested Skills: Climbing, Escapology, Fast-Draw, specific skill-sets (Gambling, Cooking, Escapology, etc.) 


Suggested Knowledges: Alternative History, Bribery, Government, Propaganda, Spycraft, Subcultures, Terrorism, 


Theology, Vice 


° Novice: You had a tough childhood. 
ee Practiced: You're from The Bad Part of Town. 
eco Skillful: When punches fly, you’re among the 


last folks standing. 


cece Expert: Extreme fighting champs shiver when 
you enter the ring. 


LII) Master: "See me hit you, you go down." 


Possessed By: Bikers, Brawlers, Bullies, Former Punching Bags, 
Bodyguards, Military Veterans, Scary Folks With Bad Tempers 


Suggested Specialties: Barroom, Boxing, Beast-Form 
Fighting, Dirty Fighting, Disarming, Peaceful Warrior 


Empathy 

Aninnatesense of emotional energies, this Talent provides you 
with insight - perhaps more insight than you might want - into how 
the people around you feel. Ideally, this helps you understand them 
better and perhaps allows you to calm, rouse, or otherwise adjust 
their emotional state. On the flipside, it might leave you vulnerable 
to their passions (a common faultamong Ecstatic mages), or it could 


leavethem vulnerable to your machinations. Combined with Mind- 
based Effects, Empathy can be a potent tool - or weapon - in the 
hands of an Awakened character. For details, see Mundane Skills 
and Magickal Effects in Chapter Ten, (pp. 532-535). 


° Novice: You're pretty decent at noticing 
emotional cues. 
ee Practiced: You’re the crying shoulder for your 
friends. 
eco Skillful: It’s fairly hard to deceive you. 
a , 
ecce Expert: Even below the surface, a person's true 


feelings seem obvious to you. 
coocoo Master: To your eyes, most people are open 
books. 
Possessed By: Ecstatic Mages, Shamans, Healers, Seducers, 
Sales Reps, Therapists, Trusted Friends, Nephandi 


Suggested Specialties: Hidden Feelings, Subtle Cues, 
Emotional Manipulation, Trust, Sensing Emotions, Life-Force 
Fluctuations, Interpersonal Psychology, Seeing Past the Mask, 
“I Know What You Need” 


Chapter Six: Creating the Character 277 


of hr 


278 


Ma$e: The Ascension 20^ Anniversary Edition 


Expression 

Life is your canvas, and you excel at making impressions 
upon it. Through theatrical flair and audience psychology, you 
can rouse emotions, shift opinions, and grab the spotlight in 
social situations. Although this Trait can be used to handle 
any social situation, it's best used to make general impressions. 
For specific artistic endeavors, see Art, above. 


° Novice: When you speak, folks notice. 

ec Practiced: Your passions capture other people's 
interest. 

ecc Skillful: You rock the crowd with a voice that's 
loud. 

ecce Expert: In this media-glutted world, you still 
blaze bright. 

coocoo Master: Poets, prophets, and politicians wish 


they were you. 


Possessed By: Rock Stars, Media Pundits, Ecstatic Mages, 
Executives, Poets, Leaders, Politicians, Bloggers, Rabble- 
Rousers, Hip-Hop MCs, Professional Celebrities 


Suggested Specialties: Passion Plays, Poetic Eloquence, 
Motivational Speaking, Tactical Rhetoric, Preaching, 
Command, Shut-Downs, Rocking the Mic 


Intimidation 

You scare people - perhaps not through overt threats 
(although, of course, that works too), but by the simple virtue 
of your presence. When you choose to, you can dominate most 
situations. Maybe you understand the unconscious cues of social 
alpha-ism or have a way with cutting words. Or perhaps you're 
simply big enough, mean enough or don’tgiveafuck enough to 
inspire submission. Whatever your secret might be, this Talent 
gives you an edge when staring down other people, beasts, and 
possibly other entities as well. 


° Novice: Playground terror. 

ee Practiced: Clique leader. 

eco Skillful: Professional dominant. 

ecce Expert: Alpha wolf. 

eccce Master: Queen or king of all you survey. 


Possessed By: Men in Black, Cyborgs, Cops, Witches, 
Mad Scientists, Outlaws, Bullies, Beast-Folk, Pro Doms, Drill 
Sergeants, Samuel L. Jackson 


Suggested Specialties: Bad Cop, BDSM, Pack Hierarchy, 
Cold Stare, Brutal Threats, Topping From Below, Pants- 
Crapping Terror 


Leadership 

Amore refined sort of control, this Talent helps you inspire 
other folks to follow your lead. It might involve commanding 
presence, assertive words, clear determination, or simply the 
Right Stuff when said stuff is needed. When you bark, folks 
hop - not always with compliance, but with, at the very least, 
a grudging admission that you seem to know what you’re 
doing... even when you don’t. 


Optional Rule: The Well-Skilled Craftsman 


Mages excel at many different fields of endeavor and focus their Arts through quite a few of them. As a result, rather 
than present a ton of related but separate Abilities, the Well-Skilled Craftsman option allows your character to master 
a wide range of similar skills. 


This optional rule lets you purchase specific specialties that reflect certain skill sets within a related Ability. Rather than 
buying the Ability several times over, you simply define a single specialty as your primary concentration within that Ability. 
Even if you have only one dot in your Ability, choose a specialty to reflect your character's preferred field. Then, when 
you reach four dots, you can buy additional specialties for just four experience points per specialty. This way, a skillful 
practitioner can quickly expand his expertise. 


For example, let’s say that Spider Chase has Crafts, with a specialty in Leatherwork. When she reaches Crafts 4, she 
can purchase additional Crafts specialties (we'll say Tailoring and Vehicle Repair) for only four experience points per 
specialty, or eight points total for those two. Of course, the character has to learn those skills in the course of the story — 
she can't just wake up knowing how to repair cars! But assuming that Spider has the chance to broaden her repertoire, 
she can become a Well-Skilled Craftsman by building upon the principles she already understands. 


This option also applies to the Art and Athletics Talents; the Firearms, Martial Arts, and Melee Skills; and the Academics, 
Esoterica, Lore, Politics, and Science Knowledge Abilities, because each one represents a related field of very different 
skills. Hobby Talent and Professional and Expert Abilities (see p.277) expand this option too - see those entries 


for details. 


° Novice: Head cheerleader. 
oo Practiced: Quarterback. 
ecc Skillful: Executive. 

coco Expert: Tycoon. 

TP 


Master: Nick Fury. 


Possessed By: Officers, Managers, Pundits, Preachers, 
Teachers, Team Leaders, Cult Leaders, Gang Leaders, Politicians 


Suggested Specialties: Competent, Inspiring, Regal, Harsh, 
Do-OrDie, Soft-Voiced Command 


Streetwise 

The underworld is your home, and you know it pretty 
well. Folks who normally don’t talk to no one will open up to 
you. Probably raised in or around the streets, you understand 
the codes and cues outside the law. In addition to some minor 
tricks of the trade (jimmying locks, fencing goods, swiping stuff 
when no one’s looking), you know how to move and speak and 
otherwise fit in where cops and angels fear to tread. 


° Novice: Rock musician. 

eo Practiced: Suburban dope dealer. 
eco Skillful: Hip-Hop MC. 

TP 


Expert: Gang leader. 


eocce Master: Gang lord. 


Possessed By: Bartenders, Hookers, Hackers, Pimps, 
Street People, Cops, Detectives, Street Ministers, Musicians, 
Runaways, Drug Dealers, Activists, Journalists, Taxi Drivers 


Suggested Specialties: Theft, Survival Skills, Outlaw 
Hacker Culture, Crash Space, Street Politics, Urban Tribes, 
Trust, Hiding Spots, Sex Trade, Drug Trade, Music Culture, 
Gangs, Seeing Nothing Yet Everything 


Subterfuge 


You're good at winning people's trust and then turning it 
to your advantage - and also good at spotting folks who try to 
do the same thing to you. (This second element, incidentally, 
replaces the old Ability Sense Deception.) Perhaps you use your 
powers for good... but probably not. A trade secret for sneaks, 
gossips, grifters, and frauds, this Talent helps you get around 
social barriers, figure out what people want, and then appeal 
to their desires. It doesn't have to involve outright lying, but 
let's just say you re really good at lawyering the truth. 


° Novice: Cute kid. 
ee Practiced: Smalltime hustler. 
eco Skillful: Successful lawyer. 


Expert: Career politician. 


eecce Master: Master spy. 


Possessed By: Syndicate Agents, Secret Agents, Home- 
Wreckers, Ad Agency Personnel, Lobbyists, Crooks, Shapeshifters, 
Infiltrators, Embezzlers, Hustlers, Attorneys, Sociopaths 

Suggested Specialties: Con Games, Sexual Manipulation, 
False Innocence, Politics, Law, Cheating, Undermining 
Opposition, Sensing Deceptions 


Skills 


Whereas Talents reflect innate affinities, Skills represent 
things you've learned to do. If your character lacks the 


appropriate Skill, you add *1 to the difficulty of an associated 
die roll. 


Crafts 


You know how to create and repair things with your hands. 
Pursuing a particular trade (and perhaps a number of other 
ones too), you've begun to master the techniques involved in 


Chapter Six: Creating the Character 279 


m 222 - 


4 


A E 


carpentry, mechanics, leatherwork, metallurgy, or any other 
handicraft you could name. 


When purchasing this Skill, you must define a specialty for 
your character even if you don't have the usual four dots in the 
Trait; this specialty defines a type of Craft you pursue, and you 
get the bonus once you achieve at least four dots in that field. 
If you want your character to have several Crafts, they should be 
purchased separately. A mechanic who's also good with ceramics, 
woodworking, and home repair, for example, would have several 
different Craft specialties to reflect her ability with each one. 


° Novice: You sorta know what you're doing. 

ec Practiced: Basic skills have given way to working 
knowledge. 

ecc Skillful: You're pretty damn good, if you must 
say so yourself! 

cooo Expert: You're highly respected within your field. 

LEKE] 


Master: There’s little you can’t do when you 
set your mind to doing it. 


Possessed By: Inventors, Mechanics, Artisans, Bohemians, 
Servants, Recreationists, Technicians, Wanderers, Survivalists, 
Mad Scientists, Obsessed Superheroes 


Suggested Specialties: Armor, Weaponsmith, Carpentry, 
Invention, Tailoring, Design, Vehicle Repair, Home Repair, 
Leatherwork, High-Tech Tinkering 


Drive 

Cars? You know cars. Maybe trucks too, if you’re good 
enough. This Skill reflects the everyday complexities of 
automobile handling: the higher your rating, the better you are 
behind the wheel. A single dot represents basic operation ofan 
automatic transmission car. Higher levels open up a wider range 
of vehicles at your command. Typical driving doesn't demand 
a roll, but if you find yourself in a race, a chase, or some other 
challenging circumstance, you'd best hope that you have a 
few dots in this Skill. The results otherwise could be... messy. 


For game rules that deal with driving and so forth, see 
Vehicle Systems in Chapter Nine, (pp. 458-462). 


° Novice: Sunday driver. 

ec Practiced: Typical American. 
eco Skillful: New York taxi driver. 
ecce Expert: Professional racer. 
LLLI) Master: Bond - James Bond. 


Possessed By: Chauffeurs, Instructors, Truckers, 
Daredevils, Delivery Drivers, Secret Agents, Getaway Specialists, 
Stunt Artists 


Suggested Specialties: Racing, Pursuit, Shadowing, Stunts, 
Vintage Cars, Heavy Trucks, Long-Distance, Shaking Tails, Bad 
Conditions, Snow and Ice, Off-Road, Showing Off 


Etiquette 

Social graces are your forté. Through a blend of cultured 
mannersand peopleskills, you know howto makea good impression. 
Given the elaborate gamesmanship and baroque expectations found 


280 Mage: The Ascension 20" Anniversary Edition 


at certain levels ofsociety (and the local customs of cultures other than 
your own), this can grant an extremely valuable edge in negotiations, 
seductions, and other forms of diplomacy. And because social rules 
often exclude everyone except “the right sort of people,” this Skill 
provides a passkey to many important engagements. 


e Novice: You can attend fine restaurants without 
embarrassing yourself. 


ee Practiced: You’ve got impressive manners and 
a sense for saying the right things. 


ecc Skillful: Wonderfully cultured, you know your 
way around a meal, party, or conversation. 


ccoo Expert: A social chameleon, you put folks at 
ease almost anywhere. 


ecccc Master: You're a valued guest in nearly any 


situation. 


Possessed By: Diplomats, Emissaries, Negotiators, Nobility, 
Executives, World Travelers, Social Climbers, Old-Money Heirs, Spies 


Suggested Specialties: High Society, Royalty, Dining, 
Subcultures, International Travel, Umbral Courts, Master 
Mages, Internet Culture, Digital Web, Technocratic Politesse 


Firearms 


Guns are your thing. You might not be an expert marksman, 
butyou’re at least familiar with the basics of shooting, cleaning, 
and maintaining firearms. A character with at least two dots in 
Firearms knows her way around a range, ammunition types, 
and the pros and cons of various makes and models. 


Because your average shooting range doesn’t carry plasma 
cannons, this Skill doesn’t cover energy-projector weapons. 
(For those chops, see Energy Weapons in the Secondary Skills 
section, below.) With the proper training and experience, however, 
specialties for the Firearms Skill can cover heavy weapons: machine 
guns, bazookas, rocket launchers, and so on; see The Well-Skilled 
Craftsman, above. 


° Novice: Gun range newbie. 

ec Practiced: Hunter. 

eco Skillful: Typical cop or soldier. 
ecce Expert: Sharpshooter. 

coocoo Master: Frank Castle. 


Possessed By: Assassins, Survivalists, Washed-Up Rock 
Stars, Police, Military Personnel, Enforcers, Bodyguards, Militia 
Members, Gang Members, Black Suits, Self-Defense Enthusiasts, 
Pissed-Off Crazy People 


Suggested Specialties: Sniper, Quick-Draw, Target 
Shooting, Rifles, Handguns, Drive-Bys, Military Hardware, 
Heavy Weapons, Vintage Firearms, Cybernetic Weaponry 


Martial Arts 


The many refinements of hand-to-hand combat have 
produced thousands of martial art styles, from brutal Greek 
pankration to sublime t'ai chi. You pursue one or more of these 
disciplines, so your fighting techniques are more effective than 
simple punches and kicks. 


: Seal WES 


Because of its extraordinary disciplines and refinements, the Akashic Art of Do is not considered a normal martial art. 
Characters who practice Do musthave the Do Talent instead of or in addition to the Martial Arts Skill. The same character 
could have both Abilities, having studied a lesser martial art before embarking upon the arduous path of Do. If she chooses 


to pursue Do, however, she may not buy any further dots in Martial Arts, as such devotion demands total commitment, 
without the distractions of lesser practices. For more details, see the entries for Do and Martial Arts in the Combat 
section of Chapter Nine, 


In game terms, the Martial Arts Skill reflects hard-won 
expertise in some combat form. Because of the intense training, 
specifictechniques, applied philosophies, and discipline involved, 
this Skill must be learned through practice and taught bya teacher 
who’s skilled in the same martial arts form you pursue. A savate 
teacher, after all, can’t teach you drunken-monkey kung fu. 


In return, this Skill grants access to a variety of special 
combat maneuvers described in the Combatsection of Chapter 
Nine. An accomplished martial artist can also use her practice 
to focus magickal Effects: powerful strikes, healing techniques, 
Mind-based powers, and so on. (See the Martial Arts entries 
in Chapter Nine, pp. 423-426 and Chapter Ten, pp. 580-581.) 
And because martial arts involve scientific applications, and 
are very much a part of accepted reality, Technocrats often use 
them too. If it’s good enough for Agent Smith, after all, then 
any good Technocrat can employ such arts! 


In real life, most martial artists pursue many different 
styles. Rather than buy this Skill separately for every different 
form your character knows, you may choose the Well-Skilled 
Craftsman option to reflect a different style of combat. Someone 
with lots of dots and specialties also has lots of options when 
it comes to kicking ass. 


As suggested above under the Optional Rule: Minimum 
Abilities, a mage who uses martial arts as the practice and/ or 
instrument of her magickal focus should have at least one dot 
in Martial Arts for every dot she has in the highest Sphere she 
uses for martial arts-based Effects. Otherwise, the Effect-Ranks 
she can focus through her martial arts are limited to the dots 
she has in this Ability; a mage with Martial Arts 1, therefore, 
could not focus Rank 2-5 Effects through her martial arts. As 
noted earlier, Chapter Ten contains details about focus, Sphere 
Ranks, and Effects. 


° Novice: Raw beginner. 
eo Practiced: Experienced student. 
eco Skillful: Devotee. 


cooo Expert: Accomplished combatant. 


coocoo Master: Formidable master. 


Possessed By: Cops, Soldiers, Gang Members, Old Masters, 
Black Suits, Self-Defense Advocates, Athletes, Stunt Artists, 
The Most Unlikely People 


Suggested Specialties: Soft Style (snake, monkey, drunken 
style, etc.), Hard Style (tiger, mantis, etc.), Aikido, Judo, Karate, 
Muay Thai, Kuei Lung Chuan, etc. 


Meditation 


Ground, center, breathe, and relax. This Skill helps you 
sweep aside the clutter of everyday existence and find a spot within 
yourself that offers calm. Depending on your preferred style, your 
background, and the purpose for which you practice meditation, 
this could involve simple quiet time, elaborate postures and breath 
control, religious devotion, and even ecstatic dance or prayer. 


In game terms, the Meditation Skill can help your 
character make up for lost sleep, hibernate, gain artistic or 
mystical insights, unravel patterns or enigmas, or refresh your 
Quintessence rating (see the Avatar and Quintessence Trait 
entries later in this chapter). 


A character with Meditation often has at least one dot 
in the Esoterica Knowledge Trait. Many forms of magick, or 
feats like astral travel, also use meditation as an instrument of 
focus - see Chapter Ten, (pp. 594-596), for details. 


° Novice: You can ground and center for short 
periods of time. 

ee Practiced: Regular practice has deepened and 
extended your abilities. 


eco Skillful: Even under distracting conditions, 
you know how to find your center. 

cooo Expert: “Use the Force, Luke...” 

coocoo Master: An island of calm is yours whenever 


you want or need it. 


Possessed By: Akashics, Yogis, Monks, Hypnotists, 
Therapists, Clergy, Martial Artists, Hippies 


Suggested Specialties: Zen, Yoga, Do, Trance, Nodes, 
Relaxation, Therapy, Tantra, T'ai Chi, Virtual Reality, Focus, 
Meditative Movement, Grace Under Pressure 


Melee 


Weapons are extensions of your own limbs, and you know 
how to use them with brutal efficiency. When fists and feet just 
aren't enough to get the job done, this Skill literally gives you 
the fighting edge... or the blunt instrument, if need be. Melee 
grants your character a working knowledge of weaponry and its 
practical effects in combat. Certain groups, like gangs or martial 
arts fellowships, prize skill at arms; if you wanna hang with such 
people, this Trait is essential to your credibility... and perhaps 
your survival, too. 


Certain weapon maneuvers (like tangling someone up 
in a chain) may be used only with certain weapons or with 


Chapter Six: Creating the Character 


28l 


A 


A 


à 


X 


i 


255 


r 
f 
| 
| 


AN TT 


| 


weapons-based martial arts. As with other fighting skills, the 

Well-Skilled Craftsman option may apply. 

° Novice: You can swing a club or blade around 
without hurting yourself... much. 

ec Practiced: You've earned a bit of skill... maybe 
even enough for a real-life fight. 


ecc Skillful: You're kinda badass. 
cooo Expert: You're seriously badass. 


Master: Your skill intimidates the pros. 


Possessed By: Cops, Military Personnel, Spies, Killers, 
Outlaws, Martial Artists, Street Folks, Barroom Brawlers, 


SCA Members 


Suggested Specialties: Blades, Polearms, Staves, Stunts, 
Combat Sports, Weapons of Opportunity, Kendo, Fencing, 
Martial Arts Weapons 


Research 

It ain't glamorous, but if you're a mage, you need to learn 
how to track things down. This Skill helps you locate sources 
of information - public libraries, private archives, Internet 
searches, occult collections, verbal lore, and so forth - and 
then skim them for the information you seek. You might not 
find exactly what you're looking for; some things can be found 
only in special places. Still, a successful Research roll can help 
you get on the right track, even if specific facts remain elusive... 
at least for now. 


s Novice: Buffy. 
eo Practiced: Anya. 
Skillful: Willow. 
Expert: Giles. 


Master: Fred. 


Possessed By: Monster Hunters, Research Assistants, 
Archive Keepers, Librarians, Detectives, Writers, Journalists, 
Scientists 


Suggested Specialties: Arcane Collections, Forbidden Lore, 
Hidden Sources, Secrets, Net Searches, Oral Traditions, specific 
topics (Crime, Medicine, Politics, History, etc.) 


Stealth 


Avital proficiency for folks who want or need to get around 
without being noticed, this Skill helps you move in silence, take 
advantage ofyour environment, and spot potential hazards before 
they blow your cover. Other characters have a chance to notice 
you, of course (see Chapter Nine, p. 403), but a high rating in 
this Skill can beat most mundane forms of observation. 


e Novice: With dark clothes, you might not be 
spotted at night. 

ee Practiced: You often sneak out pastyour parents. 

ecc Skillful: A genuine sneak, you elude casual 
detection. 

cove Expert: Just doin’ what a ninja’s gotta do... 

eeeee 


Master: Batman’s taking notes. 


Mage: The Ascension 20" Anniversary Edition 


Possessed By: Spies, Burglars, Runaways, Star-Crossed 
Lovers, Hunters, Assassins, Vigilantes 


Suggested Specialties: Blending Into Shadows, Woodlands, 
Alleys, Concealment, Squeaky Floors, Moving Silently, 
Shadowing a Target 


Survival 

In the modern consumer age, most folks have forgotten 
how to survive without a store close by. Not you, though. A 
combination of learned knowledge and animal instinct helps 
you locate sources of food, water, shelter, and relative safety. 
You can probably find your way through the wilderness or 
urban wastelands, puzzling out the local hazards long enough 
to keep you alive... at least for now. 


Very basic survival skills apply to almost any 
environment; advanced tasks, however - or extremely harsh 
or alien environments - demand specific Survival specialties. 
A bit of backpacking experience, for example, won't help 
you much in Death Valley or downtown Mumbai. À variant 
on this Skill, Urban Survival, gives you the expertise to live 
off the streets, dive Dumpsters, and figure out where - and 
where not - to grab a nap in the cities and suburbs of this 


World of Darkness. 


For rules about survival situations, see Environmental 
Hazards in Chapter Nine, (pp. 435-436). 
° Novice: You've done some day-hikes on 
established trails. 


ec Practiced: Plenty of time outdoors has taught 
you decent skills. 


ecc Skillful: You can live off the land, make traps, 
and spot most obvious hazards. 

ecce Expert: You'd probably survive the Hunger 
Games. 

LELEA] 


Master: The wilderness is your full-time home. 


Possessed By: Hunters, Hikers, Shamans, Survivalists, 
Fugitives, Reality TV Contestants, Rural Folk, Rangers, 
Members of Indigenous Cultures 


Suggested Specialties: Old-School Wisdom, Traps, 
Shelters, Weather Hazards, End-Times Preparedness, specific 
environments (Desert, Jungle, Woodlands, Suburbs, etc.) 


Technology 

In our high-tech world, this Skill often comes in handy. A 
catch-all group of familiar tech affinities, Technology reflects a 
working knowledge of typical developed-world gadgets. Most 
urbanized characters have at least one dot in Technology but 
seldom more than three. This Ability covers simple operations 
and repairs; for advanced forms of technology and hypertech, 
see Crafts above, or Computers and Secondary Skills below. 
For game systems that deal with mundane tech, see Inventing, 
Modifying, and Improving Technology in Chapter Nine, (pp. 
463-464). 


° Novice: Normal household technology is a 
snap for you. 


ee Practiced: Basic household, IT, and automotive 
maintenance and repairs are easy enough to 
manage, and you know how to tinker around 
with simple electronic tech. 


Skillful: You've got enough mechanics savvy to 
create your own minor-league tech, repair most 
everyday items, and worksimple technomagick 
with the goods at your command. 


ecce Expert: You're a whiz with typical technology, 


invent some pretty advanced stuff, and whip 
up impressive gadgets outside the range of 
everyday Sleepertech. 


eocce Master: A technological artisan, you can design, 


construct, operate, and repair unique devices 
and astonishing inventions. If you employ 
technomagick, then your creations surpass 
Sleepertech by a pretty wide margin. 


Possessed By: Technicians, Inventors, Repair Specialists, 
Technomancers 


Suggested Specialties: Electronics, Vehicles, Modification, 
Invention, Media Tech, Technomagick 


Knowledges 


Certain Abilities demand learning. Taught through a combi- 
nation of schooling and experience, these Traits reflect things that 
your character understands on an intellectual level. Although some 
of them, like Computer or Medicine, involve physical practice too, 
they exist mostly in the realm of consciousness only. Without the 
proper Knowledge, your character may not even attempt to roll for 
certain Knowledge-based feats. It’s not surprising, then, that mages 
depend on Knowledge Traits more than many other characters do. 


Academics 


Despite the failings of the American system, mages cannot 
afford to be ignorant. Whether they're self-taught, unusually 
accomplished, or schooled in some system beyond the typical 
public education found in the U.S., most Awakened folks 
display an unusual degree of scholastic achievement. 


This Knowledge reflects your overall academic understanding 
- language skills, math, history, and so forth. As with Crafts, you 
should choose a specialty to reflect your greatest area of expertise. 
(The Well-Skilled Craftsman option applies.) Even outside that 
specialty, however, your Academics rating reflects your general 
competence for scholastic subjects. And though every mage ought to 
have atleast one dot in this Trait, many groups (especially Hermetics, 
Etherites, Solificati, and the various branches of the Technocracy) 
advocate much higher levels of education and knowledge. 


For scientific fields, see pp. 288-289. For languages, see 
that Merit in Appendix II, p. 643. 


° Dabbler: Basicprimaryandsecondary education. 


ee Student: Basic university education, equivalent 
to a two-year degree. 


ecc Scholar: Advanced university education, 
equivalent to a fouryear degree. 

ecco Professor: Advanced specialized study, plus an 
advanced university-level education. 

LEKEI 


Master: Refined and advanced scholarship, 
with highly respected academic achievements. 


Possessed By: Students, Scholars, Scientists, Journalists, 
Authors, Wizards 


Suggested Specialties: Teaching, Liberal Arts, specific field 
of study (History, Language, Folklore, Politics, etc.) 


Computer 


One of the cornerstones of the world as we know it now, 
the computer was still a pretty strange device in 1993; by 2013, 
however, most industrial-world folks under 50 years old (and 
many people far older than that) know their way around basic 
home and office computer systems. Computers are also far easier 
to use in 2015 than they were in 1993, and so the degree to which 
your character understands and employs a computer - and the 
degree to which such understanding is common knowledge - 
will depend a lot on your Mage chronicle's timeframe. Basic 
proficiency with computers is a lot more typical in 2015, after 
all, than it was in the early ‘90s! 


This Knowledge reflects your understanding of Information 
Technology; asingle dot involves basic computer use (whatever that 
looks like in your chronicle), whereas higher ratings show a deeper 
understanding of hardware, software, interface, the Internet, and 
IT culture in general. Certain tasks (like advanced programming 
or repair) and systems (especially the arcane tech employed by 
technomancers) demand at least three or four dots in this Trait 
before your character can even begin to understand them. 


As a general rule for mages who employ computers as 
instruments of focus, assume that a mage cannot channel a Sphere 
Effect through a computer unless he has at least as many dots in 
Computer as he has in that Sphere. If Max, for example, has only 
one dot in Computer Knowledge, then he cannot use Sphere 
Effects of Rank 2 or higher through a computer because he 
simply doesn't understand computers well enough to do so. 
For details about Spheres, their Ranks, and their Effects, see 
Chapter Ten. 


Forexpanded gamerules related to computer maintenance, 
hacking, and cracking, see The Book of Secrets. 


° Dabbler: You know basic computer skills for 
your time and place. 


ee Student: You’ve studied IT systems and can 
do basic programming. 


ecc Scholar: Study and experience make you pretty 
decent with essential systems. 

ecce Professor: You're a respected pro in the 
computer tech field. 

eeoeee 


Master: When you’re not making existing 
systems play fetch for you, you’re crafting new 
stuff, reworking hardware, and being an overall 
master of your trade. 


Chapter Six: Creating the Character 


283 


Possessed By: Virtual Adepts, Technocrats, Technomancers, 
Students, IT Pros, Hackers, Military Personnel, Almost Anyone 
in Current Tech Cultures 


SuggestedSpecialties: General Use, Internet, Programming, 
Repair, IT Culture, Office Tech, Entertainment Tech, CGI, Data 
Systems, Hacking, Cracking, Organization, Current Market, 
Underground, Advanced Tech, Cryptanalysis 


Cosmology/ Subdimensions 

Known by Technocrats and many hypertech mystics as 
Subdimensions, this trait reflects a working knowledge of the 
puzzling Otherworlds beyond the Earthly plane. With it, you 
stand a decent chance of finding your way around out there 
without getting yourself killed. (Without it, you’re seriously 
screwed.) The specific way in which you view the Otherworlds 
will depend alot on whatyou expect to see there; this Knowledge 
simply gives you the tools to navigate paths, spot hazards, deal 
with entities, and recognize opportunities or threats when you 
run across them. 


For an overview of the Otherworlds, see Chapter Four. 
For game systems, see The Otherworlds in Chapter Nine, 
(pp. 474-485). 


° Dabbler: Student of the mysteries. 
ec Student: Occasional voyager. 

ecc Scholar: Experienced traveler. 
ecco Professor: Seasoned explorer. 
eccce Master: World-walker. 


Possessed By: Shamans, Witches, Hermetics, Void 
Engineers, Etherites, Werewolves, Astral Travelers, Archmages 


Suggested Specialties: Astral Voyaging, Courts, 
Paths, Hazards, Omens, Realms, Navigation, Dimensional 
Exploration, Threat Factors, Otherworldly Etiquette 


Enigmas 

You can wrap your head around concepts that give other 
people headaches. Puzzles, riddles, artistic themes, uncanny 
entities, arcane secrets, bizarre methods of communication 
- you might not understand the specifics just yet, but you can 
hash out enough comprehension to get by. Especially in a 
mage's world, many things transcend rational explanation... 
and that realm of strangeness is where the Enigmas Knowledge 
takes you. Whether you need to make jumps of logic, wade 
into metaphysical currents, spot clues in apparent chaos, or 
figure out what's being said waaaaaaaay between the lines (or 
totally outside them), this Trait is essential. 


° Dabbler: Puzzles intrigue you. 

ee Student: Zen koans do not piss you off. 

ecc Scholar: "You were not put here to ‘Get it,’ Mr. 
Burton." 

ecco Professor: You clap with one hand inside 
Schródinger's box. 

eee ee Master: You are an enigma. 

284 = Mage: The Ascension 20" Anniversary Edition 


Possessed By: Akashics, Ecstatics, Hermetics, Shamans, 
Mad Scientists, Detectives, Weird-Ass Metaphysicians, Gamers, 
Sifus, Professors, Crazy Fuckers, Annoying Old Masters 


Suggested Specialties: Riddles, Puzzles, Metaphysics, 
Deduction, Zen, Arcane Enigmas, Codes and Ciphers, Classic 
Mysteries, Intuitive Leaps, Deciphering Madness 


Esoterica 


Esoteric knowledge comes in many forms: astrology, 
angelography, fortune-telling, yoga, herbalism, demonology, the 
lore of stones, even the secret code languages of occult societies. For 
centuries, such mysteries were the province of selected initiates; these 
days, it’s relatively easy to find the basics in any decent bookstore 
or website. Even so, the deeper levels remain obscure to all but the 
most devoted students of the art. Anyone can take a yoga class in 
the modern world, but the more arcane applications of that art 
demand years of practice, study, and devotion. 


Gamewise, the Esoterica reflects your pursuit of an esoteric 
discipline which suggests the practices and instruments for your 
magickal focus. The Trait’s overall rating reflects your general 
knowledge of arcane subjects, whereas each specialty reflects 
your expertise within a certain field. Unlike the Occult Knowl 
edge - which in reflects an understanding of "secret history” and 
shadow-cultures - Esoterica represents the practical application of 
unusual fields. Occultcan teach your character who Aleister Crow- 
ley was, while Esoterica helps her understand what Crowley did... 
and to use those principles herself. In short, this Knowledge sums 
up a lot of previous editions' Abilities into a single united Trait. 


Because esoteric disciplines are often interrelated, you can use 
the Well.Skilled Craftsman option to purchase a new specialty for 
only four experience points, assuming that you already have atleast 
four dots in the Esoterica Knowledge, an existing specialty, and a 
story-based reason to learn that discipline. Say, for example, your 
character has four dots in Esoterica, with a specialty in Herbalism; 
if he gets some time to study yoga, he can spend four experience 
points and then add a specialty in Yoga to that Knowledge... after 
which time he can use yoga as a focus tool (assuming that it fits his 
magickal paradigm), and count 10s as two successes on mundane 
or magickcasting rolls that employ that practice. 


Given an opportunity to study and practice an art, any char- 
acter can learn Esoterica. Although such disciplines don’t give 
magickal powers to unAwakened characters, the Knowledge lets 
them use mundane applications - teaching yoga classes, doing 
horoscopes, deciphering alchemical texts and so forth - and count 
10s as two successes if and when they do so. Understanding the 
principles of bakemonojutsu - the ninja “ghost technique” - won't 
make you invisible, for instance, but a specialty in that esoteric 
technique would let you count 10s as two successes on your 
Stealth Skill roll. Even though they can't employ mystic powers, 
non-mages can be far more knowledgeable about such subjects 
than mages are. Such mentors may teach a mage this Knowledge 
or allow him to add another specialty to his existing expertise. 
Let's say that Dante needs to learn demonology; he goes to the 
best teacher he can find - an unAwakened monk named Brother 
Silence - and studies his ass off. In time, Dante understands 


Optional Rule: Body Control 


Several esoteric fields — notably yoga, t'ai chi, qigong and other advanced trance-state disciplines — granta considerable 
amount of body control to a student of that field. And though casual practitioners rarely achieve such feats, devotees 
can accomplish apparently superhuman acts. This optional rule allows for such feats even without the use of magick. 


Assume that a character with an Esoterica specialty in Yoga or Body Control, plus at least the minimum dots in Esoterica, 
can use the following feats, with only one effect at a time. 


Under calm situations, the character must focus for at least two turns, then make an Intelligence * Esoterica roll, difficulty 
7; under stress, the devotee must focus for at least two turns, then make a Wits + Esoterica roll, difficulty 8, to achieve 
a state of bodily control. Again, these effects are not magickal. With a bit of Life magick added, however, such control 
can become truly miraculous. 


Note: In the Revised-edition Akashic Brotherhood, sourcebook, Body Control was a Knowledge Ability. Under this 
option, however, it has been subsumed into certain specialties within the Esoterica Knowledge. 


For anytype of character, body control can be atrue life-saver during survival situations. For details, seethe Environmental 
Hazards section in Chapter Nine, (pp. 435-444). 


# of Successes Minimum Dots Feat 


One One dot Ignore Distraction: The devotee can concentrate well enough to screen out 
most distractions — a welcome ability during study or meditation. 


One One dot Moderated Sleep: With a chance to stop and enter a trance, the character 
can fall asleep under any circumstances. 


One Two dots Hold Breath: The character holds her breath for two minutes per dot of 
Stamina, plus one minute per success. (One roll only — no extended rolls.) 


Two Two dots Tolerate Temperature: The devotee’s discipline allows her to adjustto extreme 
heat or cold. She suffers no penalties from hot or cold temperatures and 
reduces damage dice from fire, heat, or frost damage by one die. 


Three dots Transcend Pain: Reduce wound- or illness-based dice-pool penalties by one 
for the reminder of that scene. 


Three dots Slow Bleeding and Breathing: By regulating her breath and heart rate, 
the devotee can avoid shock and stabilize her injuries without further 
complications... assuming, of course, that she isn’t injured further. 


Four dots Digestive control: The devotee can slow the rate of poison or toxin in her 
body. Each success delays the toxic effects for one hour of in-game time. 


Four dots Death Trance: The devotee enters a voluntary coma. Her heart rate and 
breathing slow so much as to be imperceptible. Bleeding stops. Poisons 
and illnesses do not circulate, although external corrosives (acid, toxic 
waste) continue to affect the body normally. Unless scanned with advanced 
technology or magick, the devotee appears to be dead. In essence, she's 
in suspended animation for one day per success. 


system if you want to use it as a focus; a computer mage will have 
a hard time wedging her study of herbalism into atechnomagickal 
hacking routine! This rule, however, helps flesh out your 
character’s belief system and gives you a practical use for the 
arcane disciplines that any mage worth that name understands. 


instruments associated with esoteric practices, see Focus and 
the Arts in Chapter Ten, (pp. 565-600). 


the names and rituals associated with Infernal powers and can * Dabbler: You've skimmed some New Age books 
put them to practical use. In such cases, the student may indeed or taken a handful of classes in the subject. 
surpass the master, thanks to the Awakened understanding that ee Student: You’ve devoted some time and energy 
: s a g 
unlocks the greatest potential of the art. to esoteric subjects. 
. ; N- ; - T 
Again, an Esoterica practice must fit the character's belief eee Scholar: A devoted esotericist, you've spent years 


you to master others more easily. 


For details about various paradigms, practices, and 


behind them. 


Chapter Six: Creating the Character 


building up aworking knowledge of odd subjec 


ts. 


ecce Professor: Nowyouunderstand theinterconnected 
patterns of arcane disciplines; knowingoneallows 


coocoo Master: You possess a profound understanding 
of esoteric subjects and the practical uses 


285 


Possessed By: Monks, Professors, Clergy, New Agers, 
Witches, Weirdoes, Artists, Occultists, Teachers, Transhumanists, 
Paranormal Researchers, Monster Hunters, Fantasy Authors 
and Editors, Students and Masters of Arcane Arts 


Suggested Specialties: Yoga, Tantra, Herbalism, Kabbalah, 
FortuneTelling, Hypnosis, Astrology, Celestiography, Demonology, 
Sacred Geometry, Gematria, Goetia, Prophecies, Omens, T'ai 
Chi, I Ching, Stone Lore, Alchemy, Symbolism, Transhumanist 
Theory, Esoteric Musicology, Bakemono-utsu, Iconology, 
Numerology, Voodoo, Crystalmancy, Tarot, specific arcane 
languages (Enochian, In-o-Musubi, the Language of Flowers, etc.) 


Investigation 


Clues of a more mundane nature are yours to unravel. 
Whether you specialize in crime scenes, information retrieval, 
political intrigues, or other mysteries, you know what to look 
for, where to look for it, and how to piece it together once 
those pieces start becoming obvious. Your training might be 
informal (like, say, a taste for detective novels), but it features 
basic - and possibly advanced - criminology techniques as well as 
logistical guesswork, potential sources of information, deductive 
methodology, and well-honed instincts that turn raw data into 
potential conclusions. 


° Dabbler: You spend lots of time in the Mystery 
section of your favorite bookstore. 

ec Student: You've learned basic criminology. 

ecc Scholar: Detective work is your trade and 
passion. 

ecce Professor: Clarice Starling comes to you for 
advice. 

coocoo Master: Batman. 


Possessed By: Crime Writers, Cops, Detectives, Stalkers, 
Journalists, Intelligence Agents, Smart Criminals, Black Suits, 
Refined Cannibal Geniuses With a Taste For Chianti 


Suggested Specialties: Forensics, Deduction, Interrogation, 
Crime Scenes, Data Sorting, Criminal Psychology, Spotting 
Clues, Personal Details, Paranormal Investigations 


Law 


You might not be the Law, but you understand how it 
works. The ins and outs of cop-shops, police procedures, ranks 
and files, end-arounds, and other essential components of your 
local justice system are yours to know. Different regions, of 
course, have very different police systems; your grasp of New 
Orleans law enforcement won't help much in Tokyo. Still, 
modern police departments have certain elements in common, 
and this Knowledge can help you suss them out even if you 
have to beat a much higher difficulty rating in order to do so. 


° Dabbler: Beat cop. 

ec Student: Police sergeant. 

eco Scholar: Chief or DA. 

ecce Professor: Federal bureau official. 


Master: Attorney General. 


Ma$e: The Ascension 20^ Anniversary Edition 


Possessed By: Cops, Lawyers, Government Agents, 
Criminals, Gang Bosses, Reporters 


Suggested Specialties: Local Beat, Crimes, Customs, 
Procedures, Bribery, Internal Affairs, Courts, International Agencies, 
OccultCrimes, Jurisdiction, Chainof Command, Bendingthe Rules 


Medicine 

When folks get broken, you know more or less how to fix 
them. One or two dots in this Ability reflect basic First Aid 
skills, whereas higher ratings represent advanced training and 
experience. (Note that said training and experience might not 
beformaland licensed training and experience...) With Medicine, 
you've learned enough about human and humanoid bodies to 
treat, harm, and potentially diagnose their injuries and illnesses. 
Healing magicks often depend upon such understanding, and 
an angry mage with this Trait can be extremely dangerous! 


For details about injury and healing, see Health and 
Injury in Chapter Nine, (pp. 406-409). For information 
about medicine as a magickal practice, see Medicine Work in 
Chapter Ten, (p. 581). 


e Dabbler: You've learned basic First Aid and 
CPR. 

eo Student: You can treat minor traumas and 
illnesses. 

eee 


Scholar: Medical training allows you to pursue 
more serious treatments. 


ecco Professor: You’ve got a professional degree 
of skill in advanced medicine and surgical 
procedures. 

ecccc 


Master: A noted and respected healer, you're 
in demand for your extensive expertise. 


Possessed By: Healers, Paramedics, Medical Professionals, 
Survivalists, Midwives, Torturers, Witches, Euthanatos, Progenitors 


Suggested Specialties: First Aid, Surgery, Nursing, Bare- 
Bones Facilities, Improvised Techniques, Traditional Remedies, 
Alternative Medicine, Physical Deconstruction, Magickal 
Healing, Frankensteinian Techniques, “Live, Damn You - LIVE!” 


Occult 


Aren't mages occult by their very nature? Yes and no. This 
Knowledge represents a generalized comprehension of the 
mystic world as most Sleepers understand it; in short, then, such 
knowledge is often misleading, incomplete, or flatoutwrong. A 
decent rating in this Trait (three dots or higher) helps you sort 
the truth from the bullshit... but by then, you've also begun to 
understand how deep the occult rabbit-hole really goes. 


"Occult" means hidden for very good reasons, and even 
the most skillful occultists often don't know nearly as much 
as they think they do. Being a mage does not automatically 
confer accurate understanding of other practices - in fact, it 
often muddies the waters even more! Still, this Ability grants 
you a decent overview of mystic practices, philosophies, lore, 
history, arcane cultures, and so-called secrets. Of course, they're 
all secrets by definition... or at least that's the theory, anyway. 


° Dabbler: You think you know who Crowley 
was, and you have some New Age books on 
your shelves. 


ee Student: Some of the stuff you've heard or 
read is actually true. 


ecc Scholar: You've got first-hand experience in 
the world of shadows. 


cooo Professor: Study and experience have taught 
you a respectable amount of genuine lore. 


eocce Master: Knowledgeable parties respect your 
accomplishments and consider you an 
authority in your own right. 


Possessed By: Moral Crusaders, Disaffected Teens, 
Metalheads, Goths, Pagans, New Agers, Parapsychologists, 
Fantasy Authors, RPG Designers, Students of Unhallowed 
Arts, Folks Who Spend Too Much Time on the Internet 


Suggested Specialties: Neopaganism, Occult History, 
Conspiracy Theories, Secret Societies, New Age, Alternative 
Sciences, Mystic Lore, Folk Magic, Moral Panic, Urban Legends, 
Satanic Folklore, Pop-Culture Satanism, Actual Satanism, any 
specific occult discipline or field (Freemasonry, Voodoo, Stage 
Magic, etc.) 


Politics 

Political power can seem like magic. With a few words in 
the right person's ear or a form filled out the proper way, you can 
make people disappear, change identities, incite scandals, and 
make or unmake kings. For certain mages - especially Technocrats, 
Hermetics, Ecstatics, and Virtual Adepts - such power is more 
effective than obvious spells; in a global era, the ability to throw 
lightning bolts pales in comparison to the clout to stage a riot ... 
Or a coup. 


Literally the "art of cities," this Knowledge helps your 
character work the reins of power - government agencies, law 
enforcement bureaus, celebrity culture, and so on. In game 
terms, this Trait combines a number of separate Knowledges 
from previous editions (Power-Brokering, Covert Culture, 
etc.) into a unified understanding of civil influence. As 
with several other Knowledges, you can use the Well-Skilled 
Craftsman option to purchase several specialties once you 
reach four dots in the Trait. Each specialty reflects a different 
sphere of influence. 


For coincidental Mind-based Effects, you could also use 
Politics as a focus instrument, assuming that you're willing to 
let that Effect take a bit of time. A clever mage, for instance, 
could implant an otherwise ridiculous idea (“the President is 
a Muslim Nazi space alien”) in the minds of a few influential 
parties and then let that idea spread through political channels 
over time. This sort of thing cannot be done abruptly, though; 
political influence is a subtle tool, and vulgar Effects weaken 
its influence. 


Unlike stealth or violence, the Politics Trait demands 
a certain amount of patience and finesse. You can’t just 
charm a district attorney and then walk away from a murder 
rap - there are too many people and procedures involved 


Chapter Six: Creating the Character 207 


NE 1-2 rms = = oes — ERE. _ ——— 5" 


= X J m owe c 2 
—— p» 


in law enforcement situations. Still, this Knowledge helps 
your character know who those people are and which strings 
can make them dance. Though it's not a glamorous skill, it 
might be among the most potent tools in the modern world. 


For game systems involving social influence, see Social 
Occasions and Intrigue in Chapter Nine, (pp. 402-404). For 
magickal practices that employ political clout, see the Art of 
Desireand Dominion practices, the Managementand Human 
Resources option, and their associated instruments, all in 
Chapter Ten, (pp. 573, 577, and 595). 


° Dabbler: Amateur power-broker. 

eco Student: Devotee of influence. 

eco Scholar: A skillful manipulator of civil 
institutions. 

eecc 


Professor: Magnificent bastard. 


coocoo Master: Machiavelli's ghost whispers in your 


ear. 


Possessed By: Politicians, Activists, Pundits, Lawyers, 
Journalists, Kingpins, Tycoons, Celebrities, Syndicate Ops, 
NWO Agents, Cult Gurus, Leaders of All Kinds 


Suggested Specialties: Legal Codes, Law Enforcement, 
Gang Culture, Local Government, National Government, 
International Politics, Corporate Influence, Media Influence, 
Blogosphere, Loopholes, Dog Whistles, Radical Politics, Celebrity 
Media, Organized Crime, Power-Brokering, Specific Groups 
(U.S. Congress, News Corporation, Anonymous, the Mafia, 
etc.), Specific Cultures (Militia Movements, Neo-Communists, 
Conspiracy-Theorists, Jihadis, Anarchists), Specific Supernatural 
Groups (Traditions, Technocracy, Faerie Courts, Vampire 
Courts, etc.) 


Science 

A small word for vast ideas, science essentially means “to 
know.” In game terms, this Trait reflects an understanding of 
scientific principles, research, history, and applications. Every 
Technocrator technomancer must have a few dots in this Ability, 
and most have quite a few of them. In the modern world, the 
majority of people have at least one dot in Science; even if you 
believe in God or magick, you can still accept science as a valid 


approach to reality. (Really? Yep - see the sidebar SCIENCE!) 


The Science Trait covers a rudimentary understanding of 
common principles, plus a given focus of specialization. High 
ratings reflectincreasing knowledge aboutthe various sciences, with 
deepening understanding of your specialization. As with Crafts, 
you define one specialty for your character's primary Science and 
then purchase different specialties to reflect different sciences. 
Also, as with Crafts, your Storyteller may allow the Well-Skilled 
Craftsman option that lets you buy multiple Sciences for fewer 
points. This way, a welltrained scientist can master avariety of fields. 


For science- and tech-based practices see Alchemy, Art of 
Desire/ Hypereconomics, Cybernetics, Hypertech, Reality- 
Hacking and Weird Science under Practice: The Shape of 
Focus, Chapter Ten, (pp. 572-586). 


288 — Mage: The Ascension 20" Anniversary Edition 


° Dabbler: You've gota typical high school science 
education and understand the basic principles 
of your field. 


ec Student: You possess an advanced science 
education and understand the major theories, 
principles, and concepts of your preferred field. 

ecc Scholar: You've dedicated yourself to scientific 
inquiry and possess a detailed knowledge of 
your chosen discipline. 


ecco Professor: Impressive scholarship, plus devoted 
study and research, make you an expert in your 
field and a master of generalized science. 
LEELEE] 


Master: Very few peers can match your expertise, 
understanding, and respect within the field. 


Possessed By: Teachers, Technicians, Would-Be Superheroes, 
Tech Geeks, Any Technocrat or Technomantic Mage 


Suggested Specialties: Almost any hard scientific field. 
Soft or social sciences, like history or anthropology, fall under 
the Academics Knowledge instead. 


Scientific Specialties 

Common “respectable” Science variations practiced by 
Awakened characters include, but are not limited to, the 
following potential specialties: 


* Aeronautics: Design, construction, and operation of 
aircraft and other flying machines. 


* Astronomy: Study of stellar bodies, celestial mechanics, 
and outer space. 


* Biology: Research into the mysteries within Earth's 
organic life forms. 


* Biopsychology: Tracing (and often altering) the 
interplay between a living being's physical state and its 
psychological state. 


* Chemistry: Decipheringand manipulating the chemical 
codes within Earthly substances. 


e Computer Science: IT system languages, logistics, theory, 
advancement, and implementation. 


e Cybernetics: Research,development,andimplementation 
of interconnected organic matter and machines. 


* Electronics: Harnessing and exploring the potential of 
electronic energies and devices. 


* Engineering: Design, research, and construction of essential 
structures. Engineering has many variations; if there's a 
structure involved in a project, then there's an engineering 
disciplineinvolved increatingand maintainingthatstructure. 


* Forensic Pathology: Reconstructing evidence from 
scattered and fragmented clues. 


* Genetics: Research, analysis, and manipulation involving 


the literal "building blocks of life." 


* Geology: Study of earthly formations, materials, and 
phenomena. 


* Hypermathematics: Esoteric, arcane, theoretical, 
and sometimes absurd applications of advanced 
mathematical principles, often tied to the links between 
science, faith, and magick. 


* Mathematics: Study of equations, numbers, patterns, 
and the interplay between them. 


* Metallurgy: Research, refinement, and implementation 
involving the properties and functions of various 
metallic substances, alloys, and compounds... though 
not, unfortunately, musicians. 


*  Paraphysics: "Proper" name for Dimensional Science, 
also known as the interrelationship between Earthly 
reality and the Otherworlds. 


* Phylogeny: Study of transition and transformation, 
their effects, and the potential uses of both. 


* Physics: Observations and research regarding the 
interrelationships between matter and energy. Theoretical 
physics deals with potential but currently unproven 
models of physics, whereas practical physics deals with 
known applications of established physics. 


¢ Psychodynamics: Study and application of human and 
humanoid mental processes - specifically the relationships 
between emotional responses, mental health, physical 
state, and outward behavior. Although some Technocrats 


consider this a softscience, thosewho manipulate identity, 
memory, and behavior find it extremely useful. 


¢ Psychology: Study of human consciousness and behavior, 
and their related therapies. 


e Psychopharmacology: Research, development, and 
applications dealing with the interplay between 
psychoactive substances and human/ humanoid 
consciousness, perceptions, and behavior. 


* Psychoprojection: Research into the multiple disciplines 
and effects of extraphysical consciousness co- and 
relocation. In plain English, the study of astral projection, 
multiple selves, and travel into the Digital Web. 


e Sociobiology: Observation and manipulation of societies 
as extended organisms - composed of individual beings 
- that nurture, protect, and reproduce themselves. 
By researching the tendencies of such organisms, 
sociobiologists strive to understand and influence 
societies... and the individuals within them. 


* Xenobiology: Study, analysis and understanding of alien 
organisms: monsters, spirits, mythic beasts, and other 
things conventional science does not currently accept 
as real. 


Radical scientists - Etherites, Ecstatics, Virtual Adepts, 
and even some maverick Technocrats, among others - have 
dozens, perhaps hundreds, of other disciplines, ranging from 
Etherdynamics to Chaos Math to Coprophrenology (don't 
ask..). Naturally, such sciences are not generally accepted 
by the community at large; this, of course, just inspires their 
proponents to prove how true their theories really are... 


Secondary Abilities 


Mages are a skillful lot. They have to be, to do 
what they do. And so, in addition to the usual 
core Abilities, there’s a range of additional 
Talents, Skills, and Knowledges that you can 
choose from as well. Many of them deal with 
specialized fields or characters (Akashics, 
Ecstatics, NWO ops, and so forth), but within 
certain parameters (see the entries), anyone 
with the right background can learn them. 


Secondary Talents 


Like the core Talents, these Traits represent natural 
inclinations honed through practice. Several of them, like 
Flying, are extremely unusual in the grand scheme of things, 
though others, like Carousing, are fairly common. 


Animal Kinship 


You have a natural affinity for animals, so much so that 
you seem to be part animal yourself. Perhaps you’ve learned 
ancestral techniques of animal communion. Maybe you’re a 
shapeshifter with the heart of a beast. Wherever your Talent 
comes from, you connect with animals on a level that often 
seems downright... primal. 


On a practical level, this Talent helps you puzzle out 
hierarchies, read moods orstates of health, communicate through 
vocalizations and body language, and come to understandings 
onan animal level. This doesn’t mean an animal will necessarily 
like you, but you can respect one another as peers. Intelligent 
animals tend to be easier to commune with than primitive ones; 
it’s far simpler to bond with, say, a wolf than witha shark. Hence, 
Animal Kinship difficulties are lower with smart or trusting beasts 
than with alien, hostile, or simple-minded ones. 


Chapter Six: Creating the Character 289 


IA 77 


PW 


Despite common misconceptions, science is not the enemy of magic or religion, much less a plot to enslave the world. 
What science is, literally, is the pursuit of knowledge - provable, repeatable, verifiable knowledge. And because 
mysticism and faith are so hard to repeat, verify, or prove in relatively objective forms, those belief systems often wind 
up getting a wary eye from science. 


That said, these three disciplines do not have to be antagonistic. A scientist can have faith, can even be a mage... and 
a mage can appreciate science, too. After all, you're reading this book because science works; if it didn't, there'd be 
no paper, no ink, no binding, no computers to craft the book, and no way to getthese words from my keyboard to your 
eyes. (If you're reading this on an e-reader, my point is even more obvious.) 


Because so much of the modern world depends upon scientific technology, and because scientific principles have been 
fundamental elements of education for centuries (often over the objections of religious fundamentalists), magick that can 
be explained in scientific terms is often coincidental, not vulgar, in technologically developed areas. As a result, although 
science depends upon consistency — and thus demands a certain amount of consistency in its explanations — a character 
can use his Science Trait to deploy a scientific rationale for what he's doing. If he succeeds, that Effect will probably be 
considered coincidental unless it's totally beyond the pale. 


In game terms, the player rolls Manipulation or Charisma * Science, with the difficulty based on the feat in question and 
the roleplaying involved in explaining it to everyone else. Meanwhile, the character unleashes a torrent of sci-speak 
that will hopefully make enough sense to justify the feat. Why.do:mad scientists ramble on about their pet theories while 
turning on that death ray? Because SCIENCE! That's why. 


n Th 


This leads to an important point: in science, theory does not mean "something | think might be true." As any scientist 
will tell you, a scientific theory must be tested, challenged, and verified through repeated experiments and evidence. A 
supposition that withstands those challenges without being disproved and winds up being accepted through peer review 
is considered a theory. This is why Technocrats, Etherites, and Virtual Adepts argue constantly about their pet theories: 
it's a form of peer review that gives credibility to weird-ass technomagick. 


What this means, in practical terms, is that technomancers cannot just do whatever they want and then pass it off as 
science. In order to be science, it hasto stand up under review. Otherwise, it's just... um, magic. 


And no self-respecting scientist wants to admit he's doing that. 


T DC 50 


Theflipsidetothistechnomagickal advantage is that science-based reality-alteration doesn'tjusthaveto be accepted by a bunch 
of stupid Sleepers: the technomancer must believe in it as well. Sure, his theories might be skewed, demented, even impossible 
by normal scientific standards, but they must make sense... atleast to him, and probably to the people he respects. A Progenitor 
hypergeneticist, for example, might be able to clone a werewolf, isolate "the changing gene, " or kill the beast with an infusion 
of silver nitrate. He could not, however, simply wave his hand and turn the werewolf to silver. That's not science! Awakened/ 
Inspired Science can get pretty weird, but — according to the beliefs of the people who use it — it cannot do the impossible. 


Thus, technomagick is a double-edged scalpel: you can use it more freely in the modern world, but it must make a certain 
degree of sense within a scientific belief system. If it does not, the character himself does not believe in the results... and 
we all know what happens when Wile E. Coyote looks down and sees that he's running on thin air. 


In game terms, a Storyteller may feel free to call shenanigans on a player's explanation when that explanation does 
not fit the character's belief system. If the Progenitor mentioned above tried to explain his silvery wave as “disrupting the 
molecular structure and shifting the elemental spectrum through my new theory of manual destabilizing conversion, " then 
POOF! It's vulgar magick. No scientific coincidences for you! This offers clever challenges for the technomantic player, 
provides fun roleplaying material, and forces him to think of his deeds in terms of the character’s beliefs. 


You See? 


The core of that character’s beliefs can be found on the character sheet, under Science. You see, science is a belief 
system, and the dots and Specialties of the Science Trait reflect the way your scientist believes that science works. (The 
Common Mage Paradigms in Chapter Ten suggest a variety of scientific worldviews, too; see pp. 568-572.) 


The Science Trait isn’t just a line on your character sheet. In many ways, it's a roleplaying guide for your character's creed. 
Those Traits explain his methodology, define his beliefs, and suggest the sorts of things he'll do, both with his Arts and in 
general. They'll show you the sorts of Devices he might use or invent, tell you the sorts of friends and rivals he has, and 
probably inspire all kinds of rants as he shares his theories with the world at large. Science, as we've seen, means “to 
know,” and most people who take science seriously want everyone else to know about their science too. Even if the rest 
of us consider them mad scientists, their madness is the kind of faith any mage can understand. 


290 = Mage: The Ascension 20" Anniversary Edition 


| me = 


Successes on an Animal Kinship roll can also help you lower 
the difficulty of a Riding roll or let you pass as "just another 
animal" if you've shapeshifted into beast form. With a Training 
specialty, you can train certain kinds of animals too; each beast 
type (horses, raptors, big cats, etc.) requires its own specialty, 
though the Well-Skilled Craftsman option may give you a break 
when buyingseveral specialties. Even then, though, this isa Talent, 
nota power. You can get on an animal's good side easily enough, 
but if you push that relationship too far, your friend is history. 


° Novice: Domesticated animals tend to like you. 


oo Practiced: Skittish animals tend to trust you. 


ooo Skillful: Wild animals tend to respect you. 
ecce Expert: Folks call you "the Beast Whisperer." 
oocce Master: You seem closer to animals than to 


human beings. 


Possessed By: Shapeshifters, Farmers, Hunters, Grooms, 
Witches, K-9 Cops, Animal Trainers, Pet Companions, 
Naturalists, Feral People Raised By Beasts 


Suggested Specialties: Dominance, Befriending, Calming, 
Bonding, Reading Signs, "Talk To the Animals,” Training (specific 
animals - Canines & Lupines, Felines, Horses, Raptors, etc.) 


Blatancy 

Through theatrical flair, audience appraisal, and raw 
audacity, you’re good at getting away with blatant acts of 
magick. Typically, this involves using tried-and-true dodges: 
"We're shooting a movie,” "It's all an illusion," "Haven't you ever 
seen a flashmob before?" - that sort of thing. As you might expect, 
such claims typically require props to lend credibility to your 
claims (a "camera crew," stage magic gear, a pack of willing 
conspirators, etc.). If and when you have the goods to back up 
your dodge, however, you can pull reality over people's eyes 
more often than you would be able to do otherwise. 


A potentially problematic Talent, this Trait comes with 
several caveats. As mentioned above, a mage who wants to use 
it must be able to back up her claims with evidence. Despite 
common preconceptions, most people aren't stupid, and - 
especially in the age of YouTube, cell phones, and wireless 
Internet access - the ability to look up "famous stage magicians” 
and “reality TV shows filming in my area” is literally within 
the grasp of the average bystander. Blatancy works best when 
you play to your location’s dominant belief system, have the 
props (physical and social) to back up your claims, and get the 
hell out of Dodge before folks start asking too many questions. 


In story terms, this Trait gives your character an edge if 
she employs a credible explanation while doing something 
that should not be possible but looks as though it could be. 
It does not work when that character does things for which no 
reasonable explanation exists. You could, for example, explain 
a suddenly healed wound with, “Look! It was just makeup” or 
“Head wounds just bleed a lot;” you could not, however, conjure 
a dragon and then shout, “Cool special effects, huh?” In order to 
employ this Talent at all, you must have something that passes 
for a rational explanation by the standards of your audience 
and then avoid pushing the envelope too far. 


In game terms, a successful Manipulation + Blatancy roll 
- combined with a reasonable explanation for the magickal deed in 
question - may allow a player to turn a normally vulgar magickal 
Effect into a coincidental one. 


These days, this sort of thing is a lot easier for Technocrats, 
Ecstatics, martial artists, trusted clergy, and stage magicians 
than it is for garden-variety mages. And in regions with mystical 
cultures, it’s far more likely that a trusted local will get away 
with Blatancy than it is to assume that some newcomer with 
fancy words will accomplish the same thing. Folks in traditional 
cultures are not morons either. If some stupid white man shows 
up and starts thinking he can play Cargo Cult with the natives, 
he’s gonna get his ass kicked. 


That said, a charismatic speaker who knows her audience 
can get away with amazing amounts of nonsense. People truly 
will fall for ridiculous ideas if and when the speaker plays 
to their fears, hopes, prejudice, and faith. In real life, folks 
accept blatant absurdities as truth all the time. A clever player/ 
character can manipulate the locals if and when she puts 
some imagination and sweat equity behind this Trait. Smart 
roleplaying, combined with advance preparation, ought to pay 
off under most circumstances. 


As a general guide to the potential difficulty or success 
required witha Blatancy roll, you may use the Blatancy Effects 
chart. On that chart, Difficulty offers a base difficulty for the 
roll, Successes Needed suggests a minimum number of successes 
before the roll succeeds. Effect gives a guideline for the size or 
scope of the magickal act in question; larger or more obvious 
acts of magick would demand a higher difficulty and/ or 
more successes rolled. Finally, Explanation offers the type of 
rationale a character might give; the lamer the explanation, 
the higher the difficulty and the more successes you'd need 
to get away with using it. Generally, you'd use either Effect 
or Explanation to determine the roll's difficulty; if you're 
compounding them - say, a Blatant Effect with a Lame 
Explanation - add *1 or more to the difficulty. That said, 
the chart provides a guideline only. The Storyteller may also 
ignore the chart if he feels it does not suit the chronicle or 
circumstances. 


Ultimately, the Storyteller is the final arbiter regarding 
the effects of a Blatancy attempt. If the explanation sucks, if 
the props do not support the claim, if the people are clearly 
being played for fools, then the roll will not succeed, period. 


For details about reality and belief, see the Reality Zones 
section of Chapter Ten, (pp. 611-617). And for guidelines about 
the limits of coincidence, check out Coincidental Magick vs. 
Vulgar Magick, also in Chapter Ten, (pp. 530-532). 


° Novice: “No, seriously - we're filming a video." 
ee 


Practiced: “That just looked easy. It took me 
years to figure out how to do that trick.” 


eco Skillful: “All the necessary permits and 
explanations are posted on our website.” 

ecce Expert: "We did this trick on Mythbusters." 

coocoo Master: “Nothing to see here - move along.” 


Chapter Six: Creating the Character 291 


H 


TN 4d 


4 


- 
s 

IA 

(of | 

y^ a 

| 

| 

| 

ij 

i 


a 
Å- 
* 


“ste 


E^ 


| Hd 


1 4 


Possessed By: Celebrities, Media Magicians, Pundits, 
Deejays, SPX Techs, Filmmakers, Stunt Artists, Martial Artists, 
Black Suits, Show Promoters 

Suggested Specialties: Religious Appeal, Political Paranoia, 
Stage Magic, Film Crew, Appeals to Vanity, Cool Gadgets, 
Geek Culture, Sheer Balls, Legal Authority, Science!, We're 
On a Mission From God 


Blatancy Effects 


Successes 

Difficulty Needed Effect Explanation 

6 One* Explainable Believable: 
“Top-secret 
experimental 
hardware.” 

7 One* Startling Questionable: 
"Flash mob - see 
the cameras?" 

8 Twot Blatant Lame: “Gas-main 
explosion!” 

9 Twot Incredible ^ Seriously?: “Huh? 
| didn't see 
anything unusual.” 

10 Three+ Absurd Um, No...: “It’s 
the Rapture! Make 
your peace with 
God!” 

Carousing 


You specialize in sharing the good times. This doesn’t have 
to involve drinking and debauchery... but it usually does anyway. 
Wherever you happen to be, you can probably spark a party and 
get the majority of folks to go along with you - possibly over 
their usual edges and into something new and wild. Typically 
associated with the Cult of Ecstasy, this Talent can break shackles 
of propriety and bust inhibitions into little pieces. 


. Novice: “YOLO!” 

ec Practiced: “Do a little dance/ Make a little 
love/ Get down tonight..." 

eco Skillful: “Sin, that you might be forgiven.” 


Expert: “The only real blasphemy is the refusal 
of joy.” 
eocce Master: "Do what thou wilt’ shall be the whole 


of the law.” 


Possessed By: Music Stars, Party Animals, Frat Boys, Bon 
Vivants, Cult Leaders, Ecstatics, Nephandic Seducers, Agents 
of Subversion, Left-Hand Path Devotees 


Suggested Specialties: High Society, Teenage Mayhem, 
Overcoming Inhibitions, Violating Vows, Classy Debauchery, 
Wild Parties, Master of Ceremonies, Mystic Justifications, Get 
This Party Started 


Mage: The Ascension 20" Anniversary Edition 


Do 


Often mistaken for a mere martial art, Do is the devotion to 
away of life. A time-honored secret of the Akashic Brotherhood 
(who began to hide its practice when Do was abused by lesser 
souls), the art is occasionally taught to non-Brothers in the 
interest of keeping Do alive. 


Although it’s reflected by a unique collection of combat 
maneuvers and magickal techniques, the Way is far more than 
a simple series of advantages. In story terms, Do is a highly 
disciplined state of being. Diet, philosophy, meditation, internal 
and external reflection, and a refined sense of one's place in the 
cosmos all characterize the study of Do; a character who does 
not pursue each element of that study cannot master the art’s 
benefits. TheStoryteller should make sure thata practitioner of 
Do acts accordingly. If the character behaves with selfish excess, 
he loses his ability to access Do. In many regards, Do is much 
more than a few dots on a character sheet. To the mages who 
pursue it, Do invests, guides, and enhances everything they do. 


The five ranks of Do are often associated with five stages 
of understanding. Ranging from the humble yet efficient insect 
stage through the various forms of animal, these levels reflect the 
growing comprehension of innate potential within a student's 
thick head. Especially within this distraction-prone age, few 
students attain the fifth rank... and though it might be possible 
for someone outside the Akashayana to reach such mastery, that 
idea seems like a joke to those who understand the essence of Do. 


In game terms, Do is more of a way of being than a learned 
Skill. Even so, it can be taught only by an Akashic mage, and 
it requires total devotion from the student. The Storyteller 
may consider Do to be an exclusively Akashic Ability - it's 
been that way for thousands of years, after all. A beginning 
Akashic character may put no more than two dots into Do; all 
other dots must be earned through in-game experience. (The 
Storyteller can waive this rule for a “masters-level” chronicle.) 
A non-Akashic character cannot start the game with any dots 
in Do - again, those dots must be earned through experience. 


In order to purchase dots in the Do Talent, a character must 
also have at least two dots of an appropriate "limb" Ability for each 
dot in Do. If Samuel "Green Tiger" Nakamura, for example, has 
three dots in Do, then he must also have at least six dots in Abilities 
related to the “eight limbs of Do.” For details about extensive rewards 
of the art, see the entry for Doin Chapter Nine, (pp. 426-430). For 
lesser forms of martial arts, see the Martial Arts Skill entry above. 


e Insect (ant, grasshopper, mantis, roach, etc.): 
Initiated into the simplest secrets of Do, you've 
begun learning the proper methods of diet, 
meditation, and exercise. 


ee Crawler (lizard, snake, toad, etc.): Like the beasts 
that crawl upon the earth, you're beginning to 
discover the keys to a higher state. Your body, 
mind, and spirit have achieved a kind of unity; 
with that understanding, you’re capable of 
impressive feats. 


Four-Footed Animal (horse, dog, cat, etc.): 
Like the greater beasts, you have unlocked 
the power of natural attainment. Your hands 
become like claws or hooves; your body surges 
with a strength unknown to most of those 
who would consider themselves human. This 
is the highest level many devotees achieve, the 
rank of an accomplished Tao-shih. 


ecco Bipedal Animal (monkey, bear, ape, etc.): 


Through greateffortand understanding, you've 
opened the gates that hold lesser beings in their 
distracted state. Your body, mind, and spirit 
can accomplish miraculous things, and you 
have earned the right to be considered a true 
heir of Do, a Sihing. To go beyond this point 
requires supreme devotion and a practice that 
typically takes lifetimes to refine. 


eocce True Humanity: Your devotion has returned you to 


the original state of human grace. At this point, you 
no longer concern yourself with what can be done, 
butmerelywith whatshouldbe done. Onlynowmight 
you be regarded as a Sifu: a Master of the Way. 


Possessed By: Akashayana and perhaps Their Most Trusted 
Companions 


Suggested Specialties: External (forceful) Style, Internal 
(meditative) Style, Weapon Forms, Energetic Alchemy, Katas, 
Animal-Form Techniques 


Flying 

People don’t usually fly. You do. Whether it’s because you’ve 
got (or can grow) wings and you know how to use them or else 
you're simply practiced in the fine art of aerial maneuvers, you're 
at home in the air as well as on the ground. 


Unlike the Jetpack Skill, this Talent reflects a knack for 
unassisted flying. To possess it, a character must have either 
wings or the innate (or magickal) power of flight. Really small 
or precarious flying methods (brooms, carpets, levitation discs, 
etc.) can count as Flying methods too; such control involves 
more instinct and comfort than technological expertise. For 
climbs, plunges, take-offs, landings, fancy moves, chases, aerial 
combat, or other airborne feats, this Talent comes in handy 
when you take to the sky. 


° Novice: Suicide case. 

eo Practiced: Awkward angel. 
eco Skillful: Quidditch player. 
cooo Expert: Winged avenger. 
eccce Master: Wind-dancer. 


Possessed By: Witches, Shapeshifters, Bird-Folk, Angelic 
or Demonic Entities, Magic Carpet Riders, Arcane Athletes, 
Crouching Tigers and Hidden Dragons 

Suggested Specialties: Broomsticks, Sports, Aerial Combat, 
Hunting, Strafing, Carrying Passengers, Chi-Based Levitation 


High Ritual 

There's both an art and a science to a good rite. You've studied 
not only the techniques and trappings of ritual practices but also 
the symbolic, psychological, and metaphysical principles behind 
the big show. In general, this Talent reflects a familiarity with rituals 
appropriate to your spiritual or magickal pursuits; a Catholic priest 
understands the various Church ceremonies, whereas an Eleusinian 
priestess knows her way around Greek mystery rites. Beyond that 
knowledge, though, you understand not only the rituals of your 
chosen practice but also possess a gift for staging rituals in general. 


Gamewise, the High Ritual Skillallowsyou to plan and execute 
rituals. A successful roll (typically Manipulation or Charisma + 
High Ritual)lets your character perform or supportanything from 
a wedding feast to a mystic rite. This roll’s difficulty depends upon 
your character's familiarity with the practice in question: simple 
rites in his cultural tradition would be easy, and elaborate rituals 
in a foreign practice would be pretty damned hard. A successful 
High Ritual roll might reduce the difficulty of a magickal working, 
whereas a blown one mightadd to the difficulty instead. (See below.) 


Certain Effects that would probably be considered vulgar 
magick might be considered coincidental if performed during a 
successful and appropriate ritual. An Awakened evangelist, for 
example, could effectively lay on hands or drive out demons 
during a potent Christian rite - such a setting encourages 
belief in such events. Although this sort of thing should not 
be taken for granted, a skillful ritualist can expand the bounds 
of possibility and evoke apparent miracles. Note that this Talent 
does not "stack" with the Blatancy Talent. A character with both 
must choose one or the other, not use both at one time. 


For the rules about modifying magick rolls with Abilities, 
see Mundane Skills and Magickal Effectsin Chapter Ten, (pp. 
532-535). For details about rituals and belief, see Coincidental 
Magick vs. Vulgar Magick, and Rituals, Rolls, and Extended 
Successes, also in Chapter Ten, (pp. 530-532 and 538-543). 


° Novice: You could plan a wedding, call the 
corners, or recite the Stations of the Cross. 


oe Practiced: Your parties and rites earn respect 
from your community. 


Skillful: Beyond your familiarity with specific 
rituals, you've begun learning about other 
practices as well. 


ecce Expert: An acclaimed priest or priestess, 


you've got a knack for powerful ceremonies 
and a broad understanding of specific ritual 
techniques. 


eccce Master: You’ve mastered not only the rites of 


your culture but many ritual practices of other 
cultures too. So potent is your knowledge that 
you could make atheists into believers. 


Possessed By: Clergy, Occultists, Entertainers, High 
Magicians, Showboating Frauds, Comparative Religion 
Specialists, Ritual Mages, Citizen Evangelists, Party Planners, 
Church or Funeral Directors 


Chapter Six: Creating the Character 293 


Suggested Specialties: High Mass, Obscure Rituals, Spontaneous 
Rituals, Secular Ceremonies, Music Concerts, Impossible Miracles, 
specific cultural rites (Jewish, Catholic, Satanic, Voudoun, etc.) 


Lucid Dreaming 

Most folks float through dreams with no sense of control. 
Not you. When you choose to assert yourself in the dreamlands, 
you may shift the tone of a dream, change locations, confront 
nightmares head-on, or even construct dreams of your choosing. 
Cosmologically, you know how to tap into the essence of Maya 
and turn it in your favor. With practice, you might create a 
Demesne Background (see below) that suits your temperament. 


In game terms, this Talent lets you manipulate your 
surroundings in a dream (Perception + Lucid Dreaming, 
difficulty 6); shape new structures (difficulty 8); or take complete 
control over that dream and your place in it (difficulty 9). 


You can use this Talent to direct conscious meditations, too 
(difficulties 5, 7, and 8, respectively), which can help you gain 
insights, unravel riddles, and achieve a state of calm or resolution. 
If you’re meditating or dreaming about a particular enigma, then 
your successes - after you wake up - count as if they were successes 
on an Enigmas roll. Jennifer Rollins, as an example, meditates 
abouta puzzle she wants to solve, and so her successes with a Lucid 
Dreaming roll countas successes used to solve that puzzle; once she 
leaves the trance, she understands how those pieces fit together. 


For the Demesne Background, see that entry in this chapter, 
(pp. 310-311). For game systems involved in riddles, puzzles, 


Mage: The Ascension 20" Anniversary Edition 


and enigmas, see Art and Science and Social Occasions and 
Intrigue in Chapter Nine, (p. 404). 


. Novice: You're aware of your dreams and can 
remember them if you choose. 

ec Practiced: You can try to dream a certain dream. 

ecc Skillful: Some control over your dreams. 

cooo Expert: You know how to influence and read 


dreams as aspects of your inner self. 


ecce Master: Youunderstand the metaphysical elements 
of dreams and can manipulate them, recall them, 
inspire them, or share them to your will. 


Possessed By: Shamans, Sages, Witches, Artists, Savants, 
Philosophers, Dream Researchers, Marauders, Martial Artists, 
Fey-Blooded People, The Dream Police 


Suggested Specialties; Dream Control, Waking From 
Nightmares, Puzzling Enigmas, Visionquesting, Omens, Dream 
Combat, Demesne 


Search 


Given time and motivation, you know how to toss a room 
or comb the woods. You’ve honed an eye for clues, mastered 
the classic hiding spaces (and puzzled out some new ones), 
and learned how to follow your instincts. If there’s something 
to be found, you're likely to find it... and if you combine this 
Talent with Sphere 1 Effects, there’s not much that can hide 
from you for long. 


° Novice: You're good at finding lost stuff. 

ee Practiced: Clues seem to jump out at you. 

eee Skillful: The last place to look is the first place 
you try. 

ecce Expert: The pros consult you when something 


or someone needs to be found. 


eocce Master: Your gift for detections seems downright 
supernatural... and probably is. 


Possessed By: Burglars, Shakedown Experts, Detectives, 
Inspectors, Profilers, Bounty Hunters, Black Suits, CSI 
Teams 


Suggested Specialties: Tossing, Hidden Spaces, Likely 
Places, Outdoor Cues, Police Procedures, Concealed Doors, 
Telltale Marks 


Seduction 


You're good at being bad. A master of attraction, you can draw 
people into engagements they might otherwise ignore or avoid. 
We're not talking about simple chemistry here, although you can 
certainly augment your chemistry with a little Life or Mind magick. 
This Talent reflects the combination of carnal allure and emotional 
manipulation that can wind people around your fingers (or other 
parts of your anatomy...) whenever you want their attention. 


Seduction isn’talways sexual. Itdoes, however, playoff the target’s 
desires. Note that you don’t have to be gorgeous to use this Ability; 
many seducers, in fact, seem unremarkable until they put this gift 
to work. For game systems associated with social machinations, see 
the Social Occasions and Intrigue entry in Chapter Nine. 


° Novice: You can score desperate drunks. 

ee Practiced: You can have almost anyone you 
want. 

eco Skillful: You’re good enough to get people to 
go against their better natures. 

ecco Expert: Turn on the charm, turn off their 
brains. 

coocoo Master: Vows, homes, hearts, and marriages 


are yours to break at will. 


Possessed By: Spies, Manipulators, Users, Subverters, 
Ecstatics, Nephandi, Pretty Strangers, Demon Lovers, Vampires 
in Many Senses of That Word 


Suggested Specialties: Raw Sex, Appealing to Kinks, False 
Innocence, Topping From Below, Subtle Moves, “Let’s be Bad 
Guys,” Crude But Effective 


Secondary Skills 


Magick demands a wide range of skills. Especially among 
the Technocratic field ops, specialized training provides the 
expertise to handle anything from a blaster cannon to a horse 
race. Of all Ability categories, the following Skills may provide 
the widest range of potential Traits... and yet, for certain Paths, 
these secondary vocations may be the most vital Abilities of all. 


Acrobatics 

Dazzling feats of athletic grace are yours to perform. Despite 
the limitations of physics and biology, you defy gravity and make 
it look easy. Naturally, there’s intense practice and dedication 
involved in such discipline - it didn't come easily, and you must 
honesuchskills with constantexercise. Still, your flexible precision 
seems downright magical and, especially if you add in Life, Time, 
and Correspondence Spheres, might be literally inhuman! 


° Novice: Practiced tumbler. 

ee Practiced: High school gymnast. 
ecc Skillful: Professional acrobat. 
ecco Expert: Olympic-level contender. 
coocoo Master: Cirque Du Soleil artist. 


Possessed By: Martial Artists, Circus Stunt Performers, 
Performers, Dancers, Gymnasts, Aerialists, Extreme Athletes, 
Shapeshifters 


Suggested Specialties: Aerial Arts, Martial Arts, Stunts, 
Falls, Trapeze, Competition Gymnastics, Floor Work, Enhanced 
Jumping, Parkour 


Archery 


You can shoot humanity’s most venerable long-distance 
weapon: the bow. Beyond its obvious practical applications, this 
Skill can become a meditative art as well - and is practiced as 
such by Zen archers and other enthusiasts. Because bows launch 
wooden shafts, they make good weapons against vampires... 
and because they're almost silent, bows offer efficient gear for 
assassins and spies as well. 


For details about bows and crossbows, see Chapter Nine, 


(p. 419 and 452). 


e Novice: Kid in archery class. 
ee Practiced: SCAdian archer. 
eco Skillful: Bow-hunter. 

ccoo Expert: Katniss Everdeen. 
ecccc Master: Legolas. 


Possessed By: Snipers, Hunters, Commandos, Assassins, 
Survivalists, Athletes, Outlaws, Recreationists, Folks From 
Arboreal Cultures, Fans of The Hunger Games, Would-Be Elves 


Suggested Specialties: Longbow, Crossbow, Hunting, 
Horse-Archery, Trick Shots, Killing Shots, Kyudou Techniques, 
Arched Flight, Primitive Archery 


Biotech 


Bodies are the original machines, and technology invents 
new machines to go along with them. You understand the 
connections between organic and mechanical systems and can 
work the places where they interface. An absolutely essential 
Skill for the cyborgs and cybernetic engineers of Iteration 
X, the Progenitors, the Virtual Adepts, and certain Etherite 
factions, Biotech gives you hands-on training and experience 
with cybernetic technology. Naturally, you need various 
Science Knowledges in order to design, invent, and install 


Chapter Six: Creating the Character 295 


A 


255 


i 


A ZT 


such technology; with this Skill, though, you've got practical 
applications to back up all that information. 


For rules about cybernetic gear, see the Enhancements 
Background later in this chapter, (pp. 312-313), and The Toybox 
in Appendix II, (pp. 657-661). For biotech as a technomagickal 
focus, see the Cyberneticsand Hypertech practices in Chapter 
Ten, (pp. 576-579). 


° Novice: Given a basic understanding of 
biotech principles, you've seen the design and 
implementation of such technology. Despite 
your lack of experience, you might be able to 
make very simple repairs if need be. 


eo Practiced: Now you’ve got the experience to 
make basic repairs and can design and install 
simple biotech machines. 


Skillful: Honed by study, field work, and 
laboratory experimentation, you ve got serious 
chops with regards to cybernetic technology. 


cooo Expert: You're good enough to create, install, 


and maintain radical designs, perform major 
overhauls on existing tech, and employ almost 
any biotech Device or Procedure within your 
field. (Weird stufffrom those demented Etherites 
is probably beyond your grasp... but really, does 
anyone truly understand those mad bastards?) 


coocoo Master: You could compare notes with Tony 


Stark. 


Possessed By: Cyborgs, Cybernetic Maintenance Techs, 
Q Division, Genegineers, Mad Scientists, Transhumanists 


Suggested Specialties: Cloning, Cybernetics, Mad 
Theories, Repair, Field Mods, Redesign, Nanotech, Floronics, 
Biomechanisms, Biomods, Web-Based Interface 


Energy Weapons 

When the only things standing between innocent 
bystanders and a raging Reality Deviant are you, your blaster, and 
the ability to use it, this becomes a must-have Skill. Laser guns, 
particle-beam accelerators, plasma hand-cannons, ectoplasmic 
disrupters, and other advanced weaponry demand advanced 
handling; any ape can fire a revolver, but only specially trained 
personnel know how to employ hypertech weaponry. 


This Ability reflects a basic understanding of energy weapon 
technology (or at least the ability to turn it on, point it in the 
right direction, and not blow your own hand off with it), and 
the essential skills involved in handling, maintaining, adjusting, 
loading, and storing the tools of Technocratic security. Forasmall 
selection of energy weapons, see The Toybox in Appendix II. 


G Novice: Imperial Stormtrooper. 

eo Practiced: Competent shooter. 

ecc Skillful: Average Technocratic field operative. 
cooo Expert: Elite Op. 

eevee Master: “Phased plasma rifle in the 40-Watt 


range...” 


206 Mage: The Ascension 20" Anniversary Edition 


Possessed By: Cyborgs, Space Marines, BlackSuits, Covert 
Agents, Etherite Heroes 


Suggested Specialties: Heavy Weapons, Experimental 
Tech, Repair, Small Arms, Field Modifications, Cybernetic 
Weaponry, Micro-Gravitational Operations, Sniper, Pulp-Tech 


Hypertech 

There's mundane technology, and then there's the stuff 
that technomages command. This latter tech is not, of course, 
"magick" - perish that thought! Still, its principles transcend 
the limited understanding of the Masses and their convenient 
little world. The advanced principles employed by the 
Technocracy, Virtual Adepts, various mad scientists, and even 
the technomancers of other, more traditional pursuits all range 
outside everyday sciences. Thesearcane technologies - nanotech, 
Trinary computing, extradimensional travel, and so on - seem 
mysterious even to many of the rank-and-file who employ them. 
You, however, understand how such things work... and through 
such understanding, you can modify existing Devices, create your 
own, oremploy machines created by other technomancer mages. 


At Ranks 1 and 2, a character with this Skill understands 
only the principles behind her own group's Devices; an Etherite, 
for example, can puzzle out the workings of a colleague's 
contraptions, but she would wind up stymied by, say, an 
Iteration X Device. At Rank 3 and above, however, that same 
mag... I mean, scientist could decipher the odd perversions of 
scientific truth behind such alien Devices - and, by extension, 
could use or even modify them. In game terms, this means that 
a successful Hypertech roll would allow a technomancer to 
employ a tool or Device that would not normally work for him 
due to its secure or unconventional design. If you're running 
a Technocratic operative, this is a pretty big deal; the warped 
confections of mad scientists begin to make a practical kind 
of sense... which means, of course, that you can now convert 
those insane Devices to more sensible purposes. 


Your Hypertech rating cannot be higher than your rating 
in the Technology Skill. If you don't understand the basics, 
after all, how will you wrap your head around the big stuff? As 
with the Computer Knowledge, your ability to focus Sphere 
Effects through hypertech may be limited to the dots in your 
Hypertech Trait. For details about technomagickal practices, see 
the Cybernetics, Hypertech, and Weird Science entries, and 
their associated paradigms and instruments, in the Practices 
section of Chapter Ten. 


e Novice: You understand basic theories of 
alternative sciences. 


ec Practiced: “Esoterica” is just another word for 
the obvious. 


ec Skillful: You can wrap your head around the 
technological perversions of other groups. 
ecce Expert: Technologies of your foes and rivals 
dance to the tune you program for them. 
LELKE] 


Master: So rich is your comprehension of the 
universe that few technologies elude your 
command. 


Possessed By: Mad Scientists, Renegade Technocrats, 
Visionary Geniuses, Tech-Hackers, Q Division Ops, Design 
Specialists, Elite Field Ops, Black Suits, Gadgeteers 


Suggested Specialties: Hacking-n-Cracking, Improvisation, 
Repair, Jury-Rigging, Radical Conversions, Weaponsmith, 
Computers, Microtech, Nanotech, Experimental Theories, 
Ethertech Theories, Street Mods, Anarchtech 


Jetpack 

The tricky art of personal flight devices is yours to enjoy. With 
this Skill, you know how to control body-mounted flying gadgets. 
Like most tech-based Abilities, your success depends a lot on your 
familiarity, or lack of it, with the specific kind of tech involved. A Man 
in Black would have as hard a time with a Son of Ether’s jetpack as 
an Etherite would have with standard-issue NWO gear. Once you've 
logged some flighttime with a device, however, you're on your way. 


° Novice: “Oooooooooh, shiiiiiiiiiiiiiiittttttt!” 

ec Practiced: "That's not flying - that's falling 
with style." 

eco 


Skillful: Experienced and controlled. 


ecco Expert: You can fly, fight, and return to earth 
intact. 
eccce Master: “To Infinity - and 
BEYOND?" 
Possessed By: Space Marines, 
Etherites, Daredevils, 


Commandos, BlackSuits, 
Research Assistants, 
Test Pilots 


Suggested 
Specialties: Combat, 
Tricks, Pursuit, High 
Speeds, BootJets, Micro-G 


Riding 

You know how 
to saddle, care for, 
and ride some sort 
of animal. Through 
a combination of 
techniques and 
bonding, you 
stand a decent 
chance of getting 
where you want 
to go without 
being thrown 
off, trampled, or 
possibly eaten by 
your ride. 


Certain beasts, 
of course, are harder to 
ride than others. For truly 
dangerous or exotic mounts 


(tigers, griffins, giant owls, etc.), you'll probably need Riding 3 
or better in order to stay in the saddle at all. Under challenging 
circumstances (combat, hard gallops, stunts, flying, and so on), 
you may need to make a Dexterity + Riding roll. Charisma + 
Riding helps you bond with your mount, and Intelligence + 
Riding lets you know how to take care of it, maintain riding 
gear, and puzzle out someone else’s riding techniques. To 
reflect an unusually keen bond with animals, see the Animal 
Kinship Talent, (p.289). 


° Novice: Dude-ranch tourist. 

eo Practiced: Practiced equestrian. 
eco Skillful: Professional rider. 
ecce Expert: Bronco-buster. 

eeccc 


Master: Ride the tiger, bay-beee! 


Possessed By: Cowboys, Medievalists, Athletes, Stable 
Grooms, Wealthy Folks, Farmers, Pre-Industrial Travelers 


Suggested Specialties: Bareback, Stunts, Horse Whispering, 
Traditional Techniques, Showmanship, Jumping, Combat, 
Jousting, Racing, Weird Mounts, Rapport 


Chapter Six: Creating the Character 207 


m ERES ZA 


Ed 


Call it "enhanced interrogation" if you like. We all know 
whatyou really do: You hurt people. Maybe you're “just following 
orders," or you realize that ticking bombs sometimes require 
blunt instruments. Perhaps you just plain enjoy it, even if you 
can't even admit that to yourself. Whatever means you use to 
justify this skill, you excel at causing mental, physical, and perhaps 
spiritual distress. This might be part of a religious duty, military 
service, mystic practice, or god-given prerogative. Then again, you 
could simply be a sick fuck. Whether said distress involves brutal 
trauma, exquisite agony, or "simple" emotional manipulation, 
your skills bring people - perhaps even yourself - to, and perhaps 
over, the edge of what was once considered endurance. 


Even when it's done for “the right reasons,” torture presents 
an extremely dicey proposition, especially for an interactive 
entertainment. Still, itwould be dishonestto pretend that certain 
magicians and operatives don’t practice excruciation as part of 
their calling. Many mystic practices include ordeals, self-torment, 
and even mutilation. Meanwhile, the dreaded techniques of 
object lessons and secured intelligence feature torture as just 
another part of the gig. In game terms, this Skill might involve 
a blackout; if not, the scene should not be treated lightly, or 
with disrespect toward the feelings of other players. Whatever 
the context, torture scenes certainly count as mature content. 
For more on the subject, see Triggers, Limits, and Boundaries 
in Chapter Seven (p.345), Dramatic Feats in Chapter Nine 
(p.404), and Ordeals and Exertion in Chapter Ten (p.597). 


e Novice: Playground bully. 

ec Practiced: Bad cop. 

eco Skillful: Covert ops interrogator. 
ecce Expert: Elite pro dom. 


Master: Nazi doctor, Spanish Inquisitor, or 
serial killer. 


Possessed By: Enforcers, Gangsters, Spies, CounterTerrorism 
Agents, LeftHand Path Ecstatic Mages and Euthanatos, NWO 
Operatives, Scary Doctors, Sadists (Safe, Sane, and Otherwise) 


Suggested Specialties: Mind Games, Exquisite Techniques, 
Prolonged Agony, Classical Devices, Sexplay, SelfTorment, 
Information Retrieval, “Works of Art,” Pain - Not Harm 


Secondary Knowledges 


Knowledge is a mage’s best friend. Beyond the core 
Knowledge Abilities, Mage features many types of Knowledge, 
often tied to specific mystic or technomagickal pursuits. The 
average person probably hasn’t even heard of some of these fields of 
study. To certain Awakened folks, however, the following optional 
Knowledges can define their Path... or ensure their survival! 


Area Knowledge 


You know a certain area like the back of your hand. In 
game terms, choose a particular region (no larger than a city) 
that your character has a reason to know about. Successful Area 
Knowledge rolls help you get around, spot shortcuts, and grasp 
customs, clues, and trivia in ways no outsider could understand. 


Mage: The Ascension 20" Anniversary Edition 


(Note: The Well-Skilled Craftsman option does not apply to 
Area Knowledge. To learn a place, you must spend time there.) 


° Dabbler: You’vestudied up on the area in question. 
ec Student: You've lived there a while. 
ecc Scholar: You've spent lots of time getting to 


know the local secrets. 


cooo Professor: There’s not much about the place 
you don’t know. 


coocoo Master: "My city calls me, and I answer...” 


Possessed By: Vigilantes, Cops, Crime Bosses, Journalists, 
Backwoods Legends, Street Folks, BlackSuits, Protectors ofthe People 


Suggested Specialties: History, Geography, Wildlife, 
Politics, Shortcuts, Getaways, Crime, Rumors, Hideouts, Gangs, 
Information Sources, Well-Hidden Secrets 


Belief Systems 

You'vestudied what people believe, how they believe it, why 
they believe what they do, and - perhaps most importantly - 
where people tend to hold certain beliefs. Why is this important? 
Because, when reality is your stock-in-trade, knowing why, how, 
and where people believe certain things gives you a massive edge 
when you're trying to suit or change those beliefs. 


Asa Trait, this Knowledge covers general religious, political, 
economic, and philosophical belief systems throughout the 
modern mortal world. The higher your rating is, the more 
extensive and yet specific your understanding becomes. A single 
dot confers basic information ("Many United States citizens tend to 
be moderately capitalist, with a modern Christian cultural background 
and a heavy reliance upon mass-media impressions”), whereas higher 
ratings reflect increasingly detailed and specific knowledge (“The 
San Francisco region comprises extremes of both right and leftwing 
American political ideologies, with the dominant religious belief systems 
encompassing the modern and traditional beliefs of its large Chinese, 
Indian, and Japanese cultures; traditional and modified Native American 
belief systems; Mexican Catholicism; moderate Evangelical Protestant 
Christianity; moderate U.S. Catholicism; postmodern NeoPaganism; and 
diverse New Age syntheses of pan-cultural magical thinking...”). This sort 
of understanding can be extremely helpful when you're crafting 
coincidental magick, appealing to local traditions, cultivating 
good impressions, or shifting people’s beliefs in your favor. 

The Belief Systems Knowledge also helps a mage understand the 


"reality zones” phenomenon and to turn it to her advantage. See the 
Reality Zonessection in Chapter Ten, (pp. 611-617), for further details. 


° Dabbler: You’ve gleaned a working knowledge 
off Wikipedia. 
ec Student: You hold a decent understanding of 


current religious and cultural beliefs. 


ecc Scholar: You've got a deep comprehension of 
dominant belief systems worldwide. 


ecce Professor: You're a noted authority on 
comparativereligionsand political philosophies. 


eccce Master: Karen Armstrong fact-checks her books 


with you. 


Possessed By: Journalists, Missionaries, Theologians, Historians, 
Professors, Pundits, Philosophers, Poli-Sci Scholars, Media 
Manipulators, Political/ Religious Activists, Paradigm-Shifting Mages 

Suggested Specialties: Regional Beliefs, Esoterica, Cults, 
Current Events, Religious/ Political History, Geopolitics, 
Comparative Religion, Media Manipulation, Belief Trends, 
Paradigm-Hacking 


Cryptography 

A world full of secrets is a world filled with codes. You 
understand how they work, know the principles for crafting 
and cracking them, and have the kind of mind that curves 
along the proper corners when hacking various codes. A 
background in mathematics and historical encryption comes 
with this Skill, although other Abilities - Enigmas, Esoterica 
(Alchemy, Bibliomancy, Secret Code Languages, etc.), Science 
(Mathematics), and so forth - provide invaluable assistance for 
such tasks. Mages are really good at rendering simple things 
into obscure gibberish, so this is a valuable skill, though not an 
especially common one. 


With this Knowledge, you can create codes that can be 
broken only by someone who exceeds your Cryptography rating 
with her own Intelligence * Cryptography dice pool. (Someone 
with a dice pool of at least four dice could beat Cryptography 
3, for example, but not Cryptography 4.) You can also try to 
unravel codes with your own Intelligence * Cryptography rolls. 
In both cases, the difficulty depends upon the complexity of 
the code and the obscurity of the elements involved. If the 
code demands some knowledge that the would-be cracker does 
not have, of course, the code remains unbreakable. Japanese 
cryptographers, for instance, couldn't have deciphered the 
Navajo code-talker messages because they didn't even know 
that the Navajo language existed. Even without such knowledge, 
though, a good roll can help you puzzle out the foundation of 
a code even if you can’t read its contents, which is often half 
the battle. 


For rules dealing with codes and decryption, see Social 
Occasions and Intrigue in Chapter Nine. 


e Dabbler: Spy novel fan. 
eo Student: Military signals engineer. 
eee 


Scholar: Intelligence operative. 


cece Professor: Cipher specialist. 


eocce Master: Codebuster supreme. 


Possessed By: Puzzle Fans, Intelligence Specialists, 
Spies, Alchemists, Communication Analysts, Insurgents, 
Counterterrorism Agents 


Suggested Specialties: Mathematical Encryption, Secret 
Languages, Mystical Codes, Occulted Lore, Encryption History, 
Weird Logic, Computers, Art-History Symbolism 


Demolitions 

You know how to make things go BOOM, usually without 
blowing yourself to bits in the process. This perilous specialty 
becomes especially important in the new millennium, when 


Improvised Explosive Devices are weapons of choice and 
opportunity. Such Knowledge confers a working familiarity 
with explosive chemistry and tech, an understanding of 
common designs, a knack for figuring blast patterns and 
effects, and - at its higher levels - the expertise to defuse 
many explosive devices too. What it does not do is provide 
foolproof explosive technology. Once things explode, chaos 
always takes over. 


° Novice: Model kits, fireworks, and you. 
ee Practiced: Anarchy! 
eco Skillful: You’ve trained with explosive 


compounds, devices, and precautions. 
Expert: "Stand back - I’m a professional.” 


Master: A master of disasters, you can defuse, 
as well as create, a wide range of explosive 
devices. 


Possessed By: Mythbusters, Terrorists, Counterterrorists, 
Radicals, Survivalists, Spies, Pyrotechnicians, Military Specialists, 
YouTube Stars, Kids With More Enthusiasm Than Sense 

Suggested Specialties: IEDs, Bomb Disposal, Stage 
Effects, Fireworks, Car Bombs, Improvised Materials, Magickal 
Enhancement, Building Demolition, “Watch This!” 


Finance 

Money is the ultimate human magic trick, and you know 
how it works. Trade, trends, investments, markets, and risks 
provide you with mental stimulation, Awakened/ Enlightened 
power, economic fortitude, and - most likely - plenty of money 
(in game terms, the Resources Background). 


An essential Trait for Syndicate Technocrats, this 
Knowledge enriches wizards, Adepts, mad scientists, and sharp- 
witted witches everywhere and provides a key componentof the 
Ars Cupiditae - a venerable form magick based upon desire. (See 
The Art of Desire/ Hypereconomics in Chapter Ten, p.573.) 


° Dabbler: Smart investor. 
ee Student: Bank employee. 
ecc Scholar: Professional stockbroker. 


ecce Professor: Wall Street wizard. 


eccce Master: Power behind the throne. 


Possessed By: Bankers, Brokers, Tycoons, Executives, 
Reporters, Accountants, Investors, Wealthy Bastards, 
Nephandic Corrupters, Captains of Industry, Masters of the 
Modern World 


Suggested Specialties: Stock Markets, Investment Trends, 
International Trading, Warning Signs, Insider Trading, Laws, Law- 
Breaking, Black Markets, Currency, Power of Greed, Ars Cupiditae 


Lore/ RD Data 


You know more about the Night-Folk than they'd appreciate 
you knowing. Sure, your understanding gets filtered through 
the lens of your own group’s perspective, but it’s more than the 
average person... or mage... comprehends. For mystic mages, such 
knowledge is considered Lore: the hidden secrets of vampires, 


Chapter Six: Creating the Character 299 


TN Al 
NN ri 


AA 

4 yf 
a 
| 
— 


? 


werecreatures, and the like. Among Technocrats, it's known as 
RD Data: information about the clandestine affairs of Reality 
Deviants whose very existence presents a threat to the Consensus. 


Different Lore categories include: Spirits, Fae, Werecreatures, 
Vampires, Ghosts, Hunters, Demons, Mages (naturally...), and 
potentially others as well. Each Lore/ RD Data category counts 
as a separate Lore specialty; knowing about Sabbat Kindred won't 
teach you anything about Seelie Fae Kith. The WellSkilled 
Craftsman option may help you assemble a formidable amount 
of information about various groups within those categories. 
Even then, however, your knowledge will be full of holes, 
misconceptions, prejudices, and lies. These secretive beings 
don’t even have accurate appraisals of themselves, so an outsider 
(especially a Technocratic one) has obvious disadvantages in 
that regard as well. 


Another thing - despite their long rivalries, different mage 
factions don’t often have accurate data about one another. A 
Verbena runecaster might recognize “one of those fucking 
soulless Technocratic bastards,” but he’s not likely to know the 
difference between a Progenitor Genegineer and a Syndicate 
(3 H » + 4 HU 

magic man"... or to care much about it, either, unless he's got 
a specialty in Technocracy Lore. 


° Dabbler: They're out there... 


ee Student: You've heard a few names and legends 
about them. 


Scholar: These entities have distinct social 
structures, and you've begun to understand 
what they might be. 


ecce Professor: Although your knowledge is biased 


by your own perspective, you can tell a Ventrue 
from a Setite and you've got some idea what 
that distinction means. 


LLLI) Master: You're not supposed to know as much 


about them as you do... but you do. 


Possessed By: Sages, Wizards, Xenobiologists, Black 
Suits, Witches, Shamans, Field Ops, Adventurers, Emissaries, 
Strategists, Interrogators, Intelligence Analysts, Monster- 
Hunters 


Suggested Specialties: Infernalists, Marauders, Traditions, 
Technocracy, Disparates, Faeries, Vampires, Werebeasts, Ghosts, 
Hunters, Demons, etc. 


Media 


Mass media is mass reality... and you know how to shape 
both. The fine art and science of crafting public perception is 
yours to employ. You know who to call, what to tell them, which 
strings to pull, and probably how to make a tasty profit off the 
end result. Although this Trait does not necessarily grant access 
to high-placed media figures (see the Influence Background for 
those kinds of connections), you understand the Mass Media 
Machine and can guide it to your best advantage. 


The Dominion, Art of Desire, and Reality-Hacking 
practices often depend upon an understanding of media (see 
those entries in Chapter Ten), and media can even function as 


Ma$e: The Ascension 20^ Anniversary Edition 


an instrument of certain types of magick - see the Mass Media 
entry on (p.594) for details. 


° Dabbler: Mass-Com major. 
ec Student: Reporter. 

coo Scholar: Career journalist. 
ecce Professor: Network honcho. 
eccce 


Master: Rupert Murdoch. 


Possessed By: Writers, Editors, Pundits, Media Flacks, 
Spin Doctors, Watchdog Advocates, Bloggers, Advertisers, 
Celebrities, Corrupters, Media Agents, Politicians, Activists, 
Adbusters, NWO Watchers, Media-Indoctrination Specialists 


Suggested Specialties: Spin Control, Politics, Leverage, 
Slander, Media Law, International Media, Propaganda, Panic, 
Subversion, Local News, Internet Media, Alternative Sources, 
Movies, TV, Cable News, Media Consolidation, Top-Down 
Influence, Entertainment, Advertising, Walking The Line 
Between Truth And Fiction 


Pharmacopoeia/ Poisons 

Drugs are your specialty: street drugs, herbal compounds, 
experimental medications, psychoactives, hypertech concoctions, 
and the like. You understand the effects of various chemicals 
on the human animal and perhaps on other animals as well. A 
specialty of shamans, witches, Progenitors, Ecstatics, alchemists, 
and other mages who employ pharmaceutical compounds, this 
Knowledge allows you - with the proper tools, of course - to 
measure, recognize, analyze, counter, or dose someone with 
a range of chemicals. As usual, higher ratings reflect greater 
expertise. You'll never know everything, of course, but you're 
rarely flying blind. 

A venerable, if underhanded, magickal tool, the variation 
Knowledge of Poisons allows you to alter the natural chemistry 
of living things in... shall we say, unfortunate ways. Witches, 
alchemists, assassins, and other shady types are infamous for 
their expertise with such compounds, and though you might 
not want to advertise that information, you're experienced with 
such compounds too. 


For rules dealing with poisons and intoxication, see Drugs, 
Poisons, and Disease in Chapter Nine, (pp. 441-444). 


° Dabbler: Street dealer. 

ee Student: Pharmacy student or savvy herbalist. 

ecc Scholar: Dr. Timothy Leary. 

ELIO Professor: Experienced with mystic, esoteric, 
and hypertech compounds. 

LELEA] 


Master: Renowned Pharmacopoeist. 


Possessed By: Progenitors, Ecstatics, Alchemists, 
Entheogenic Mystics, Dope Dealers, Vice Cops, Verbena, 
Interrogators, Corrupters, Party Animals, Mad Scientists, 
Medical Professionals 


Suggested Specialties: Mundane Meds, Hypermeds, 
Street Drugs, Entheogens, Magical Concoctions, Designer 
Compounds, Herbal Remedies, Nutritional Supplements, 
Mood-Altering Drugs 


A measure of resources both internal (Avatar, 
Arcane, Dream, etc.) and external (Allies, 
Mentor, Resources, and so on), the Background 
Trait tells you plenty abouta mage's position in 
life. A charismatic wizard, for instance, would 
have Allies, Contacts, Influence, and the like, 
whereas a solitary hermit would possess a strong 
Avatar, lots of Arcane, and maybe a Familiar 
or Node. As with other Traits, Backgrounds 
come from essential elements of that character’s 
history and often play significant roles in the 
chronicle at hand. When you pick your Backgrounds, then, 
make sure there are good reasons for the things you choose. 
Who are your Allies, and why do they aid you? Where’s your 
Node, what’s it like, and how did you acquire such a potent 
treasure? A high Avatar rating reflects an entity with a strong 
personality and goals of its own; what, then, is your relationship 
with that internal spirit, and how does that affect your life? 
Each Trait should have origins, conditions, and a story of its 
own... at least in regards to its place in your life. 


In certain situations, you can roll your Background rating 
as a dice pool (or part of one) for certain feats. Charisma + 
Influence, for example, can help you spread a message quickly, 
and Manipulation + Arcane might help you pull the old “I’m 
not the one you’re looking for” trick. Generally, though, your 
Background ratings reflect things that are available to you, not 
dice you roll to accomplish the average task. 


Although your actions affect the power of your Background 
resources, the Background Trait itself is generally considered to 
be outside the player’s control. Under the original Storyteller 
rules, you could not raise a Background Trait with experience 
points, although the Storyteller might raise it for you, in lieu 
of experience points, to reflect events in the chronicle. Mage 
Revised changed this rule, so the final decision depends on 
your Storyteller’s wishes (see p. 336.) Even then, a changed 
Background generally reflects a change in circumstances. You 
can try to recruit more Spies or entice more Allies to join your 
cause, but the exact number of people who do (or don’t) flock 
to your banner depend on the needs of the story, not on the 
points you spend to boost those Traits. 


Background Ratings Over Five 


When you've got the resources of a massive organization 
behind you, or if you've acquired some monumental wealth 
or influence thanks to your Arts, an inheritance, or some 
other unusual means, you could exceed the usual Background 
limits. Such levels of influence are extremely rare, the province 
of the richest and most influential folks on Earth. Syndicate 
tycoons, heirs of Hermetic wizardry, hackers who own entire IT 
firms - these sorts of characters might, if the Storyteller agrees, 
purchase Background Traits above the usual level. 


Only the Backgrounds noted below can go above the five- 
dotlevel. These Backgrounds - Allies, Backup, Influence, Library, 


Node, Resources, Requisitions, and Spies - reflect external resources 
thatother Traits cannot match. Theother Background Traits can 
NOT go above five; you can't purchase Avatar 6 or Mentor 8. 


When listing a Background Trait above 5, simply note 
the first five dots in the usual place and then either mark the 
additional dots in the next line under that one, or else write 
down something like "Resources 7" on your character sheet. 
As with all other Backgrounds, these high-level Traits are not 
free. People who own companies, have fortunes, or maintain 
vast spy networks need to spend a lot of time maintaining 
those resources... and those who don't soon wind up losing 
those fortunes to bad luck and untrustworthy subordinates. 
On a related note, a character needs a really good justification 
for such opulence. Backgrounds between 6 and 10 reflect vital 
elements of a character's life. 


High-level Backgrounds can seriously unbalance a 
chronicle. The Storyteller may refuse to let players purchase such 
expansive Traits at all. Even if he allows those upper levels into 
play, we strongly suggest limiting the nine- and 10-dot ranks to 
Storyteller characters only. A single character with Resources 10 
can buy almost anything or anyone; a mere handful of people 
on Earth command that kind of wealth, and it’s not wise to 
allow playerrun mages to be among them! 


Pooling Backgrounds 


Cooperation benefits everyone. A team of Technocratic 
operatives - or, at the Storyteller’s discretion, a tight circle 
of like-minded mystics - can pool certain Background Traits 
and then share them with the group as a whole. In the case of 
Technocracy ops, that’s a fairly standard procedure; for mystic 
mages, the group must have a common purpose and a very 
close connection with one another - say, a witches’ coven, an 
Etherite lab-group, a hacker society, and so forth. 


The following Backgrounds can be shared within a single 
group: Allies, Backup, Influence, Laboratory, Library, Mentor, 
Node, Patron, Resources, Requisitions, Spies and Wonder. Other 
backgrounds are too individual to be shared this way. Although 
mystic mages can pool their Background points toward a 
common Chantry, Technocratic agents are specifically prohibited 
from doing so. When you're part of that Union, you go where 
they tell you to go, belong to the group they tell you to belong to, 
and don’t even think of establishing your own base of control. 


In story terms, the members of the group agree to hold 
certain assets in common. The group’s leader determines who 
gets what and when, then takes the necessary steps to secure 
that Background for his group. In game terms: 


* The players pool their Background points and then put 
them into certain Backgrounds that each member of 
the group can use. These Backgrounds are then listed 
as Group Assets or Shared Resources on the character 
sheet of each member of that group. 


Chapter Six: Creating the Character 


. 


f 


ING ZA: 
Backgrounds 


eo 


"UL 


; 


If a member of that group quits, dies, or falls out of favor 
with thegroup, her Background points are withdrawn from 
the group's total. She, in turn, loses access to the Group 
Asset Backgrounds, assuming she's alive to use them. The 
other members either lose those points permanently or 
replace them with new points of their own. 


Individual characters may keep a few Background points 
aside for personal use. If nothing else, each mage in that 
group should have a point or two in the Avatar/ Genius 
Background. 


When the group's leader requisitions new gear for 
his team, the chances of success are based on the 
team's relationship to its superiors. A hotshot pack of 
malcontents will have a harder time getting gear than 
an efficient strike force. The pool may come from 
membership in a larger group. 


If a specific member of the team tries to “borrow” a 
Background (see below), that player makes the roll. 
Failure, however, might affect the team as a whole, 
which might get the offending agent thrown under the 
bus for the sake of the group. 


If the group members want to purchase a high-level 
Background (see Background Ratings Over Five, above), 
they may do so if the Storyteller agrees. All the points 
get totaled up, and that Background becomes group 
property. A team that assembles some really large assets, 
though, may attract unwanted attention, especially if 
they belong to the Technocracy. Members of the Union 
should always remember their place in the greater whole, 
and vast Resources (other than money among Syndicate 
operatives) might reflect an unmutual attitude. 


Membership Has Its Privileges: 
Technocratic Backgrounds 


Certain Backgrounds, marked with an asterisk (*), are 
available only to members of the Technocratic Union. In order 
to access them, your character must display loyal and constant 
devotion to the cause. Erratic or unmutual behavior will also 
reduce a Technocrat’s external Background Traits (Allies, 
Influence, Resources, etc.); after all, if you don’ tact trustworthy, 
you can’t expect your superiors to trust you. 


Other Background Traits have slightly different forms for 
Technocratic operatives. Marked with an alternate name on 
the other side of a slash (like Familiar/ Companion), these 
Backgrounds function more or less the same way, in game 
terms, as the mystic option, but are regarded very differently 
by the characters themselves. 


Requisitioning, Outsourcing, 
and Borrowing Backgrounds 


Thanks to their involvement with the Technocratic Union, 
Technocracy operatives enjoy several edges with regards to 
Background Traits: 


e Outfitting: Before an assignment, Technocrats usually get 
outfitted with the essential equipment for that mission. The 
mission supervisor (that is, the Storyteller) determines what 
theagentswill need, and then gives them theappropriate gear. 
The agents, of course, do not own this gear - it’s still property 
of the Technocratic Union and may be withdrawn at any 
time. Technocrats who get in hotwater with their supervisors 
often find themselves with crappy gear, inadequate gear, 
or no gear at all. (See The Six Degrees in Chapter Five, 
pp.181-182.) Outfitting typically supplies a character with 
mundane equipment: guns, cars, communication devices, 
etc. Complex, advanced, expensive, or illegal gear (military 


Optional Rule: Differential Background 


To represent a character with several different types of related resources, your group could use differential Backgrounds. 
This optional rule lets one player purchase the same Background several times for the same character, with each one 
reflecting a separate resource. 


Under this option, each related Background Trait is defined as a specific group or situation. One set of Contacts, for 
instance, could bea set of spies in the Vatican, and another represents a bunch of bloggers. The Vatican infiltrators would 
be Spies * * e (“a highly secured area”), whereas the bloggers would be Spies * * ("various helpful areas"). Both groups 
would feed you very different kinds of information and provide separate types of access. 


Differentiated Backgrounds can be especially useful if and when one group of resources is compromised or destroyed 
(say, the Vatican spies get caught), or if your character has several identities (the bloggers know him as their buddy 
Gethsemane, but the Vatican insiders answer to the mysterious Black Bishop). Shapeshifting mages, or folks working 
several angles, may have different bank accounts (Resources), Nodes, Allies, or even Familiars. Each one is purchased 
separately, without any “price breaks.” If one Background falls through, however, you can still employ the other. 


This rule applies only to Backgrounds where one character could have several different related resources. You cannot 
own multiple Avatars, Arcanes, Destinies, Dreams, or Requisitions. You could, however, have several Allies, Contacts, 
Mentors, Libraries, and so forth. In all cases, each Background demands the usual time and attention - a pair of Familiars 
or Chantries would be pretty challenging to maintain! And yet, for certain characters, this option provides an array of 
options for an ever-changing world. 


302 


Mage: The Ascension 20" Anniversary Edition 


hardware, trucks, office space, etc.) often needs to be 
requisitioned unless the supervisor/ Storyteller considers 
it to be necessary for the assignment. 


Requisitioning: As beneficiaries of the Union's 
generosity, Technocrats may file a requisition with the 
appropriate supervisor. If that request is granted, the 
operative can have - ona temporary basis - specialized gear 
and/ ora Background Traitshe doesn't normally possess. 
In this case, the character must have the Requisitions 
Background; the player justifies the request, in character, 
to theStoryteller, and then rolls her Requisitions rating. 
The roll’s default difficulty is 7, but it might be lower or 
higher if the character's in really good (or really poor) 
standing with her supervisors; if the gear is either easy 
to come by; or if it is rare, fragile, expensive, and/ or 
dangerous. A successful roll nets her that gear, a failed 
roll gets a simple refusal, and a botched roll earns her 
a chewing-out from the offended supervisor. 


Outsourcing: Normally, Technocracy agents can 
requisition gear that's appropriate to their Convention: 
a Black Suit gets weapons and surveillance gear, a Void 
Engineergets DimensionalScience hypertech - thatsort 
of thing. However, a member of the Syndicate (and only 
a member of the Syndicate) can outsource gear from 
another Technocracy Convention. Again, the roll's 
difficulty is 7, modified by the nature of the gear and 
the standing of the agent requesting it. 


Borrowing: A Technocrat with connections can try to 
get his Ally, Contact, Mentor, or Patron to get the gear 
for him. In this case, the player rolls the appropriate 
Background Trait. Again, the difficulty is 7, adjusted 
for circumstances. A failed roll equals a refusal (which 
may also damage that relationship), and a botched roll 
means one or both of the partners gets caught (which 
will certainly damage it). If the borrower succeeds, each 
success is worth one dot in Requisitions; if he already 
has that Trait, it adds one dot to his usual rating. 


Asking Nicely: In this case, a borrowing Technocrat works 
his connection with somesocial finesse. The player roleplays 
the request and then either makes a social roll (a Social 
Trait * an Ability, with Traits appropriate to the nature 
of the request: Manipulation + Politics, Appearance + 
Seduction, etc.); or else rolls a Social Trait + the appropriate 
Background Trait (Charisma + Allies, for example). The 
roll itself depends on what that character’s doing to try 
to work the connection. Using Enlightened Procedures 
(that is, Sphere magick) to get what you want in this sort 
of bargain is extremely unmutual, with dire consequences 
to one or both parties if something goes wrong. 


Stealing: A stupid and/ or desperate agent might try to 
“unofficially borrow” gear for the long haul. The Union, 
though, keeps very good track of its resources, and an agent 
who tries stealing some of it is not long for this world. 


The following Backgrounds may be requisitioned, 
outsourced, or borrowed: Backup, Device, Influence, Library, 
Node, Resources, and Spies. All other Traits imply a personal 
connection to the Background in question. In no cases do the 
requested Traits become that character’s property. They need to 
be returned - in good working order - at the end of a mission. 


Although a non-Technocrat might try borrowing a 
Background Trait from another non-Technocrat (the usual 
limits apply), no agent of the Union would ever lend Union 
gear to a Reality Deviant. Beyond the horrific consequences of 
getting caught doing that, the idea would completely go against 
a Technocrat's grain. Sure, that crazy death-mage has his uses 
as cannon-fodder, but would you really trust such a lunatic with 
a Consensual Hallucination Generator? Never. 


Resource Forfeiture 

The downside of these expansive policies is simple: What is 
given can be taken away. A character or group that acts recklessly, 
dishonorably, or suspiciously can have its Background Traits 
rescinded. In this case, the Storyteller takes the Backgrounds 
away - possibly after a trial, sham or otherwise, maybe not. Aside 
from personal Backgrounds - Cloaking, Destiny, Genius, and 
Hypercram - a Technocrat's Backgrounds ultimately belong 
to the Union, not to the individual. Wise Technocrats behave 
themselves... or else. 


The following Background Traits can be taken away at the 
supervisor's command: Allies, Backup, Enhancement, Influence, Men- 
tor, Patron, Requisitions, Resources, Secret Weapon, Spies, and Wonder. 
Companions and Contacts can be neutralized (read: kidnapped or 
killed) as well, and access to a Construct, Laboratory, Library, or 
Node can be restricted or denied. In short, then, a Technocratic 
character has both huge advantages and a massive disadvantage; 
shecan requestthings far above her usual capacity, butthose things 
can be removed from her reach if she gets out of line. Thus, both 
juicy carrots and pointy sticks are used to control a Technocrat's 
behavior, assuring compliance, loyalty, and dedicated service. 


For more information about resource forfeiture, see 
Failure to Comply, The Six Degrees, and Rewards of Service 
in Chapter Five, (pp. 181-183). 


Background Traits 


As mentioned above, the Technocracy defines certain 
Traits differently than mystic mages do. And although members 
of the Traditions share a lot of common terms, mystic mages 
and technomancers who belong to different groups - or to no 
group at all - might define their Backgrounds by Technocratic 
standards (say, a Companion, not a Familiar) rather than by 
the usual Tradition labels or ideas. As usual, concept guides 
definition: a Bata'a priestess is more likely to see her Avatar as 
an aspect of the Loa, whereas a sel-Awakened computer geek is 
liable to see his Enlightened Self as a blazing spark of Genius. 


Allies 


In times of need, you've got folks who've got your back. 
These allies might be badass friends, helpful animals, people 


Chapter Six: Creating the Character 303 


E 


TN E 


a 


SS 


with connections they can work in your favor, errand-runners, 
or maybe even minor spirits who ll lend you the occasional favor 
if and when they feel like doing so. Generally, this Background 
refers to unAwakened humans or fairly intelligent animals (like 
a wolf pack or a troupe of apes). They're probably aware of the 
weirder side of your life, but they don't know the details of 
mage society or your true powers unless you choose to endanger 
them by sharing those secrets. Whatever their nature, or their 
relationship to you, these allies are characters in their own 
right, with needs, fears, motivations, and agendas that might 
coincide with your mage's goals but also may occasionally 
clash with them. 


Each dot in this Background gives you one ally with some 
moderately useful abilities, or two allies who essentially run 
errands and do busywork. At two dots and above, you can 
increase the ability of your moderate allies or buy a larger number 
of lesser and moderate allies. If you get two dots, for example, 
you could select two moderate allies, get four sidekicks, or 
make a single major ally who's more capable than those lesser 
ones. Magick-using Allies count as major ones. If your allies get 
killed or wind up quitting your company some other way, this 
Background loses the dots that represented those characters 
until you recruit new allies to replace the departed ones. 


In certain cases, this Background may go higher than five 
dots - see Background Traits Over Five, (p. 301). For an array 
of characters, see Appendix I. 


304 . Mage: The Ascension 20" Anniversary Edition 


X No allies who'd help you in times of need. 

° One ally of moderate power, or two minor 
sidekicks. 

ee Two moderate allies, four sidekicks, ora single, 


more powerful one. 


ecc Three moderate allies, or a combination of 
lesser and greater ones. 


cooo Four moderate allies, six minor sidekicks, or 
a combination of all three types. 


coocoo Five moderate allies, or an assortment of lesser 
and greater ones. 


coocoo o Six moderate allies, a small gang of sidekicks, 


or one or two really powerful friends. 


coocoo oo Seven moderates, a staff of sidekicks, or a 


handful of strong companions. 


eeeee eoe Eight moderates, a bunch of followers, or a 

few major badasses. 

eeece eeee Nine moderates, a private militia, or a pack of 
major friends. 

eeece e0000 Ten capable allies, a small army, or a truly 
deadly gang. 


Alternate Identity 


Sometimes you've gotta be ready to disappear. Especially 
for shapechangers, clones, or people in dangerous professions 


(spies, informers, assassins, etc.), the ability to adopt alternate 
identities can mean the difference between a new life and an 
unmarked grave. With this Background, you can duck behind 
a fake identity; the higher the rating, the more support you 
have for that identity's existence. Each dot in Alternate Identity 
provides a certain level of official recognition that stands up to 
increasing degrees of scrutiny. A cheap fake ID could get you 
past a bouncer, but it won't fool the Highway Patrol! 


By itself, an alternate identity is useful but not extremely 
so. You can use a new ID for a short time, but that'll leave you 
starting fresh unless you're planning to rebuild your life from 
scratch. Other Background Traits, however, can be linked to 
an alternate identity; you won't be able to get a new Avatar, 
of course, but you might have Allies, Resources, Spies, and so 
on that are connected to that new you. For each dot in the 
Alternate Identity Background, you may add one dot's worth of 
other Background Traits to your other self. You'll still need to 
pay points for those Backgrounds, of course - they don't come 
free with this Trait. Still, if and when you need to ditch your 
previous identity, you could have new resources waiting for you. 
(See the sidebar Differential Backgrounds for more details.) 


Strong IDs stand up to close observation. To penetrate an 
alternate identity, a character would need to roll a Mental Trait 
+ Investigation against a difficulty of your Alternate Identity + 
3. You can purchase this Trait several times in order to reflect 
a set of alternate IDs. Even so, you should use some form of 
magick or disguise to provide distinct appearances for your 
different identities. Sure, your driver's license might read "Jane 
Palmer," but if you still look, act, and sound like Eva Morrissey, 
you'll probably be recognized as the latter. 


X You're just you. 

° A fake driver’s license that kinda looks like 
you. 

eo A passable fake ID, plus a few supporting 
documents. 

ec Respectable identification papers and support 


documents that'll pass casual inspection. 
An established alternative identity. 


A fully supported identity with complete 
history, support documents, witnesses, fake 
family photos, alternate homes and so on. 


Arcane/ Cloaking 


You know the fine art of disappearing. Whether this involves 
a notsosimple trick, the ability to cloud men’s minds, nanotech 
sensory disrupters, or some nameless power of obscurity, you possess 
atalent for getting lost. Especially in the age of cell-phone cameras, 
global databases, electronic trackers, DNA samples, and Closed 
Circuit TV monitors on every corner, Arcane - or its Technocratic 
version, Cloaking - is a useful Trait to have. Records get lost; 
cameras malfunction or record fuzzy images in your place; folks 
recall "Some guy... or girl, I guess - I’m really not sure." Although 
this talent isn't invisibility per se, it helps you blend in with crowds, 
blurs your features on camera, and allows you to slide in between 
the cracks of an increasingly monitored world. 


To mystic mages, Arcane is a bending of reality caused by 
fluctuations of metaphysical energy, like echoes or Resonance. 
As far as the Technocracy's concerned, this is a perfectly 
explainable phenomenon... and they'll get back to you with a 
reasonable explanation as soon as one meets the rigid criteria 
for disbursed information. The Union prefers to keep track 
of mysterious individuals, like Secret Agent John Courage, 
who manifest this Cloaking effect; doing so, however, is easier 
declared than achieved. 


Game-wise, you add your Arcane/ Cloaking dots as extra 
dice on all Stealth-related rolls. Your opponents reduce their 
Perception or Investigation dice pools by that same amount 
whenever someone tries to track you down. This benefit lasts for 
as long as you remain inconspicuous. In combat, folks can see 
you normally, although videos or pictures of that fight remain 
blurred. A Cloaked character who runs around shouting and 
being obvious will be obvious, although witnesses will probably 
disagree about his exact description after the event has passed. 
TheArcane/ Cloaking effect does not conceal really memorable 
features. À purple-haired dude with facial tattoos is going to 
get noticed, although folks may disagree about the shade of 
purple or the patterns of his tattoos. 


X You're as obvious as anybody else. 

° You blend into crowds. 

ee Your presence slides out of memory. 
eco You're that person no one easily recalls. 
eeocc 


Records, pictures, even memories of you are 
few and hard to find. 


coocoo You're like a ghost in this world, known only 


to the folks you want to trust. 


Avatar/ Genius 


Awakening defines the mage. Whether she refers to it 
as some mystic inner god or the scientifically explainable 
Enlightenment of higher consciousness, the Avatar or Genius 
allows a willworker to do the things she does. Some Avatars, 
though, are more potent and effective than others. This Trait 
measures your Awakened self, reflects its ability to shift and 
hold Quintessence, and determines how real it is in your 
character's perceptions. 


Every mage character has an Avatar of some kind; unless 
you purchase at least one dot in this Trait, however, your ability 
to actually do much with your magick is extremely limited. 
Although your magick-casting rolls are based on Arete, not the 
Avatar, your character won't be able to use Quintessence to aid 
her spells. A mage's ability to absorb or employ Quintessence is 
based on the Avatar Trait. (See the Quintessence Trait entry, 
pp.331-333.) Her higher self, too, is weak - more of an ember 
than a bonfire. A high Avatar/ Genius rating, though, reflects 
a higher self whose distinct personality seems very real to the 
mage in question. 


X An ephemeral Avatar hardly capable of magick. 


° A notable presence that lets you absorb or 
expend one point of Quintessence. 


Chapter Six: Creating the Characłer 305 


D ZT 


eo A dynamic presence that lets you absorb or 
expend two points of Quintessence. 


eco A discernable entity that lets you absorb or 
expend three points of Quintessence. 

ecce A potent spirit that lets you absorb or expend 
four points of Quintessence. 

coocoo A powerful force of Enlightenment that lets you 
absorb or expend five points of Quintessence. 

Backup 


You can call in the cavalry and expect help when needed... 
in a limited capacity, anyhow. Thanks to your membership in 
some organization, you're able to request Backup and have a 
small team of useful folks swoop in and take care of business. 
Unlike Allies, these people are largely faceless, have limited 
skills, and are more or less expendable. Essentially, they come 
in to handle simple tasks, then disperse back to the organization 
to which you all belong. 


Backup characters come from a large pool of skilled 
but unAwakened personnel. Their relationship to the player 
characters is pretty much a matter of convenience, with no 
special loyalty attached. Though they might risk their lives on 
the mage's behalf, the help's not personal. These folks are just 
doing their job. 

Backup tends to arrive as a pack of gun-wielding grunts who 
rush in to cover a mage's escape. Any major tasks (or sacrifices) 
are the mage's responsibility - the backup's not there to handle 
much heavy lifting. In other situations, the Background can 
represent other types of support personnel: receptionists, students, 
roadies, drivers, medics, even prostitutes. A King or Queen of 
the Jungle might be able to holler for assistance and attract an 
appropriate group of animals, assuming that character has a 
story-based reason for such loyalty. The type of aid will depend 
onthe organization, the situation, and the mage’s role within that 
group. An Ecstatic rock star could call in hookers and roadies, 
whereas a Black Suit might bring in cops, reporters, or a cleanup 
crew. And though it’s easy to dismiss the importance of students, 
receptionists, or bloggers, it’s also worth remembering that society 
at large depends more upon information than upon violence. 
One eloquent reporter can do more, in the grand scheme of 
things, than a dozen dudes with guns. 


Typical Backup personnel have Traits in the 1-3 range, 
with one or two notable Skills. Animals are small (birds, rats, 
bats, domestic dogs or cats, etc.), and spirits are minor single- 
purpose entities (fetch spirits, breeze elementals, and so forth). 
More elite Backup agents - mercenaries, ninja, cyborgs, minor 
spirits, or large predatory animals, for example - cost twice as 
much as typical agents but have Traits in the 3-5 range, unusual 
abilities, or serious combat potential. Essentially, these elite 
"temp" agents become Allies for the course of a single mission 
and then disappear back to wherever it is they came from. 


In order to get this Background, a character must be 
part of a larger organization - a gang, the police, an armed 
services division, the Technocracy, and so forth. Whatever his 
connection to that group might be, the mage needs to fulfill 


306 Mage: The Ascension 20" Anniversary Edition 


occasional duties on behalf of the group that sends assistance. 


If he doesn't keep his end of the bargain, if his Backup tends to 
suffer heavy casualties, or if he otherwise abuses the agents and 


their group, this Background may be reduced or withdrawn. 


Sample Backup teams, and the types of mages they support, 


include: 


All: Students, drivers, receptionists, couriers, lab techs, 
political activists, merchants, manual laborers, EMTs, 
cult members, thugs. 


Agents of Authority: Cops and detectives, military 
personnel, reporters, EMTs, cleanup crews. 


Celebrities: Fans, roadies, personal assistants, 
photographers, road-crew, journalists, makeup artists. 


Clergy: Acolytes, lesser and lay clergy, healers, devotees 
of your religion. 


Cyborgs: Mechanics, technicians, soldiers, cybernetic 
“temps”. 


Feral folk: Animals, healers, medicine people, tribal 
elders, natives of the appropriate region. 


Gangsters and Vigilantes: Gang members, hookers, 
allied cops, street people, junkies, journalists, petty 
crooks. 


Hackers: Technicians, bloggers, hacker “temps,” political 
activists, anarchists, transhumanists, IT specialists. 


Martial artists: Healers, philosophers, martial arts 
students, “temp” fighters, devotees of your spiritual path. 


Ritual magicians: Occultists, cultists, acolytes, academics, 
fearful assistants, aspiring apprentices, minor imps, or 
spirit “temps.” 


Scholars: Research assistants, librarians, bloggers, 
academics, former students, grad students. 


Scientists: Techs, research aides, robots, misshapen or 
enhanced assistant “temps.” 


Shamans: Devotees, minor spirits, animals, activists, or 
armed defenders of your culture. 


Spies and Assassins: Informants, gang members, sleeper 
agents, cleanup crews. 


Subculturists: Artists, neotribalists, musicians, healers, 
bloggers, psychoactive specialists, badasses from your 
subculture. 


Tycoons: Corporate subordinates, flunkies, toadies, 
office personnel, journalists, security guards. 


Witches: Animals, devotees, New Agers, Pagan activists, 
healers, minor spirits. 


This Background may go higher than five dots - see (p. 
301). Forsample Backup characters and animals, see Appendix 
L (pp. 618-639). 


X You're on your own, kid! 

° Two typical agents. 

ee Four basic agents or two skilled "temps." 
eco Six agents. 

ecce Eight agents or four "temps." 

LLLI 10 agents. 

eeccc o 


12 agents or six "temps." 


14 agents. 


eeeee vos  [Ó agents or eight “temps.” 


eeeee ecco {8 agents. 


eecee 00000 20 agents, or 10 “temps.” 


Blessin$ 


Someone out there has left its mark on you. That mark 
is usually beneficial, but it comes with uncanny side effects. 
Maybe you always find a few extra bucks when you need them 
but get stuck with the check when you grab some drinks with 
the girls. Perhaps you're lucky in lust but can't find a lasting 
partnership. This Background gives you a minor perk at the 
cost of a related quirk. 


In game terms, Blessings gives you a single, minor, story- 
based benefit. This benefit seems to come from an element 
in your character history, one that's tied into the beliefs that 
focus your magick. An Akashic, for example, could consider 
herself blessed by the wind-god Fei Lian because she's always 
cooled by a faint breeze; a Sister of Hippolyta never gets lost 
(a blessing of Athena), whereas a one-eyed Syndicate boss with 
an unsettling sense of physical and energetic androgyny also 
seems to know little things no one should know about. (No 
one actually calls the boss Odin, but that picture of two ravens 
on the boss's wall hints at a certain familiarity...) 


At the same time, this benefit seems a little... weird. Why's 
there a breeze blowing inside this locked apartment? How'd 
you know your way through this maze? Is that boss "him"... or 
“her”... or... um, I think I'll just call them "Boss." This sense 
of oddness could be considered a constant bit of Resonance, a 
wink from your patron god, a quirk of localized reality-streams, 
or whatever else seems appropriate. The obvious explanation 
is that it's a sign of the figure who blessed you, but that sort 
of thing doesn't happen in the real world, does it? 


Like the Dream, Legend, Past Life, and Totem Backgrounds 
below, Blessings ties your mage into forces greater than himself. 
Although those forces, in your mage’s mind, appear to stem 
from his deeply-held beliefs (and thus might be a latent form 
of uncontrolled magick), they remain ultimately mysterious. 
Odin won’t be showing up at that boss’s door saying, “Hey, 
guess who made you androgynous,” though certain story-based 
quirks might make the answer obvious to someone familiar 
with Norse mythology. (The raven picture, the one eye, the way 
crows always fly past when the boss goes for a walk, that sort of 


thing.) The character might not admit that he or she believes 
in the Blessing (“Old Viking gods? Ridiculous!”), but there’s a 
lingering connection that runs deeper than anyone suspects. 
(The boss still recalls that Norse mythology book from third 
grade rather fondly...) 


In game terms, choose one non-combat, story-based ability 
that blesses your character with an unusual talent. The higher 
the rating, the more useful that talent becomes. Contrary to 
the original Blessings entry in Guide to the Traditions, this 
talent is NOT chosen from among Sphere Effects, Merits, or 
Flaws; instead, it’s a minor twist of fate that influences the 
character's life in story terms - see the examples below. (That 
Blessings Background - an open-ended set of superpowers 
with conflicting causes, effects and systems - has been revised 
for this edition.) 


Your Blessings talent must follow certain guidelines: 


* It’s based in the character's beliefs about the world - in 
short, his magickal paradigm. 


* It’s tied into your mage’s personal history, probably 
somewhere in her childhood. 


* It’s connected to a potent supernatural/ mythic/ 
paranormal figure of some kind - a god, a hero, an 
archetype, a Fae queen - whose favor fits your character 
concept. 


* [t does not influence combat, except perhaps in a 
roundabout way (your knives remain sharp, you always 
have one bullet left in the chamber, your punches have 
movie-ike sound effects, and so forth). 


* [tdoesnotinfluence magick casting rolls either. Although 
a Blessing may influence the character’s choice of Spheres 
and should be tied into his focus, it will not alter the 
difficulty for Arete rolls when casting spells. 


* [t's not an obvious display of inhuman or impossible 
phenomena (no flight, iron skin, fiery hands, and so 
forth) and might have a rational, scientific explanation. 


* [thasacorresponding weird quirk, also story-based, with 
effects that follow or mirror the Blessing (the odd breeze, 
one eye and an affinity for ravens, a tendency to always 
scramble directions even though you never get lost, etc.). 


* [fthe character breaks faith with her apparent patron 
- say, by a grave insult or religious conversion - then 
the Blessing disappears. (Gods hate ingratitude...) 


These Blessings share a clear connection to the figure who 
apparently favors your character: a dude blessed by Pan always 
goes home with the bestlooking woman (or man) in the club, 
even though he's kinda hairy and has a powerful smell; the 
woman blessed by Allah has a knack for improvised poetry, 
yet never writes any of it down; that chick blessed by the Lady 
of the Lake always carries sharp knives... and she really enjoys 
swimming; thatguy nicknamed "Lucifer"? Well, he's notactually 


Chapter Six: Creating the Character 307 


A A 


a devil or anything, but he seems to be able to talk folks into 
anything... and doesn't his skin seem a little... red...? 


Blessings are not infallible. In high-stakes situations, the 
blessed character may still need to roll for success. If, for instance, 
the Lucifer guy wants to talk an important character into some 
truly crazy scheme, his player has to roll for it. In such rolls, 
the Storyteller deducts one level of difficulty per dot in this 
Background from the usual difficulty of the task. Our Lucifer 
guy, for instance, has Blessings 4, and so subtracts -4 from the 
difficulty of his roll. Again, a Blessing does not affect combat 
actions or magick-casting rolls, so it does not alter such rolls. 


As suggested earlier, this Background fits well with Destiny, 
Legend, Past Life, and most especially Totem. The Storyteller 
has the final say about the Blessing's effects and manifestations 
and may veto a Blessing that doesn't fit her chronicle, seems 
too powerful, or tilts the game too far in that character's favor. 


X No figure favors you. 


° Life gives you small favors: your clothes always 
look clean and pressed, your kitchen never gets 
filthy, you find dollar bills on the ground, etc. 


ec Little things go your way: You always find a 
parking space, win small amounts whenever 
you play the lottery, score someone's phone 
number whenever you ask for it, etc. 


eee You possess a strange affinity for certain things: 
your cooking always tastes good, you never get 
lost or lose your keys, babies fall asleep as soon 
as you start rocking them, etc. 


ecce Your knack gets downright uncanny: kids shut 


up as soon as you tell them to, your suggestions 
always sound reasonable, you score with 
whomever appeals to you, etc. 


coocoo A major blessing follows you: your wallet and 


bank account always have one dollar left, your 
gun has one final bullet, you know secrets no 
one should be able to know about, etc. 


Certification 

In an age when you need permits for every damn thing 
imaginable, the right certifications can save you a world of 
aggravation. With this Background, your character has official 
papers thatallow her to pursue some regulated activity: hunting, 
driving, operating heavy machinery, practicing medicine, 
owning certain weapons, and so on. Generally, such activities 
involve risk, demand special training, affect society at large, or 
a combination of the three. Simple certifications, like a fishing 
permit, are easy to obtain, whereas really hazardous or complex 
activities demand higher levels of certification. 


Unless your character has managed to obtain a permit 
without the proper training, you'll need at least one dot in a 
related Abilityfor each dotin this Background; a medical license, 
for example, would demand at least four dots in Medicine. 
Assuming that your character has the appropriate skills (or 
has paid the appropriate bribes), you can get certifications for 


308 Mage: The Ascension 20" Anniversary Edition 


alternate identities (see Alternate Identity, above) to reflect a 
character with the right papers under various names. 


Official certifications carry a degree of visibility. 
Certifications can be checked by the authorities, and although a 
heavy-weapons permit might let you own some serious hardware, 
it also assures that you'll be one of the first people the cops 
look for when someone commits a crime with such weaponry! 


X The usual stuff - driver's license, government 
ID card, nothing special. 


° Hunting license, business license, passport to 
an open country, etc. 


ee Teaching certificate, bodywork license, PADI 
certification, CPA, trucker's or motorcycle 
license, basic firearms permit, etc. 


ecc Concealed weapons permit, HAZMAT disposal 
license, church-ordained clergy, lifeguard 
certification, private investigator's license, 
private pilot's permit, etc. 


ecco Class Cweapons permit, board-certified medical 
or legal professional, professional aircraft pilot's 
license, government intelligence operative, etc. 
eoeeee 


Diplomatic immunity, license to kill. 


Chantry/ Construct 

In the hazardous world of the Awakened, it’s always a good 
idea to have some like-minded associates and a stronghold 
with some fair security. Since the Golden Age of Wizardry, 
such places have been called Covenants: centers where a group 
of allied mages stake out territory, consolidate resources, and 
agreed to assist and defend one another when need be. In later 
years, the Order of Reason adopted that idea and built the 
Technocratic Union around that principle. By the 20" century, 
Tradition mages call those places Chantries, the Union calls them 
Constructs, and other mages call them by whatever sounds like 
a culturally appropriate name (temple, lodge, mosque, etc.). 


In game terms, a Chantry or Construct is a base of 
operations. A character with this Background belongs to such 
a base and has certain benefits from, and responsibilities to, 
the group that maintains that base. Most Technocratic agents 
belong to a Construct by default - that’s just how the Union 
operates. Mystic mages have a more of a choice about such 
things, but many of them belong to Chantries as a matter of 
practicality. There is strength in numbers, after all. 


Because Mage'scharactercreation rules assume that beginning 
characters are new to the Awakened game, a character with this 
Background begins as a low-ranking member of an established 
stronghold. She gets the benefit of a belonging to a group of older 
and more experienced peers (who are probably Storytellerrun 
characters), but starts off at the bottom of the pecking order too. 
Theelders have her doing errands and chores around the Chantry, 
and she lacks political clout within the group. Growing beyond 
that stage is one of the keys to a young mage's journey. 


A group of mystic mages can also create their own Chantry, 
an option that's not open to Technocratic operatives. (The 


Union frowns on such individualism.) By pooling points among 
the members, the group can assemble the resources necessary 
to build a place of its own. In game terms, these construction 
points reflect time, money, favors, labor, and other things spent 
in the process of establishing the stronghold. (A point-based 
building system was included in The Book of Chantries, but 
that system has since been discarded.) The more points the 
group assembles, the larger the Chantry can become. 


Secure Squat 10-20 point pool 
Small Sanctuary 
Mystic Chantry 


Stronghold 


21-30 point pool 
30-70 point pool 
71-100 point pool 


Power Center 101+ point pool 


A Chantry or Construct can take whatever form seems 
appropriate. One might be a rural woodland grove; another 
could be an abandoned movie theater; a third may be a 
secluded mad laboratory; and a fourth sets up shop in an office 
building, Viking longhouse, law firm, or machine shop. Low- 
level Chantries and Constructs have a few mundane resources 
- some magickal wards, a security system, perhaps a handful 
of unAwakened aides, communication services, and so forth. 
At the Mystic Chantry level, the place can get a few paranormal 
trappings: scrying pools, portals to Horizon Realms, spirit 
guardians, that sort of thing. Strongholds and Power Centers have 
extensive mundane and magickal/ hypertech resources; such 
places should be hashed out in detail with the Storyteller and 
demand huge investments of time, power, labor, and materials. 


The stability of this pool depends on the continued 
cooperation and survival of the contributors. If a mage quits or 
gets killed, his points are lost. If the entire group fractures, all 
points are lost and the Chantry dissolves. Surviving members 
might pool some experience points and make up the difference 
for the lost contribution. Otherwise, that Chantry joins the 
many broken fellowships and strongholds sprinkled throughout 
mage history. 


Incidentally, other Backgrounds that are connected to 
the Chantry must be purchased separately. The following 
Backgrounds may be added to a Chantry: Allies, Arcane, Backup, 
Cult, Familiar, Influence, Library, Mentor, Node, Patron, Retainers, 
Resources, Spies, and Wonder. For details about combining 
Background points toward a shared Background Trait, see 
Pooling Backgrounds, (pp.301-302). 


X No place to call home. 

° One pool pointor membership in a tiny Squat. 

eo Two pool points or membership in a small 
Sanctuary. 

eco Three pool points or membership in an average 


Chantry or Construct. 


esee Four pool points or membership in a 


Stronghold. 


eocce Five pool points or membership in a Power 


Center. 


Contacts 


You know people who know things. Although such contacts 
aren't as helpful or reliable as Allies, they can help you dig up 
information, spread messages, pull strings, and call in small 
favors (scoring tickets to a sold-out concert, locating a low-rent 
apartment, getting a meeting with the police chief, and so on). 
Naturally, these folks will want occasional help from you as well. 
So long as one hand washes the other, though, these folks can 
prove remarkably helpful. 


The nature of your Contacts Background depends upon 
your character's concept and backstory. The runaway Jinx, for 
example, would have contacts among the street-folk community, 
whereas executive Malcolm has contacts in the business world. 
Within their area of experience, contacts can usually find or 
pass on appropriate sorts of information; Jinx might learn 
how to hotwire a car, and Malcolm might secure data about 
automotive stocks, but Neither Jinx nor Malcolm is likely to 
know someone who could trace a car's license plate number. 
If you're looking for contacts outside your area of expertise, 
you could always nurture some new ones, or else you could 
use your existing contacts to find out what you need. (In game 
terms, this second option raises the difficulty of your roll by 
*2 or more.) 


When calling on your contacts, roll an appropriate Social 
Attribute * Contacts. The difficulty depends on the nature of 
the information you're trying to circulate or the favor you're 
trying to get. Success gets you what you needed, but failure 
reflects flawed data, a mangled message, or no benefit at all. A 
botch means you've pissed somebody off; either your contact 
sells you out or else tells you to go to hell and then removes 
herself from your network for a while. 


Each dotin this Trait reflects one major Contact, a fleshed- 
out character like an Ally. You could also establish casual 
contacts with a successful Social or Mental Trait * Contacts 
roll, but these sources will be harder to work with (that is, 
the roll has a higher difficulty) and they're not reliable with 
sensitive information. 

This Background can go above five dots. For information 


networks that deal in sensitive or secret information, see the 
Background: Spies. 


X Nope - it's all on you. 
" One contact. 

ee Two contacts. 

ecc Three contacts. 

ecco Four contacts. 


Five contacts. 
Six contacts. 
Seven contacts. 
eeeee cee = Fight contacts. 
eececee 0000 Nine contacts. 


eeecc 00000 |() contacts. 


Chapter Six: Creating the Character — 309 


Cult 


Any mage with charisma can have friends; this Cult, 
however, goes beyond mere friendship. These devotees trust 
and revere you so deeply that, when gathered and directed, 
they can lend their beliefs to your rituals. 


The nature of your cult isn't important. You might be a 
religious figure with a congregation, an artist with especially 
devoted fans, a professor whose students literally revere him, 
or any other similar arrangement. What matters is the belief: 
your cultaccepts you as someone who works wonders, and they 
want to be part of that magic... and so they are. 


As detailed under Allies, Assistants, and Cultsand Acting 
in Concert (Chapter Ten, p. 532 and pp. 542-543), a group 
of assistants who share a common belief add to the caster's 
dice pool in a ritual cast with their help. Such rituals can 
involve either mystic Arts or technomagick, so long as everyone 
participates. In most cases, all characters involved must occupy 
the same physical space during the ritual; a potential exception 
could be made for a networked group linked by Mind magick 
or conference technology (a LAN party, video conference, 
and so forth). Again, though, the helpers must hold absolute 
conviction and be free - at least for the moment - from outside 
distractions. 


Cult members are typical Sleepers: not especially skillful 
or accomplished beyond their utter faith in you. Powerful 
helpers are Allies, Backup, Retainers, or other major characters. 


3I0 — Mage: The Ascension 20" Anniversary Edition 


These people, though, have some vital reason to believe in 
what you do. On your end, then, you must fulfill their trust. 
If you want their trust, then at least appear to be the person 
they expect you to be. If their faith wavers, then you lose this 
Background's benefits. 


It's possible to have a larger cult, of course - a popular 
evangelist might have hundreds of devotees. After a certain 
point, though, they can help you only so much. The five-dot 
rank in this Background offers the maximum benefit for a cult. 


X No cult. 


° Tiny cult: 3-7 people. Add one die to the dice 
poolofaritualcastwith that group's assistance. 


ee Small cult: 8-12 people. Add two dice to rituals 
cast when that group is gathered. 


eco Moderate cult: 13-17 people. Add three dice to 
rituals cast in the presence of the whole group. 

ecce Large cult: 18-22 people. Add four dice to 
rituals cast with that group behind them. 

coocoo Huge cult, between 23-30 people. Add five 
dice to rituals cast when the entire cult has 
gathered. 

Demesne 


A mage’s mind is her castle. There, she can get away 
from it all to a world of her own making. Classical and 


Renaissance treatises refer to memory palaces, wherein a person 
builds a structure in her mind as an aid to meditation, study, 
reflection, and, of course, memory. Shaped from the builder's 
consciousness, these constructs have no physical form, yet 
they offer a type of refuge. With this Background, you have 
such a place. 


Cosmologically, a Demesne exists in the Maya as a semi- 
permanent Dream Realm inspired by your dreaming mind. 
This Realm might be something you created intentionally 
with the Talent: Lucid Dreaming, or it might exist in a place 
conjured by your subconscious imagination. Either way, it 
follows cues from your consciousness and features elements 
of personal significance for you. Your mind might build a 
temple that no one can defile, a field of flowers in honor of 
your beloved, a gallery of pictures that immortalize people or 
places you wish to remember... if you can dream it, you can 
create it... though you might not actually control your creation 
once the Demesne exists. 


This Demesne might not be a pleasant place. Nightmares, 
Quiets, suicidal thoughts, or other dark neuroses can spawn 
a Demesne too. Maybe you want to craft a nightmare realm, 
either a testing-ground, a purgatory, or a reflection of your love 
for horror films. Pleasant or otherwise, the Demesne could be 
small, impressive, or vast. You yourself might not know just how 
expansive it can be. Our minds, after all, are full of surprises... 


In game terms, the Background rating reflects the degree 
of control you have over this place once it's established. At 
low ratings, you can visit the Realm but not command it, 
while at higher levels you determine almost every detail of 
your Realm. (Again, see the Lucid Dreaming entry, p. 294.) 
Figure out your Demesne's appearance and nature, probably 
in collaboration with your Storyteller... who's bound to add a 
few elements of her own. 


When dreaming or meditating, your character can go visit 
his Demesne with a successful Perception * Demesne roll. 
The difficulty depends upon your situation: directing yourself 
there under normal circumstances would be difficulty 5 or 6, 
whereas trying to reach it under distressing circumstances (say, 
while enduring torture or other challenges) would range from 
difficulty 7 to 9. Once he’s arrived, the character's consciousness 
is free to wander around the Demesne. Although physical or 
mental distress can disrupt the Realm, it's still a familiar - if 
not always welcoming - space. 


There's nothing physical about a Demesne. You don't go 
there physically, and you cannot take anything physical from 
that Realm. Instead, a traveler sends his astral form into that 
Demesne, leaving his body behind; for details, see Astral Travel 
in Chapters Four and Nine, (p. 87) and (pp. 476-478). That 
said, you don't need Mind 3 or better to enter your personal 
Demesne - the Background Trait takes care of the travel 
arrangements. A mage who can travel astrally, though, may 
wander out of the Demesne and reach other Dream or Astral 
Realms from there. 


In the Demesne, your appearance reflects your state of 
mind. If you're calm, you're lucid dreaming, or have managed 


to project your ideal astral form, you look however you want 
to look. Under other circumstances, your visiting form might 
betray whatever stress, fear, or insecurities you re facing in 
the physical world. A successful Wits * Demesne (or Lucid 
Dreaming) roll lets you adjust your appearance at that point, 
though... and similar rolls can help you change the dreamscape 
too. Large changes, of course, demand several successes - see 
above for potential difficulties. 


Because the Demesne itself reflects its creator's mental state, 
you can also confront internal issues within the Dream Realm's 
boundaries. A successful Perception * Demesne roll allows you 
to puzzle out subconscious conflicts and figure out what's going 
on beneath the surface. On a related note, you can try to access 
memories that might be hidden throughout the Demesne. In 
this case, roll Intelligence * Meditation or Demesne (whichever 
is higher), with the difficulty and numbers of successes based 
upon the obscurity of that information. The name of your last 
girlfriend would be easy to find, but the name of the kid who sat 
next to you in third grade would be significantly harder to recall. 


A skillful Mind mage (that is, Mind 3 for a sleeping 
subject, Mind 4 for one who's awake) can draw other people's 
consciousness into his Demesne too. If that person doesn't want 
to enter the Demesne, they have a Willpower-versus-Willpower 
contest (see Resisted Actions in Chapter Eight, p. 390), with 
the winner achieving his objective. A person who's fighting 
the dream can roll every few turns to leave the Demesne; until 
the roll succeeds, however, that character is trapped. Again, 
this is not a physical trap, though being stuck in someone else's 
nightmare can be pretty horrifying... 


If your mage falls into a Quiet, you can roll his Willpower 
(difficulty 9) in order to go into your Demesne; there, he's still 
trapped in the mindscape, but at least it's familiar territory. A 
few successful Perception * Demesne rolls could lead him back 
out again. See Quiet in Chapter Ten, (pp. 554-561). 


X No Dream Realm to speak of. 

° Occasional visitor to the Realm. You have a 
name for it and recognize a few significant 
features. 

ee A regular visitor, you’ve traveled extensively 


through the Demesne. 


eco In your dreams, you know this place quite well. 

ecco This is your Realm, and though you don't 
command its every feature or resident, they 
know and recognize you as someone of 
authority there. 

coocoo Lord or Lady of the Demesne, you know 
and command this Realm as if it were your 
kingdom... because it is. 

Destiny 


You're a Chosen One, destined to play a vital role in 
the cosmic drama. Prophecies hint at your coming greatness; 
statistical analysis points toward your significance. Most 
importantly, you know you're fated to be special. When things 
seem bleak, you can call upon this knowledge to getyou through. 


Chapter Six: Creating the Character 


Tt 


f 


Once per game session, you can call upon this sense of 
destiny ifyou’re facing a tough challenge ora tight spot. If you've 
spent all of your Willpower points before this crisis, you can 
roll your Destiny dice pool against difficulty 8. Each success 
you roll allows you to instantly regain a point of Willpower. 
With that restored confidence, you can cheat defeat or death, 
living another day to achieve Fate’s plans for you. 


At some point, however, you will finally face your final 
destiny. On that day, the Storyteller declares, “It’s your Moment 
of Destiny. Face THIS crisis on your own!” At that point, you're out 
of special rolls. Whatever Fate has in store for you, it's up to you 
to fulfill that destiny. If you happen to survive that encounter 
and achieve something memorable, this Background goes away, 
perhaps to be replaced by another Background (Storyteller's 
option) that reflects the dramatic change oflife you've endured. 
If you fail, you get stuck with the knowledge that Destiny came 
calling and you weren't up to the task. 


X You're not especially important. 

° A minor destiny; roll one die. 

eo You're significant; roll two dice. 

eco You're important; roll three dice. 

cooo You're destined for great things; roll four dice. 
eeccc 


Someday soon, you'll be a legend; roll five dice. 


Dream/ Hypercram 

Knowledge is everything to a mage. Being the conduits to 
cosmic consciousness that they can be, certain mages are able 
to access information that they have not personally studied or 
practiced. After taking a bit of time to meditate (or, in the case 
of Technocrats and other scientifically-minded willworkers, to 
Hypercram), such mages can temporarily tap into the wealth of 
knowledge and experience that’s out there, channeling Ability 
Traits they don’t normally possess. 


In story terms, your character takes a short period of time 
to concentrate on a particular situation. The more elaborate 
the situation, the longer it takes to meditate upon it. The form 
of concentration depends on the mage’s focus, and can range 
from a BDSM session to a hard night at the library. A scholar 
could hit the books and lose himself in study for an upcoming 
exam; a Pagan seer might walk through the woods, reaching 
out to the spirits of that place. Spider Chase might spin fire 
while Zafira Angelita prays for the guidance of God. 


In game terms, roll Perception + Dream (difficulty 6) to gain 
insights into the question at hand. As long as your character 
hasn’t been interrupted during his meditative practice, she 
can draw upon a certain amount of free-floating knowledge 
that deals with the situation. If the Perception + Dream roll 
succeeded, you get to substitute your Dream rating for another 
Ability that’s related to the subject of her concentration. If 
the character doesn’t normally have that Ability, she can still 
use it to address that situation for a single uninterrupted task, 
assuming that she meditated upon a related subject that day; if 
she does have that Ability, she can use the Dream rating instead 
of that Ability - one Trait does not add on to the other. 


Ma$e: The Ascension 20^ Anniversary Edition 


As an example, let's say that Spider's facing a major fight 
against an opponent who really knows what he's doing. Her 
slight Brawl Skill isn't gonna cut it, so she meditates while 
spinning fire. Spider has four dots in Dream. Her player makes 
a successful Perception * Dream roll, and so, during that fight 
- and only for the duration of that fight - Spider finds herself 
with four dots’ worth of Martial Arts, an Ability she doesn't 
normally possess. After the fight ends, Spider's skill fades away; 
for the life of her, she can't recall what she just did. 


This Background isn’t reliable. You might get some Ability 
you didn't expect, and you can't hang on to what you know 
- it's more of a feeling than a certainty. The Dream-granted 
Ability lasts for the duration of one necessary task - a fight, 
an exam, a board meeting, a race, and so forth - and can be 
used only to fulfill that task. Dream can be used only once 
per day, and although the player can state what she'd like to 
learn, theStoryteller makes the final decision about the Ability 
conferred by that Dream. 


X Youlackthatspecial connection to the collective 
consciousness. 
e You catch hazy bits of related information. 


One die for the task. 


ee Helpful insights present themselves during a 
trance. Two dice for the task. 


eco Your meditations produce serious results. Three 
dice for the task. 


ecce From a trance, you can pull amazing bits of 


knowledge. Four dice for the task. 


eccce You've got a direct line to the collective 


consciousness. Given time to focus, you can 
pick up phenomenal things. Five dice for the 
task. 


Enhancement $ 

Enlightened hypertech can accomplish incredible things, 
few of them more staggering (or, to some mages, unholy) than 
the modification of living tissue with the power of machines. 
Such enhancements improve upon (or desecrate) Nature's 
work, creating more-or-less permanent mutations - cybernetic 
limbs or genegineered biomods that give the subject powers 
far beyond normal abilities. 


An Enhanced character has one of three options: 


* A cyborg has biomechanical devices integrated into 
her body: Primium bones, extendable claws, infra-red 
scanners, and so on. The Background rating gives that 
character a certain amount of cybernetic Enhancement 
Devices, at the cost of permanent Paradox points. 


* A biomodifed (or biomodded) person has permanent 
organic modifications grafted, grown, or otherwise 
implanted into his body. The Background rating acts 
like cybernetics, with permanent Paradox but a few 
benefits over mechanical modification. 


* A genegineered being has certain physical enhancements 
that make him stronger, faster, tougher, smarter, more 
perceptive, or betterlooking than a typical specimen of 
that species. The Background rating boosts the related 
Attributes above their normal maximums, at the cost 
of permanent genetic flaws. 


Those three options cannot be combined. A single character 
may have only one, not all three. Each option has certain rules 
and limitations: 


e Cybernetics: These devices turn you into a Paradox 
magnet. [n game terms, you've got permanent Paradox 
points added to your Paradox Wheel; these points never 
go away, and any additional Paradox you earn gets added 
to those permanent points. Thus, Paradox backlashes 
can get very ugly. 


Cyberimplantsare essentially machines keyed to your body. 
Cyborgs who annoy their inventors have their implants 
removed, which tends to be a terminal process. Such 
entities are also walking investments for their creators, 
who keep very close watch on the behavior and location 
of those human resources. The lessons of Frankenstein 
are not lost on people who build cyborgs, and they often 
install failsafes in order to cut down on such unfortunate 
events. If nothingelse, they'll often go to ridiculous lengths 
to retrieve an errant cyborg... or to destroy her. 


As for the effects of Life-based magick on cybernetic 
humanoids... well, it's not pretty. Such witcheries cause 
organic tissue to reject the mechanical devices. Life 
spells inflict two additional levels of aggravated damage 
on cyborgs if they get past the cyborg's countermagick. 
As a protection, Technocracy cyborgs get outfitted with 
Primium Countermeasures, which are described under 
Biotech in Appendix II, (p. 659). Cyborgs from non- 
Technocratic sects, however, are kinda screwed. 


* Biomods: This form of genetic or flesh-crafting mutation 
essentially installs permanent modifications to the 
character’s body. Unlike mechanical cybernetics, these 
mods cannot be uninstalled or rejected from the body. 
(They can, of course, be cut off or surgically removed.) 
The extra Life Sphere damage, then, does not apply 
to biomods, although the permanent Paradox points 
still apply to obvious biomods. Like genegineering 
enhancements, biomods also make the character take 
one Genetic Flaw per level in the Background Trait. 


* Genegineering: Unlike mechanical enhancements, 
genegineering isn't usually obvious. Unless a gene- 
modded bioconstruct lifts a car or bounces bullets off 
his chest, he can typically pass for a normal human 
being. Even so, the imperfect understanding of organic 
tissue - or simply the hubris of people who would 
master it - leaves its own legacy: madness, illness, and 
so forth, represented in the rules by the Genetic Flaw 
Traits, described in Appendix II, (pp. 648 and 651). 


The following Attributes - and no others! - may be boosted 
by Enhancements: Strength, Dexterity, Stamina, Appearance, 
Perception, Intelligence and Health. These added Trait dots 
can raise a character’s normal Traits as high as 8 and 
may be divided between several different Attributes... for 
example, three to Strength and two to Stamina. 


Thanks to its powerful effects and unusual properties, the 
Enhancements Trait is more expensive than usual. This Background 
costs TWO points per dot, instead of the usual one point. These 
modifications are essentially built-in Devices, so this Background 
cannot be shared, requisitioned or pooled. It can be raised with 
experience points, provided there’s another character around who 
knows how to work with the associated technologies. We do not 
recommend allowing player characters to purchase this Background 
higher than the maximum rating of 5. Certain powerfulsupporting- 
cast characters might have more extensive modifications, but such 
extreme Enhancements should be offlimits to your players. 


Typically, the Enhancements Background applies only 
to Technocrat characters. With the Storyteller’s approval, 
however, other tech-based characters (Etherites, Virtual Adepts, 
cyberpagans, etc.) may get such mods as well. There’s one 
caveat, however: The Union has spent decades perfecting these 
technologies, while individual mad scientists have flown by 
the seat of their pants. It is utterly appropriate to make non- 
Technocrat characters take additional Flaws or suffer other 
game-based penalties based on their Enhancements. 


For details about Enhancements and their related Flaws, 
again see the Biotech and Genetic Flaws sections in Appendix 
IL, (pp. 648-651) and (pp. 657-661). 

X No special modifications. 
° +1 Attribute dot, or 3 points for Devices. One 
Paradox point or Genetic Flaw. 


eo +2 Attribute dots, or 6 points for Devices. Two 
Paradox points or Genetic Flaws. 


eee +3 Attribute dots, or 9 points for Devices. 
Three Paradox points or Genetic Flaws. 


ecco *4 Attribute dots, or 12 points for Devices. 
Four Paradox points or Genetic Flaws. 
eccce +5 Attribute dots, or 15 points for Devices. 
Five Paradox points or Genetic Flaws. 
Fame 


For some story-based reason, you’re famous within the 
Sleeper world. Maybe you’rea hip-hop star, a politician, an athlete, 
or one of the boom/ bust stardom circle generated by YouTube 
and reality TV. Among folks in the know, you’re considered a 
celebrity; the higher your rating, the greater your fame. 


A decidedly mixed blessing, this Trait gives you a fairly high 
profile. The authorities will be less likely to mess with you (unless 
theywantto make an example of you...), fans will give you a certain 
amount of deference, and folks will believe things of you that 
they would not accept from a normal person. Sure, that kung-fu 
superstar can kick a hole through a brick wall - didn’t you see 
her last movie? And hey, if that guy looked at me that way, I'd 


Chapter Six: Creating the Character 313 


EZ | 


pass out too! Fame confers status at the cost of visibility and lets 
you get away with coincidences few other folks could manage. 


This Background also complements Social Traits when 
you're trying to get things done. A successful Charisma, 
Manipulation, or Appearance * Fame roll can open lots of 
doors. Of course, folks will recognize you, too, so don't expect 
to scam those free airline tickets or get past that security detail 
without someone remembering that you did it. In the age of 
cell phone cameras, YouTube, and CCTV, a famous person 
has a hard time getting away with stuff. Cast a spell in public, 
and there'll be videos of the event online in no time. 


Fame is fleeting, too, especially in this age of disposable 
celebrities. In story terms, you'll have to keep doing big things in 
order to beremembered. And justas there are folks who'll love you 
for what you do, there'll be folks who hate your guts for it as well. 
Fame brings stalkers, haters, critics, and thieves... and if you don't 
wantthem in your life, then why'd you choose to become FAMOUS...? 


X No one of consequence. 


° Within a select subculture, folks know your 
name. Perhaps you were more famous once, 
but those days are long behind you now. 


ee A local celebrity, you’re known by all the right 
people in your community. 


314 Mage: The Ascension 20" Anniversary Edition 


eco Someone of note, you’re recognized by large 
portions of the population at large. 

ecce A national, or perhaps even international, 
figure, you're recognized by large portions of 
the general populace. 

eeeee 


You’re famous almost everywhere. 


Familiar/ Companion 

Animal allies remain an integral part of the classical mage's 
mystique. Who hasn’t heard of the witch’s cat, the telepathic 
steed, the wolf-brother, or the lab-assistant made of spare parts 
and ingenuity? Tradition calls such entities familiars, and most 
of the Nine Traditions tend to use that name as well. Other 
groups, as usual, employ their own names: assistants, brothers, 
soul-beasts, spirit animals, and so forth. 


Although the Technocracy does not officially acknowledge 
such deviation from protocol in its ranks, certain Technocrats 
- especially among the Progenitors, the New World Order, 
and Iteration X - have been known to employ Companions: 
cybernetically enhanced critters, bioengineered experiments, 
clones, and so on. Lab animals have their intelligence and 
capabilities boosted with the wonders of hyperscience, and 
vatgrown humans with perfect skin and dazzling features 
stock the offices and bordellos of Syndicate bosses. Out on the 


murky fringes where protocol becomes a stern suggestion, Void 
Engineers work alongside friendly(?) aliens and technologically 
modified Earth creatures. These Companions, of course, are 
nothing like those superstitionist familiars - such comparisons 
would be tantamount to treason! And yet, it's funny how much 
Companions and Familiars have in common. In game terms, of 
course, they're pretty much the same thing. Technocrats define 
their bonding ceremonies and feeding procedures differently, but 
the Background Trait works the same way for both definitions. 


A Familiar/ Companion's primary role involves 
companionship. Mages lead strange lives that often remove 
them from normal human interactions, and justas people crave 
pets of various species, mages crave the company of entities that 
understand those strange lives they lead. It might seem weird to 
staff your lab with hyperintelligent mice (and downright crazy to 
fill it with hyperintelligent apes!), but when weirdness defines 
your daily life, those companions seem perfectly appropriate. 
With very few exceptions, these creatures have at least a human 
level of intelligence, enigmatic levels of perception and arcane 
wisdom, and at least one or two physical abilities beyond what 
you might expect from a normal animal or person. 


What type of Familiar or Companion do you have? That 
depends on your approach to life and magick. Common 
Familiars/ Companions for various mage types include: 


* Charismatic megafauna: Wolves, bears, alligators, 
eagles, hawks, apes, big cats, oxen, bison, horses, stags, 
reindeer, etc. (Shamans, nature witches, martial artists, 
clergy, wizards, and so forth.) 


* Small but capable animals: Mice, rats, domestic cats 
and dogs, rabbits and hares, ravens, owls, foxes, pigeons, 
parrots, monkeys, snakes, etc. (Urban or rural witches, 
streetfolks, suburban mystics, mad scientists, academics, 
saints, and so on.) 


* Attack Beasts: Large dogs, domesticated big cats, raptors, 
serpents, spiders, etc. (Witches, Black Suits, agents of 
authority, military personnel, war mages, etc.) 


* Machines: Robots, androids, and other mechanical 
assistants. (Various types of technomancer.) 


* Servitors: Clones; weird servants; incredibly strong, 
attractive, or capable "people" who seem unusually 
obedientand abit more, yet less, than human. (Executives, 
celebrities, criminals, mad scientists, urban witches, seers, 
cult leaders, decadent tempters, Infernalists, etc.) 


* Dead Things: Zombies, animated skeletons, disembodied 
yet "living" body parts - heads, hands, etc. (Necromancers, 
wizards, cult leaders, gutter kids, and other dark-side mages.) 


¢ Constructs: Golems, cyborgs, technologically augmented 
animals, monsters stitched together from previously dead 
bodies, etc. (Mad scientists and other technomancers; 
old-school ritual magicians make them out of clay, stone, 
and so forth.) 


N E 


* Hybrid Beings: Mermaids, centaurs, satyrs, unicorns, 
and so on. (They’re attracted to high-mythic mystics, 
wizards, nature witches, mad scientists, Marauders, etc.) 


* Aliens: Greys, Bug-Eyed Monsters, Horrors From Beyond 
Space and Time. (Void Engineers, Etherites, mad scientists, 
crazed cultists, lone geek weirdoes, Black Suits, etc.) 


* Imps: Little devils, demonic beasties, scary little critters, 
etc. (Infernalists, wizards, scary witches, cult leaders, etc.) 


¢ Spirit Servitors: Elementals, invisible servants, minor 
ghosts, nature spirits, epiphlings, etc. (Shamans of all 
types, seers, wizards, witches, etc.) 


* Data Beasts: Incarnated programs on the Digital Web. 
(Internet-based technomancers of all kinds.) 


Whatever form your associate takes, the Familiar/ 
Companion has a mind and consciousness of its own, with 
agendas and desires you might assume but never truly know. 
There's always something vaguely alien about them, and not 
even the greatest Mind-based Arts can completely penetrate 
the thought process of such entities. 


In game terms, this Background - like Allies and Mentor - 
reflects a character affiliated with the player and yet created and 
run by the Storyteller. Beyond companionship, that character 
confers several other benefits onto his mage: 


* Advice: The Familiar/ Companion has access to certain 
types of information and can lend insights to his associated 
mage. Generally, this works as a handful of Knowledges 
- Cosmology, Enigmas, Occult, and possibly some others - 
fromwhich the Familiar/Companion can offer suggestions 
to his mage. The dice pool for that Trait equals one die for 
each dot in the Background. Say, for example, that Spider 
Chase has a Familiar 3 blue tarantula. Spider needs some 
advice about a riddle, the Storyteller rolls three dice, and 
the tarantula spins some advice into a web. 


* Empathy: The mage and her Companion share an 
emotional bond and each can sense what the other is 
feeling. In order to conceal those feelings, a character 
must make a successful Manipulation * Subterfuge roll, 
using the other character's Willpower as the difficulty. 
Even then, the other partner will realize that the 
character's trying to hide something. 


* The Feast of Nettles/ Paradox Nullification: When an 
impending Paradox backlash threatens the Companion's 
mage, or when that mage absorbs dangerous amounts 
of Paradox energies, the Familiar can absorb a certain 
amount of those energies. So long as the Companion 
stays close to his mage, usually within 10 yards (30 feet) or 
so, he can bleed off a few points from a mage's Paradox 
trait or consume a pending backlash. 


The Familiar can hold up to five points of Paradox for 
each dot in the Background; Spider's spider, then, could 


Chapter Six: Creating the Character 315 


a 


A 


ak 


retain up to 15 points of Paradox. The Familiar nullifies 
those points at a rate of one point per week. If Paradox 
exceeds the familiar’s capacity - say, 15 Paradox for Spider’s 
spider - then the whole amount of Paradox explodes in 
a horrific backlash that affects both the mage and the 
Familiar equally. See Physical Backlash, a.k.a. “the Burn” 
under The Paradox Effect in Chapter Ten, (p. 551). 


By the way, Familiars don’t enjoy this sort of thing at 
all, and they may get fed up (so to speak) with a mage 
who makes them “eat nettles” very often. A Familiar 
gets quite cranky when he’s stuffed with Paradox, and 
he may break the bond or otherwise act up if his mage 
keeps using him like a Paradox battery. 


Quintessence Feeding: In return for those benefits, the 
Familiar requires a certain amount of Quintessence or Tass per 
week. Mystic critters devour magickal energies by suckling on 
the mage, bathing in her aura, or otherwise sharing physical 
or metaphysical contact. Technological Companions eat 
Quintessence-rich snacks (that is, Tass), absorb Quintessence 
through physical contact (affection, mind-melds, sex, and so 
on), or get powered up by the mage’s hypertech machines. In 
game terms, it’s all the same thing: the mage offers Quintessence 
and the Companion feeds on it. No Quintessence, no Familiar; 
the disgruntled Companion disappears and the mage loses all 
of the benefits associated with her Companion. 


Familiars also crave gifts, favors, affection, and so on. The 
nature of those offerings depends on the individual Companion 
and might be weird, arbitrary, or outright horrifying. 


Smart mages are protective of their Familiars... and 
with good reason. If a Familiar dies, the associated mage 
automatically loses all benefits of that relationship, plus one 
pointof permanent Willpower plus two points of Quintessence 
for each level in the Background Trait. If that costs more 
Quintessence than the mage has to offer, then the additional 
points of Quintessence become points of Paradox instead. 
Should someone squash Spider's tarantula, for example, she'd 
lose six points of Quintessence; if she has only two points to 
begin with, then she also gains four points of Paradox. Moral: 
don't let anyone squash your Familiar! 


A Familiar/ mage bond begins with an appropriate 
summoning ceremony. Shamans have vision quests, witches 
call forth a helpmeet, mad scientists make their Companions 
through unorthodox technologies, and so forth. Regardless of 
the specifics, the mage and her Companion agree to share a 
close bond with one another. So long as both parties survive 
and honor the terms of that agreement - terms that demand 
certain commitments and sacrifices from the mage - the bond 
remains intact. 


This Background covers a special kind of Companion; 
other companion critters without the Background's special 
properties would count as Allies or a Totem instead. For the 
game«stats of various beings, see Appendix I, and for an array 
of familiars and the rules for creating such characters, see the 
Mage 20 sourcebook Gods, Monsters, and Familiar Strangers. 


Ma$e: The Ascension 20^ Anniversary Edition 


X No special pets. 


° Your Companion has access to a few scattered 
bits of helpful information. (Requires one 
Quintessence point per week and can absorb 
up to five points of Paradox.) 


ee You've gota pretty cool Companion. (Requires 
two Quintessence points per week and can 
absorb up to 10 points of Paradox.) 


eco A magnificent Companion shares its wisdom 
and loyalty with you. (Three Quintessence 
points per week and up to 15 points of Paradox.) 


ecco You're favored with the presence (if not always 


the good behavior) of a smart and miraculous 
creature. (Four Quintessence points per week 
with up to 20 points of Paradox.) 


coocoo Your Familiar probably knows more than you do, 


can be quite demanding, and has a very outspoken 
personality. (Five Quintessence points per week, 
may retain up to 25 points of Paradox, and will 
give you lots of shit about both.) 


Influence 

You command attention and respect within the Sleepers’ 
world. Perhaps you're a celebrity, gang boss, politician, or cult 
leader... or maybe you've just got lots of powerful friends. 
Either way, when you speak, folks listen and frequently obey. 


Generally, this Background reflects a certain amount of 
social deference that you receive even without rolling the Trait. 
Whenahigh-Influence person walks into a room, people notice; 
folks behave themselves accordingly, small favors are offered, 
impossible arrangements suddenly get made in your favor... 
that sort of thing. By combining Social Attributes with this 
Background (say, Manipulation * Influence), you can work 
your mojo with the appropriate parties. Mental Attributes (like 
Perception * Influence) help you spot or secure information 
through your social network. And although Physical Traits won't 
help you accomplish actions through your Influence, a showy 
athletic feat (say, Stamina * Influence to reflect one of those 
“Nobody could survive THAT" sorts of stunts) can impress a large 
number of people if you do something lots of people can see. 


To reflect the fame certain people command, this 
Background can go up to 10. Remember, though, that famous 
and influential people are easily recognized and tend to be 
responsible for (and held accountable by) lots of people. 
Influence is double-edged in that regard, and unwise activities 
can lower your Influence rating. Sure, you can walk into a 
restaurant and treat people like dirt - just expect some nasty 
social media reactions to you as soon as your back is turned... 


Certain magickal practices tend to utilize this sort of 
Influence; see the Art of Desire and Dominion entries, and 
theirassociated instruments, in the Practicessection of Chapter 
Ten, (pp. 573 and 577). 


X No influence to speak of. 


° Folks within your profession recognize you. 


ec You'vegotvarious associates and a small degree 
of clout. 

eco People within your field respect your abilities. 

LIO You've got quite a bit of clout. 

eccce You're a force to be reckoned with. 

eeeee o 


You command influence within your nation’s 
political affairs. 


coocoo co Your actions influence various allied nations. 


eeeee eee Youcommandvastrespectacross whole cultural 


regions. 
eeeec eeee Your dominance extends across whole socio- 


political spheres. (The EU, UN, ANC, etc.) 


eeeec eccce Your influence extends across the mortal 
world, with some respect granted even in the 
Otherworlds. 


Legend 


Humanity’s collective imagination focuses on you. Although 
you might notactually bea reincarnation of King Arthur or Biggie 
Smalls, you evoke those figures on a primal level. People see you 
as a legend, and so they expect legendary things from you. As 
a result, you function as a walking Node, able to recharge your 
own Quintessence - and possibly the Quintessence of other 
people too - by living up to your associated legend. 


In story terms, pick a legend and then model your character 
off some familiar elements of that figure. Little Red would wear a 
crimson hoodie and wander off where she's not supposed to go; 
Popeye would talk weird, eat spinach, and get into lots of fights. Our 
mediaage manufactures legends, soyour model could bea pop«ulture 
character, though the power of such legends doesn't run very deep. 
The more you live up to the legend, the more energy it lends to you. 


In game terms, you can roll your Legend Background no 
more than once per story. Each success refreshes one point of 
Quintessence in your pool. (It's wise to choose a high Avatar 
rating if you've got this Background.) The difficulty of that 
roll depends on how well-known that legend is in your current 
location; embodying Sun Tzu might score you major props in 
a Chinese military academy, but the average U.S. citizen would 
be like, "Sun WHO?” The roll's minimum difficulty is 6; if your 
Legend is obscure, that can go as high as 9. 


Once perstory, you can also instill items with Quintessence 
- turning them into Tass - if they've had something to do with 
you living up to your legend. A Colt .45 used by a modern Jesse 
James, for instance, would acquire a certain energy through 
association. Such items havea potentfeel to them; even Sleepers 
sense something special about Jimi Hendrix’s guitar. Characters 
who can use Quintessence may access that Tass for their own 
purposes. Each dot in this Background allows you to either 
instill a single object with the entire Background rating's worth 
of Quintessence, or you can imbue one item with a single 
point of Tass for every dot in the Background. Legend 5, then, 
would either fill a single item with five points of Quintessence 
or imbue one point of Quintessence into five separate items. 
Once that Tass is used, it’s gone until the next story. 


Other Awakened characters can recharge their Avatars from 
you as well, if and when they take an active role in your legend. 
A lover of James Dean, a drinking companion of Janis Joplin, 
a mage sharing the Round Table of a reincarnated Lancelot - 
these characters may enjoy the benefits of this walking Node 
effect as well, so long as they’ve participated in the legend over 
the course of that particular story. 


(Technocrats can have this Background too; that 
reincarnated Lancelot might be a cyborg with a particularly 
noble personality and a really active dream life.) 


Objects or animals can have the Legend Background, 
with all the same powers of a character’s Legend. In this case, 
the “living up to the legend” element requires other people to 
believe in their connection to that legend. Hendrix’s Sunburst 
Stratocaster might be a Legend in its own right, an object of 
reverence for music lovers everywhere. A mage who got her 
hands on that guitar could recharge her Avatar by playing the 
instrument... which explains why certain objects become hot 
properties among folks who know them for what they are, and 
why people keep killing white buffalo and stags whenever they 
appear. Legendary objects and animals, though, should remain 
property of the Storyteller. If the Storyteller allows a character 
to acquire that object or animal, it becomes a Wonder or Ally. 


In all cases, that Quintessence holds legendary Resonance 
too. Smoke from a joint passed by Monsieur Zig Zag will evoke 
the 1960s even in 2015, and faint echoes of Ahiii-ahiii-ahhhh!!! 
follow the trail ofa Man With No Name. Lizzie Borden’s hatchet 
makes people feel queasy even though the real Lizzie Borden 
killed no one with it. That force of belief clings to the essence 
of a Legend Trait. Folks touched by a legend know they’ve been 
part of something extraordinary. 


This Background works well with these Backgrounds: Destiny, 

Past Lives, and Totem, and with certain Merits and Flaws as well. 

Obviously, you need a compelling reason to claim the Legend 

Background. Simply looking like Jim Morrison is not enough - you 

must be Jim Morrison in every way that matters. Plenty of people 

claim to be “the new Beatles” or “the next Jesus Christ,” but the 

connection has to run deeper than that. This Background draws 

upon sublime power from the realm of archetypes. Unless that 

power runs true and manifests in clear and constant form, then 

you're just another pretender, not the real McCoy. 

X No legendary connection. 

° An obscure legend (Clever Gretel, Abou 
Hassan) or minor pop culture figure (Betty 
Boop, Grumpy Cat). 

eo A minor legend (Sinbad the Sailor, Don 
Quixote) or significant pop culture figure (Janis 
Joplin, the Cheshire Cat). 


eco A famous legend (Guy Fawkes, Shaka Zulu) or 
pop culture icon (Batman, Elvis). 

ecce A major legend (George Washington, 
Geronimo, Red Riding Hood). 


Auniversally popular legend (Cinderella, King 
Arthur, the Mona Lisa). 


Chapter Six: Creating the Character 317 


H 


a 


-- 


4, 


f 


e 7 E 


Library 

Wow... do people even need books in the Internet Age? 
Well, yes, actually. Although the Internet has a nearinfinite 
supply of information, there's still plenty of information that's 
available only in books. Especially when you're dealing with 
esoteric, mystic, historical, or academic information, a good 
library can offer data that no net search can uncover. As much 
as new-millennium mages learn to appreciate the Internet (or 
else suffer for the lack of that appreciation), hard-copy archives 
are still essential to the serious student of the magickal Arts 
and Enlightened hypersciences. 


In the late 20" and early 21* centuries, this Background 
Trait reflects access to a multimedia archive that's vital to that 
particular mage. An old-fashioned magus might shake his gray 
head at all that Internet foolishness, but even he will probably 
still have photographs, record albums, film reels, and probably 
even *gasp!* DVDs, CDs or MP3s in his archive, if only because 
so much of the last century has been recorded in such media. 
An urban witch might have a small but significant collection 
of classical magick tomes or old “60s-era psychedelic magazines 
to compliment his broadband connection, and even the most 
sublime transhumanist retains a few dog-eared copies of Mondo 
2000 or Piss Clear in her collection. The exact nature of your 
Library, then, will depend upon your personality and yet give 
you unrestricted access to an impressive amount of information 
when you need it. 


Because your Library Background is based around a store 
of useful information for your mage, it includes material that 
helps you research your chosen Abilities and Spheres. You'll 
need to add to your collection from time to time when learning 
about new topics (no wonder mages tend to be inveterate data- 
hounds), but then you'll be able to research topics dealing with 
those Traits by making successful Mental Trait + Library rolls. 
Such research, of course, demands time and effort... and with 
bigger archives, both that time and effort can be substantial! 


To reflect enormous archives, this Background can go 
above 5. A tightknit and trusting group can also pool this 
Background, creating truly impressive archives. In this case, 
the group’s Library Background equals the Library Background 
of the highest-rated member of that group, plus one dot for 
each additional contributor. (A cabal whose members have, 
respectively, Library ratings of 3, 2, 2, and 1 would have a total 
combined Library Background of 5.) After all, a combined 
archive will have redundant material... and how many copies 
of Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban do you really need? 


For information about Raising and Learning Traits, see 
the section of that name later in this chapter, (pp. 336-337). 


X Those copies of Cosmo won't help you learn 
Spheres. 

° You’ve got a few New Age paperbacks. 

eo Lots of fiction, little substance. 

eco There’s some useful stuff in there when you 
go digging for it. 

eecc 


Your collection of arcane data is respectable. 


eccce You've gota pretty decent collection of diverse 


lore. 


eccco o You enjoy a huge personal archive. 


eeeee o0 Your database features extensive written, 


recorded, and virtual information. 


eeeee eee You're got full access to a national archive. 


eeeee e000 You enjoy unrestricted access to personal, 
national, and classified databases. 


eecce 00000 Given enough time (and assistance), you can 
access almost anything that's been written 
down and stored. You might not understand it 
(damn those codes, lost languages, and foreign 
tongues!), but you could probably find it. 


Mentor 


An “elder” mage has taken an interest in you and provides 
training, guidance, and occasional assistance. Note that said 
elder might be your own age or even younger, said training 
could consist of dropping you off rooftops, said guidance may 
involve more Yodaisms than a Karate Kid marathon, and said 
assistance could boil down to whacking you in the head just 
after you read that passage in the flesh-bound grimoire. This 
Background's rating reflects how helpful your mentor is for you, 
above and beyond her personal power. After all, a Hermetic 
Grand Master isn’t much good for her students if she refuses 
to do anything other than let them sleep on her floor. 


The mentor/ student bond tends to be one of the most 
influential experiences of a mage's life. In many cases, the mentor 
notices some interesting talent in a currently unAwakened 
Sleepwalker, initiates the prospective student, and then nurtures 
and guides that spark as it bursts into full Awakening. This is 
especially the case with Technocrats, who often get recruited 
soon before or just after they attain Enlightenment... or else 
get converted from their previous Reality Deviant careers by 
an effective Technocratic operative. 


Mentors have their own agendas, of course, and those 
goals aren’t always obvious. Plenty of mages get their first 
taste of Awakened society from mentors who are distant, 
abusive, manipulative, uncaring, ineffective, or downright 
insane. Others, of course, learn from elders who turn out to 
be loving, caring, insightful, and wise. It really depends on the 
nature of your mage’s personality, backstory, and affiliation. 
Technocratic mentors are often (though not always) cold and 
efficient, whereas mystics can be silly, eccentric, aloof, or any 
combination of wizardly traits you can imagine. 


Gamewise, a Mentor provides some social lubricant, 
magickal or technological training, occasional resources, and 
perhaps interventions or assistance if your mage really needs 
help. In return, she'll expect a certain amount of respect, 
obedience, and help around the workshop. A student's behavior, 
good or bad, reflects upon his mentor, so it’s not wise to abuse 
this relationship. Especially for a young and inexperienced 
mage, an angry mentor can be a terrible thing. 


As with Allies and Familiar, this Background represents 
Storyteller characters with their own backgrounds, personalities, 


motivations, and relationships to the world at large. Your 
Storyteller can (and should) have a blast playing up such 
characters, running agendas thatoften remain obscure to the 
students in their path. Remember the various games being 
run by elders throughout the Harry Potter saga - games in 
which the pupils rarely understood what was really going on. 
Mentors give nothing for nothing; if one has taken a guiding 
interest in your mage, there's always something more than 
simple kindness or duty involved! 

For examples regarding the mentor-student relationships 
in various groups, see the Initiation sections of the two-page 
spreads throughout Chapter Five. 


X No mentor worth mentioning. 

° An unreliable or inexperienced mentor. 

ee A helpful yet eccentric guide. 

eco A good and noteworthy teacher. 

ecco A wise, helpful, and respected elder. 

eocce A powerful elder with serious investments in 


your Success. 


Node 


Inaworld where magick seems scarce, you've got access to 
a miracle: a Node where you can meditate to restore your inner 
Quintessence or gather solid-energy Tass in various forms. 
You may have to fight to keep this place to yourself, though 
- werewolves, spirits, and rival mages are always looking to 
add such places to their collections. The Node might not 
be obvious as a magical site; most of them are not. To folks 
who understand such things, though, Nodes stand out as 
beacons of energy desired by mystics and Technocrats alike. 


In the grand tradition of religions and empires 
everywhere, Nodes tend to get converted to suit the purposes 
of the groups that claim them. The Technocracy sends in 
teams to sanitize mystic Nodes and then builds strongholds, 
labs, or power stations on top of the previous installation. 
Mystic mages consecrate such territories in their own ways, 
building temples over glens, churches over wells, and shopping 
malls or computer labs over the holy ground once honored 
by a rival group. In short, Nodes present one of the nastier 
fronts of the Ascension War. Even allied mages, like Celestial 
Choristers and Verbena, are not above repurposing one 
another’s sacred spaces... all for the greater good, of course! 


As Chapter Three mentions, Nodes have Resonance 
that comes from the type of energy that formed them. The 
Tass from a given site carries that Resonance with it too, and 
the form that Tass takes will follow the nature of the Node. 
A Node forged by a battle might radiate fury and sadness, 
incarnated as blood, bones, and ash; a fountain of hope feels 
refreshing and clean, with pure water Tass; but a Frankenstein- 
esque laboratory feels Gothic and foreboding, with lightning 
bolt Quintessence arcing between generators and captured 
in batteries, as Tass, for later use. The Gauntlet tends to thin 
out around mystic Nodes, but it thickens in Technocratic ones 
unless you’re using Dimensional Science procedures instead 
of spirit magick. 


Chapter Six: Creating the Character 319 


4 


e I E 


Asa Background Trait, this Node represents a location that's 
held by your character and perhaps a few friends. You can pool 
Background points to buy a larger Node, though your group 
will need a reasonable, story-based reason if you want to begin 
the chronicle with a place of great power. Your Node produces 
a certain amount of ambient, untapped Quintessence that your 
Avatar can absorb while you meditate in that spot for a while, 
plus a bit of Tass that can be collected in solid form and used 
later elsewhere. The exact amounts of Tass and free Quintessence 
depend upon the nature of your chronicle: a high-fantasy saga's 
Node might produce as much as five or 10 Quintessence points 
per week for every dot in the Background rating, whereas a “magic 
is dying" chronicle would have Nodes that produce only one or 
two Quintessence per week for each dot in that Trait. Ultimately, 
the Storyteller determines the perweek value of a Node. For 
industrial-era chronicles, we suggest two points per week, per dot 
in the Trait - half of that in free Quintessence, the other half in 
Tass. Regardless of its form, that supply of Quintessence is finite. 
If you absorb it all into your Avatar or collect it all as Tass, that 
Node needs to replenish its energy before it can be used again. 


Werewolves think of Nodes as caerns: sacred spaces blessed 
by their primal moon-goddess. Driven by religious fervor, they 
tend to claim Nodes for themselves when they can. Although 
such creatures avoid the cold factories of Technocratic power, a 
mage or cabal with a mystic Node could have some large, furry 
visitors wishing to discuss a real-estate transaction... 


(Note: The caern levels have been adjusted from older 
versions of the rules in order to reflect the 1-10 scale of this 
Background.) 


X No place of power. 

° A tiny site of minor significance. (Level One 
caern.) 

ec A small trickle of metaphysical energy. (Level 


One caern.) 


eco A steady flow of Quintessence. (Level Two 
caern.) 

ecce A pulse of energy, plus generous quantities of 
materialized Tass. (Level Two caern.) 

eccce A powerful wellspring of energetic abundance. 
(Level Three caern.) 

coocoo o A focused Node, with both Tass and ambient 


energy refined by Prime Arts or sciences. (Level 
Three caern.) 


eeeee o0 A considerable force of metaphysical power. 


(Level Four caern.) 


eeeee cee A rare and wondrous place, brimming with 


incarnate Prime Force. (Level Four caern.) 


eeoo0 0000 One of the grandest sacred spots, or most 
potent refineries, in the material world. (Level 
Five caern.) 

eeccc eeeee One of the rarest and most precious sites on 
Earth... and a certain battleground for the 
forces that would tap its power. (Level Five 
caern.) 


Ma$e: The Ascension 20^ Anniversary Edition 


Past Lives 

Reincarnation remains a subject of debate, even among 
mages. Akashics and Chakravanti base their entire approach 
to reality upon that idea, yet their Chorus allies (to say nothing 
of those atheistic Technocrats) deny the concept of recycled 
souls... or sometimes the very idea of a soul! Still, there appears 
to be something there... a familiar essence that certain people 
can call upon in times of need. 


With this Background, you can meditate on a past life 
(or, at the Storyteller's discretion, experience a sudden burst of 
insight) in order to get help in a current situation. Maybe the 
glare of an imposing adversary reminds you of that time you 
faced down Stalin's chief operative, or thatweird book reminds 
you of the alchemical scroll you studied in Byzantium. If the 
Past Lives Background kicks in, your memories help you with 
the present dilemma. 


Gamewise, this Background's dice pool may add to the 
dice pool of another task. Once per game session, you can check 
in with that well of memory. Every dot in Past Lives gives you 
one die to roll against difficulty 8; each success on that roll 
gives you an extra die to use on an upcoming roll with some 
other Ability. These dice can either add to the dice pool for 
an Ability you already possess, or else - like the Background: 
Dream - give you a temporary dice pool for an Ability you 
don't normally have on your sheet. Past Lives does not ensure 
success, but it can lend a bit of extra expertise. 


Botching a Past Lives roll lands you in the middle of some 
past-life trauma; fora crucial moment, the memories overwhelm 
your character, blowing any chance of success in the here-and- 
now. That's especially disconcerting if your mage doesn't believe 
in reincarnation! ("What the hell was THAT all about...?”) For an 
extra dose of Awesome Sauce, note down details of your past 
life when you access this Trait successfully. Such memories will 
probably come in handy again someday... 


X No past lives to speak of. 

° Faint traces of some previous incarnation. 

os Frequent cases of déja vu. 

eee Definite memories of other lives. 

ecce Clear recall of previous experiences and other 
lives. 

coocoo Which life is this one again? 

Patron 


Inthe chessboard politics ofthe Ascension factions, certain 
players conceal their faces from the pawns. One of those players 
has dedicated him- or herself to your welfare... at least for the 
moment. Chances are, you have no idea who this patron is, 
what they want, or what the final bill for services rendered will 
be; even if you think you know who's behind that goodwill, the 
truth remains uncertain. This person is no Mentor or Ally but 
asecretive benefactor whose true goals remain hidden... atleast 
for the moment... from your understanding. 


Gamewise, Patron reflects a powerful party who's watching 
outfor your character's interests. Only theStoryteller knows what 


this party's plans are and what their interest in the character might 
be. At the beginning of the chronicle, at least, this benefactor 
exerts force in mysterious ways: orders get reversed, contracts 
issued or terminated, gifts delivered, hints dropped, and strings 
pulled. Magick will not reveal the reason for these indulgences - 
the patron's far too clever to get caught that easily. There's clearly 
some alliance or common ground involved, but the nature of that 
connection remains elusive. Especially in paranoid labyrinths like 
the Hermetic or Technocratic Orders, this mysterious generosity 
can be very disconcerting. Someday, you know, the patron will 
call in his markers... 


X No special friends. 

° Ashadowysomeone pulling occasional strings. 

eo A helpful benefactor who chooses to remain 
concealed. 

eco Asuperior or elder who helps you for mysterious 
reasons. 

cece A powerful party who appears to favor you. 

LLLI) A high-ranking mageor Technocratwho seems 
dedicated to your well-being... at least for now. 

Rank 


You hold a title of some distinction among the masses - 
perhapsa militaryrank, a religious office, an executive position with 
a powerful corporation, or some similarly influential post. That 
position grants you a degree of respect, certain perks related to the 
job, and probably the immediate deference (and obedience) of lower- 
ranking personnel. Naturally, this rank demands responsibility to 
that office too; a head of state can’t just run offand have adventures 
when she pleases! Ranks above the ones shown below certainly 
exist, but they’re not suitable for player characters because they 
demand too much time and responsibility. 


Especially common among Technocrats, this Background 
commands Influence - as per that Background Trait - equal to 
the Rank rating. However, this Influence activates only among 
the people under the Rank’s dominion (say, staffers under an 
executive, or citizens under nobility) and in situations in which 
the character is acting within the limits of her office. 


Other people might not be so easily impressed, in which 
case the Influence counts as half the Rank or a level of the 
Storyteller’s choosing. (A mullah still holds some clout with 
non-Muslims, but not as much as he holds among the faithful.) 
Also keep in mind that the VP of Finance of a Fortune 500 
company might command Influence among people who live 
and breathe capitalism, but a group of Occupy Wall Street 
protestors might react very negatively to the character's Rank... 


When acting in an official capacity, your character may 
also access Resources (again, as the Background) equal to half 
her Rank, or a level of the Storyteller's choosing as a perk 
of her office... though she'll probably need to answer to her 
superiors for how those Resources are spent! She might also 
have Fame at half her Rank among the people she commands. 
If she wants Influence, Resources, or Fame independent of that 
Rank, however, then she'll need to buy them separately; a drill 
sergeant can be wealthy from family money, but that cash flow 


doesn't come through military channels. Rank might confer 
other benefits as well, depending on the office. A priest could 
not commandeer a company's best limousine, but the VP of that 
company damn well can! 


Note that Rank reflects status among Sleeper institutions. 
Mage status has nothing to do with this Background, although a 
VP, priest, or drill sergeant mightstill impress certain Awakened 
folks due to that person’s position in the mortal world. 


X No rank with noticing. 


° Minor rank: Army sergeant, squire, deacon, 
school board member, novice journalist, junior 
manager, university instructor. 


ee Low rank: Junior officer, knight, prior, city 
councilor, staff reporter, senior manager, 
professor. 


ecc Medium rank: Captain, baron, abbot, 


mayor, local columnist, corporate middle- 
management, tenured faculty. 


ecco High rank: Major, count, bishop, governor, 


syndicated columnist, junior VP, department 


head. 


Command staff: General, prince, archbishop, 
senator, international correspondent, corporate 


VP, dean. 


Requisitions" 

There are reasons for Technocratic dominance. One of 
them involves the epic resources available to Technocratic 
operatives. With this Background - a Trait available ONLY 
to Technocrats in good standing with the Order - you can request 
goodies from your superiors and often expect to get them. 


Before a mission, you and your team will be issued whatever 
gear your superiors expect you to need. If you want more than 
that (as most agents do), you need to requisition it. In story 
terms, you tap your contacts and file an official request for 
the desired goodies - see Requisitioning, Outsourcing, and 
Borrowing Backgrounds, (pp. 302-303). In game terms, you 
roll your Requisitions rating as a dice pool. Each success on 
that roll gives you five Background points with which to buy 
Devices for that mission. (See The Toybox in Appendix II for 
Devices and their costs.) More than three successes scores you as 
much mundane Sleepertech as you can use. If your relationship 
with the Powers That Be is good, this'll be an easy roll... and 
if not, then good luck getting anything other than an earful 
of abuse. See The Six Degrees in Chapter Five, (pp. 181-182), 
for examples of good standing and its alternatives. 


Assuming thatyour reputation remains spotless (or you've at 
least balanced out your cock-ups with blazing victories), you could 
simply consider this Background to be worth five Background 
points per dot when requisitioning Devices. Your Storyteller 
may reserve the roll for times when you’re on thin ice, asking for 
special favors, or trying to pound a mosquito with a pile driver. 


At mission’s end, you must return the borrowed gear. If 
Q Division has to come for it themselves, you'll be losing your 


Chapter Six: Creating the Character 32l 


Requisitions rating for a while... and if you're lucky, that's 
all they'll take! Lost or damaged gear reflects poorly on your 
performance, too - especially if you let some Reality Deviant 
get her blood-caked hands on Union hypertech. If things went 
well, your Requisitions rating might go up a dot or two; if 
not, it might lose one or two dots... even more if you make a 
catastrophic mess. Your amalgam can pool this Background in 
order to requisition even more gear, butthen the entire group is 
responsible for both equipment and success. The Technocracy 
understands that eggs get broken when omelets get prepared, 
but such understanding goes only so far... 


Requisitions Chart 


Relationship Difficulty 
Doubtful Loyalty 9 
Questionable Loyalty 8 
Assumed Loyalty 7 
Assured Loyalty 6 
Total Loyalty 5 
X No dice: “Get out of my office.” 
G One die: They don’t take you seriously. 
ee Two dice: "There might be something left over 


here for you..." 


ecc Three dice: You've earned their trust. 

ecce Four dice: Q Division likes you. 

coocoo Five dice: You’re a trusted and valuable 
operative. 

eceoeee o 


Six dice: A squad of proven agents. 
Seven dice: A trusted team of loyal ops. 


Eight dice: A team of specialists. 


eeece 0000 Nine dice: An elite strike force with the utmost 


confidence from above. 


eecee 00000 Ten dice: Maximum clearance, trust, and favor 
from above. 


Resources 


As any Syndicate rep could tell you, there’s good money 
to be made with magick - very good money if you play your 
cards right. Naturally, the Syndicate won't refer to what they 
do as magick - it's simply the Art of Desire, honed to a science. 
Whatever you choose to call it, this Background means that 
you've got cash and goods on hand... at the upper levels, lots 
of cash and goods. 


Given the staggering wealth that certain mages can accrue, 
this Background goes to 10. Such wealth isn't just the dominion 
of the Syndicate, either. Hermetic wizards are infamous for their 
luxuries, Choristers can command vast resources, and Ecstatic 
rockstars can make more money than anyone has a right to enjoy. 
The real fiscal wizards, though, are the so-called money men (and 
women) whose Convention began with the medieval High Guild 


Ma$e: The Ascension 20^ Anniversary Edition 


and has been going strong ever since. Some mages come from 
that kind of old money; others make their own fortunes. Given 
the economic potential of Spheres like Entropy, Matter, Mind, 
and Life, after all, why not go for the gold? 


Of course, it's often dangerous to rely too much upon 
magickal income. Transactions these days are mostly con- 
ducted in virtual money: debit cards, credit cards, bank 
withdrawals, online deposits, and so on. Throwing around 
a lot of cash will get you noticed too... why else do you think 
so many paper-money bills have those tracking strips? A wise 
mage charms people into fattening her bank account; chang- 
ing lead into gold is too suspicious (and labor-intensive) to 
be effective. As with so many other things in this tech-heavy 
world, it's far easier for a Technocrat to get around such 
obstacles than it is for a mystic mage to do so. That said, 
there's quite a bit of old money floating around Hermetic 
circles and certain witches' covens. Hell, some daring mages 
even make their fortunes writing New Age books, fantasy 
novels, or roleplaying games! 


High Resource ratings, like other high Backgrounds, take 
time and effort to control. It's easier to lose fortunes, if you're 
not careful, than it is to make them. Given the virtual nature 
of modern commerce, you probably don't have stacks of paper 
money and precious metals lying around... although, if you're 
old-school enough, you just might... 


Note: As mentioned earlier, the Storyteller may wish to 
forbid player characters from assembling Resources worth 
8, 9, or 10 dots. As described under the Art of Desire/ 
Hypereconomics practice, the Primal Utility Sphere, and the 
Money and Wealth instrument entries, money can provide a 
potent source of power for the 21* century mage. See those 
entries in Chapter Ten (pp. 573, 526-527, and 596) for details. 


X Working poor: You live paycheck-to-paycheck, 
and that's about it. 


° Slightly ahead of the game: You’ve got a small 
apartment and perhaps a cheap vehicle. By 
local standards, a working-class income. 


ec Lower middle class: You've got a condo or 
apartment, plus a vehicle, some savings, and 
enough money for occasional indulgences. 


eco Middle class with property: You either own 


or have decent equity in some property, 
plus a vehicle, investments, and savings. You 
could maintain a one-dot standard of living 
indefinitely. 


cooo Well-off: You own a large house, some property, 


and at least two vehicles, as well as notable levels 
of savings and investments. By local standards, 
you're a millionaire, and although that's not 
worth as much as it once was, it’s still nothing 
to sneeze at. 


coocoo Welcome to the 1%: As a multimillionaire, 


you've got substantial holdings, investments, 
and savings. 


ecccc o Hollywood money: Whatever you want, you've 
got it. 


coocoo oo Billionaires’ club. You can influence an entire 
business or industry. 


eeeee eee Druce Wayne level wealth. You own companies. 
eeece ecce Tony Stark level wealth. You own industries. 


eecce 00000 Dill Gates level wealth. You own governments. 


Retainers 

“What will it be tonight, sir" When the battle's over (or 
shortly before it begins), a faithful retainer can bind your 
wounds, sharpen your weapons, clean up the bodies, and make 
sure you make it to your 8 o’clock meeting in the morning. 


Unlike Allies or Familiars, such Retainers aren’t skilled in the 
mystic Arts or combat; unlike Backup or Spies, they’re not faceless 
guns or founts of information. Each retainer is a devoted servant, 
employee, mind-controlled servitor, lab-built construct, or even a 
very minor spirit who does your bidding with a decent sense of 
loyalty. He’ll tend your house, your gear, and your overall busywork. 
Perhaps he'sa pathetic lab-assistant, a mundane apprentice, a lover, 
or a devoted friend. He's your Igor; she’s your Moneypenny. So 
long as you treat such characters with respect (and maybe even if 
you don’t), this Background gives you extra sets of hands. 


As with the aforementioned Backgrounds, each Retainer is 
a Storyteller character in his or her own right. That character’s 
loyalty depends a lot on circumstances, but she can generally be 
counted on unless things get really bad. With few exceptions, a 
Retainer’s skills are strictly mundane. He might knowsome yoga 
or have office experience, but hewon’t be hefting a machine gun 
anytime soon! If and when you train up a Retainer character, 
that character becomes an Ally instead. 


Lab-built constructs and spirit retainers are essentially 
normal human beings with a certain special effect and origin 
but no unusual powers beyond, perhaps, unusual strength 
or the ability to float around the mansion. Other than that, 
they’re just plain folks. Rich people have several retainers on 
staff, but you don’t need to be wealthy to have this Background. 
A homeless mage might still enjoy the loyalty of the kid she 
saved from an abusive dad. 


X You're doing your own laundry, dude! 
° One retainer. 

eo Two retainers. 

eco Three retainers. 

ecco Four retainers. 

sewoe Five retainers. 


Sanctum/ Laboratory $ 


You have a place where you can get away from it all - said 
“all” being the consensual reality that hinders your Arts and 
Enlightened Sciences. Oh, this place still exists on the Earthly 
plane, and it's subject to the Paradox Effect. Still, your Lab or 
Sanctum isa place of power and privacy, set to fulfill your needs 
and allow you to hone your skills in relative safety. 


Chapter Six: Creating the Character 


323 


eZ 


A Sanctum can range from a small herb-garden with wards 
set against intruders and trees planted to screen the place off from 
casual viewing to small laboratories filled with gleaming scientific 
gear. Martialarts studios, yoga lofts, sacred groves, basement dens, 
band practice spaces, penthouse suites, photography studios, 
tiny shrines on remote mountaintops - the Sanctum or Lab is 
whatever you want it to be. Essentially, a mage or group secures 
the place, dedicates it to reflect their needs and wishes, and sets 
the reality of that space to suit the owners’ purposes. A Progenitor 
lab might gleam under sterile lights, polished surfaces of steel 
and glass ready to advance the call of Science. A ritual clearing 
might nestle in amongst thick forests, old runes cut into trees 
and stones artfully arranged to emphasize the mystic nature of 
the place. You might have a blood-spattered basement with chairs 
of human bones; a “7Os-style seduction pad; a bookstore that's 
open only at night; a hobbit-hole straight out of a Peter Jackson 
Tolkien flick - whatever suits your fancy (and your available 
resources) is within the grasp of this Background Trait. 


In game terms, this Trait provides several benefits: 


* A relatively private space to conduct experiments, 
meditate, practice your arts, and so on. Again, this privacy 
is relative; Technocratic operatives rarely have such places 
to themselves. Unless a group or individual is extremely 
wealthy and connected, a Technocratic Laboratory is 
actually owned and managed by the Union, not by the 
operatives themselves. Thus, your superiors have their 
eyes on you even within your sanctuary, and its privacy 
is more of a courtesy than an absolute. 


* A stock of materials you can use - herbs, cauldrons, 
diagrams, elaborate glyphs carved into the floors, martial 
arts practice weapons, chemistry arrays, telescopes, 
microscopes, whatever. This stock depends upon the 
Background rating and allows you constant access to 
whatever it is (within reason) that you need. 


* A Sanctum's specially prepared ritual space (or a Lab's 
experimental space) reduces the difficulty of rituals or 
experiments performed in that area. That reduction 
dependson the Background trait's rating, as shown below. 


e Acloakingeffectsafeguards the place's location. Essentially, 
theSanctum/ Laboratory has an Arcane/ Cloaking rating 
based on the place's Background rating. You could consider 
this effectaresult of protection wards, concealment fields, an 
aura of ordinariness... that sort of thing. As longas theystay 
within the protected area, characters enjoy the protection 
of this Arcane effect too. (A character who already has the 
Arcane/ Cloaking Background gets whichever Arcane 
rating is highest - the rating of the Sanctum or the rating 
of her Arcane rating - not a combination of both.) 


* All Effects cast within the Sanctum are considered 
coincidental magick, so long as those Effects follow the 
definition of reality within thatsanctuary. Cloningwould 
be coincidental within an Iteration X or Progenitor lab; 
spiritssummoning would be coincidental on a shaman's 


Ma$e: The Ascension 20^ Anniversary Edition 


sacred ground; a witch could conjure imps or heal 
gaping wounds within his Sanctum; but the Black Suit 
busting down the door would find himself at a distinct 
disadvantage there because... 


The Effects of rival mages are considered vulgar in your 
space. That Man in Black's procedures go against the 
prevailing reality within that witch's sanctuary, whereas 
the witch's spells run counter to the established reality 
of a NWO Construct. Rivals who use the same style 
of magick would be considered equally at home in a 
Sanctum - two Verbenae, for example, who hate each 
other's guts but who employ the same paradigms and 
tools would both be considered coincidental within the 
same sanctum; an Etherite, however, would find that her 
weird science is vulgar within that witch’s sacred ground, 
even if she was allied with one of the rival Verbenae. 


Mystic Sanctums have an additional benefit over 
technological Laboratories: the Gauntlet rating is one 
levellower in a place that's been dedicated to magick than 
it is in a similar place than has not been so dedicated. 
The Gauntlet in a technomagickal Laboratory, on the 
other hand - like those used by the Society of Ether or 
Virtual Adepts - is one level higher than it would be 
otherwise. Anda Technocracy Laboratory has a Gauntlet 
rating of 9 except with regards to Dimensional Science 
procedures, whose Effects are considered coincidental 
in an appropriate Technocratic Lab. 


Because of these many benefits, a Sanctum costs TWO 


Background dots for each dot in the Sanctum. Like the 
Enhancements Background, it offers an unusual amount of value 
per dot. Ifyou'reallowed to purchase Backgrounds with experience 
points, Sanctum costs double the usual Background price. 


Regardless of its nature, this space must be specially 


prepared by the group or mage who uses it, with constant 
maintenance (no less than once per month) to keep the space 
attuned to the people who use it. A Sanctum can be no larger 
than 500 square feet, and most of them are much smaller than 
that... typically a room or two. Because this is personal space, it's 
often wise to limit the people coming and going throughout your 
Sanctum. Too much traffic can render a Sanctuary mundane, 
as far as reality's Consensus is concerned. 


X 


No special space. 

A tiny stock of goods; no reduction of ritual 
difficulties, though your magick is coincidental 
here. One dot in Arcane. 

Small stock of goods; ritual difficulties reduced 
by 1. Two dots in Arcane. 

Decentstock of goods; ritual difficulties reduced 
by 1. Three dots in Arcane. 

Fine stock of materials; ritual difficulties 
reduced by 2. Four dots in Arcane. 


Excellent stock of materials; ritual difficulties 
reduced by 2. Five dots in Arcane. 


Secret Weapons* 

As a prized guinea pig for the Technocratic Q Division, 
you get access to experimental technology. When a new 
Device reaches the prototype stage, you get a briefing from 


your friends(...?) at Q, then get sent out to see what the thing 
will do in the field. 


A Background that applies ONLY to Technocratic field 
operatives, this Trait periodically gives you goodies to play with. 
The Trait rating reflects the sorts of goodies you get access to 
for a given mission. As with Requisitions, these Devices do not 
belong to you - Q Division wants them back, preferably intact, 
along with a full report about how the Device functioned in 
your hands. Hopefully, you'll have good things to say; if things 
go badly... well, at least Q Division will know what not to do 
next time out. 


Favored agents get better gear. Trouble, is, you’re not 
always sure just how favored you really are. When you prepare 
for a mission, your Storyteller makes a Social Trait + Secret 
Weapons roll. (The Trait in question depends on the sort 
of relationship your character has with the Q Division rep: 
Charisma in most cases, Manipulation if the agent tries to 
game the system, and Appearance if the agent looks especially 
attractive to the Q Division rep.) The difficulty depends on 
how the Q Division rep feels about your agent. A failed roll 
means that the rep’s got nothing for you this time around; 
one or two successes get you something of dubious value, 
and three successes or more score you some choice goodies. 
A botch reflects a flawed gadget - either slipped to you on 
purpose by a disgruntled rep or something sent into the field 
before all the bugs have been worked out. Because this is a 
secret Storyteller roll, you won’t know how things turned out 
until you use the gadgets in the field. Obviously, it pays to 
be on good terms with your local Q Division representative! 


X 


° You can get small items of trivial value: pens, 
lamps, nutrition bars, etc. 


Typical agent - no goodies for you! 


ee They send out small items with limited utility 


value: sensors, power sources, energy pills, etc. 


You start to get the good stuff: small weapons, 
body armor, medical supplies, etc. 


ecce A trusted agent, you know the quirks of various 


Q Div weaponsmiths because they come to 
you when their special toys need to be tested. 
These items tend to be useful but plagued with 
finicky and perhaps dangerous bugs. 


eccce You get all kinds of cool, expensive stuff: armor, 


weapons, advanced transportation gear, and 


so forth. Now do be careful, 007! 


Spies 

A collection of little birds in various nests keeps you well- 
informed. These informants aren't necessarily your friends - they 
may, in fact, hate you with the burning intensity of a thousand 
fiery suns. For the moment, though, you have something they 


want: money, sex, drugs, magick, whatever. In return for that 
indulgence, they’ll tell you what they know. 


Spies come in many different forms: disgruntled associates, 
dismayed staff, jaded groupies, desperate addicts, loyal acolytes 
of your cause, folks who owe you favors, people who'd be in 
very deep trouble without you, opportunists who like the color 
of your money, lovers who want to stay on your good side... 
Certain mad scientists and Technocrats even have special 
critters or tiny robots who report back to them. Whatever 
your relationship to these spies might be, however, they could 
turn against you if you're not careful. Money, magick, better 
drugs, the threat of torture - all these things and more might 
flip your spies into someone else's service. And even if they do 
remain loyal to you, your spies can be misled with false data 
or mistaken impressions of what's really going on. They know 
only what they're able to see. 


Systems-wise, this Trait lets you ferret out information 
(Intelligence + Spies); circulate misinformation, diversions, 
and lies (Manipulation + Spies); impress people from a distance 
(Charisma + Spies); or note potential threats before they solidify 
(Perception + Spies). A true spymaster can command well above 
five dots in this Trait, which explains the frightening influence of 
certain Hermetics, Technocrats, vigilantes, and criminal minds. 


X 


° One or two spies in helpful places - the police, 
the Mob, Wall Street, etc. 


Four to six informants in various helpful areas. 


No special informants. 


A handful of spies in helpful places, plus a few 
in hard-to-reach areas (the Pentagon, the CIA, 
the UN, etc.), or one or two in highly secure 
areas (a Technocratic Symposium, a Tradition 
Chantry, a classified government bureau, etc.). 


ecce Infiltrators in a whole sphere of influence 


(the underworld, a nation's government, the 
international stock market, etc.), or a handful 
ina Construct, Chantry, vampire clan, werewolf 
tribe, and so forth. 


eccce Eyes and ears throughout the Sleeper world, 


or several contacts in the supernatural realm. 


ecccee You’ve gota small news industry or intelligence 


agency on your payroll, and it has some 
perspective on supernatural affairs as well. 


Beyond the hundreds of contacts you have in 
the mortal world, you've got plenty of “friends” 
scattered throughout the supernatural realm. 


You’ve gotan entire intelligence agency fielding 
and processing information for you. 
LEKEI 


eeee Big Brother. 


eecee 00000 Bio Brother on a global scale. 


Status 


Respect is important. Fortunately, you enjoy a certain 
degree of respect within your chosen group. This Background 


Chapter Six: Creating the Character — 325 


H 


 -— —-— 9 ÀÁ P 


LE 


4 
SJ 


| Pees 


3 


LAUBEDS TEM 


UMMI 


E 


Ma$e: The Ascension 20^ Anniversary Edition 


reflects your overall reputation among your Awakened peers 
- Virtual Adepts, Templars, Progenitors, etc. At the highest 
levels of Status (4 and 5), that rep extends to affiliated groups 
(allthe Traditions, Disparate Crafts, Technocracy Conventions) 
and might extend outside your faction as well. ("I've heard a 
lot about you, Mister Leonard — even here, we've heard of you...") 


Story-wise, Status gives you a certain amount of respect 
fromassociated mages. This, in turn, grants you some deference: 
folks open doors for you, address you by your desired name 
and title, send you invitations for special events, and so forth. 
If you need a small favor, or get involved in a dispute, Status 
lends your cause a bit of weight. 


In game terms, you may add this Background to your 
dice pool during Social rolls when dealing with your peers; an 
admired Virtual Adept, for instance, would add four dice to her 
Social rolls among the Adepts. That bonus is halved (round up) 
among mages from a different but allied sect; the same Adept 
would get a two-dice bonus among other Traditions. You don't 
get that bonus among enemies or strangers, though they might 
acknowledge you in story terms. ("Our files on you, Ms. Vasquez 
- or perhaps I should call you ‘Voodoo’ — are most... impressive...") 


Obviously, Status must be based on something you 
do or have done. A brand-new mage isn't going to have 
Status 5 - she'll have to earn it. This Background reflects 
a reputation among mages, not among Sleepers or other 
entities, though certain beings in the know (like vampires 
or spiritlords) might recognize a Status 4 or 5 mage. Ideally, 
this Background is granted by the Storyteller as a reward 
for your actions throughout the chronicle. You can also 
lose Status by failing to live up to it; an agent known for 
cowardice won't command respect for long... 


X No special status. 

° Acknowledged; your peers recognize your name 
if it comes up. 

ec Credible; you're considered noteworthy. 

eco Respected; your word carries weight. 

DELLI Admired; most people in your group look up 
to you. 

LLLI) Revered; you're considered a paragon of your 


group's principles. 


Totem $ 


Long before technology gave us little gods, shamans swore 
pacts with spirit helpers. Each side of such pacts received 
something in return: the shaman got aid when necessary, and 
the spirit got a human ally for Earthly matters. These days, a 
handful of people remember these pacts. The Totem Background 
reflects such a bargain on your part. ONLY shamans or medicine 
workers of some sort can choose this Background Trait. 


Totems, however, are far more than just convenient helpers. 
Each totem is a powerful spirit archetype - an entity with many 
forms and faces. Coyote isn’t simply an animal; he’s a mythic 
trickster, libidinous and clever, though not especially wise. To 
be one of Coyote’s chosen is to embark on a path of mischief 
and misbehavior that undermines authority and fractures 


limitations. A shaman embraced by Coyote becomes an agent 
of misrule, whose tricks receive aid from Coyote himself. 


Totem spirits aren't in the business of helping human beings; 
in fact, these days they're not often fond of people atall. To obtain 
a totem's favor, a person needs to either seek that spirit out in a 
gruelingvision quest or attract that spirit’s attention by embodying 
the totem’s essence in her daily life. That Coyoteshaman might 
have been a bit coyote-like in the first place: tricky and shifty with 
an anti-authoritarian streak a mile wide... If so, she may have had 
Coyote’s attention all along! Either way, a shaman who wants to 
bond with her spirit totem will have to journey off into the spirit 
world (probably while enduring a real-life ordeal) in order to 
impress that totem with her potential devotion. 


Unlike those wizards who compel obedience from spirits, 
a totem-bound shaman doesn’t demand a pact. Nor does she 
worship the spirit as if it were a god. Instead, the shaman be- 
comes kin to the spirit - essentially a cousin, sibling, or child. 
That said, a shaman/ totem bond can be fractious, argumen- 
tative, even insulting. Totems tend to be pretty rough around 
the edges... and so, for that matter, do most shamans. Both 
parties understand each other in the cryptic, sometimes blunt 
manner that families often use... and, like relatives, can speak 
volumes to each other while hardly saying a word. 


Instoryterms, the totem spirit becomes like a combination of 
Allyand Patron, helping your shaman when it suits that totem’s 
wishes to do so. As with other allied characters, this spirit has 
certain things it wants in return. Typically, those desires combine 
service (“Go hunt down the people who killed my wolf-children”) with a 
ban (“Do not kill wolves or allow other people to kill them, unless those 
wolves attack you first”). Both elements depend on the nature of the 
totem - Cockroach, for instance, won't have you hunting rabbits 
or ban you from drinking alcohol. In exchange, the totem instills 
a bit of its essence - its touch or mark - on its chosen people. A 
person with a Wolf totem has a fierce yet noble aspect, but one 
sworn to Cockroach is a tough, if dirty, survivor. 


Systems-wise, each dot in Totem gives you a closer connection 
to a spirit entity: the higher the rating, the deeper the bond. The 
Background costs TWO points per dot (like Enhancements and 
Sanctum) and confers an escalating series of benefits: 


* Communication: A totem can always communicate 
with its chosen people. Generally, though, this involves 
omens, dreams, and whispers in your ear. Totems rarely 
hold conversations with their human kin unless the 
bond is especially intense (in game terms, Totem 4 or 5). 
Your totem might get chatty in a dream, but don't expect 
that to become a habit. Spirits often expect humans to 
be stupid... and cryptic communications weed out the 
dummies. If you can’t figure out what the totem's saying, 
after all, why should it bother talking to you at all? 


* Appearance: Your totem shows up, either in a form that 
only you can see or - at the higher levels - in a spirit- 
animal manifestation. These manifestations have the 
approximate traits of the appropriate animals, although 
a five-dot Totem could be considerably more powerful 
if the situation demands a powerful appearance. 


* Ability: Each totem spirit has certain famous traits: Fox's 
cleverness, Cat's stealth, Lion's ferocity, and so forth. 
As a result, the Totem Background gives you additional 
dice to add to an Ability that's related to that spirit's 
nature. If you don't have that Ability to begin with, then 
you're clearly not worthy of the totem's attention! To 
bond with a totem spirit, you must share something of 
its nature. 


* Wisdom: Totems teach their special kin howto deal with 
the spirit worlds. In game terms, this comes through 
as dots in either Cosmology, Lore (with a specialty in 
Spirits), or both. 


* Totem Mark: As mentioned above, a totem shares a 
bit of its nature with the shaman... and the shaman 
probably displayed a bit of that nature even before the 
bond. Once the bond becomes official, her behavior and 
appearance favor the totem's nature even more. People 
who work with spirits will be able to spot the totem's 
connection to your shaman (“You’ve got the look of Raven 
about you...") with a successful Perception * Awareness 
roll. At the upper levels of this Background, though, 
even Sleepers notice it; they might not know what it is 
that they're seeing, but the shaman feels odd to them. 
(*Lady, what's with that coyote-skin head on your backpack... 
and don't you EVER comb your hair?”) 


Because of the differences between human shamans 
and shamanic werewolves, this Background differs from the 
Werewolf: The Apocalypse Background of the same name. (It's 
also a revision of the Background presented in The Spirit Ways, 
which resembled the Werewolf one.) As with Backgrounds like 
Fame, Resources, Status, and so forth, you must maintain your 
totem bond and keep your spiritkin happy. Otherwise, you 
could lose dots in this Trait... possibly losing Totem completely. 
This Background works well with Allies, Blessing, Familiar, 
and Legend; it might be tied to certain Merits or Flaws as well. 
Those Traits, of course, must still be purchased separately. 


As mentioned above, only shamanic or medicine-working 
characters may have the Totem Background. Technocrats - being 
dead to the spirits - cannot ever bond with a totem spirit other 
than two specific exceptions: The Man and The Machine. 
Certain spiritoriented technomancers, however, might bond 
with tech-oriented totems. Hermetics, Choristers, and other 
monotheistic, high-ritualtypes are generally considered too bossy 
or antagonistic to win a totem spirit’s affection. For a variety of 
potential spirit guides and their associated characteristics, check 
out the Totem Spirits section of Appendix I, (pp. 633-636). 


X 


e Your totem appears in dreams and visions and 
offers one additional die to your normal pool 
for an Ability (Athletics, Stealth, Survival, etc.) 
that’s related to the totem spirit’s nature. 


No totem spirit bond. 


The totem speaks to you, offering occasional 
cryptic advice and omens, plus two dice that 
can be used for that related Ability. 


Chapter Six: Creating the Character — 327 


A^ 


TN AE 


ak 


a 


i Lu xs 


/ 
i 


Your spirit guide appears in your waking life, 
though only to you and to other folks who can 
see spirits. The totem gives you advice, sends 
omens, occasionally manifests a spirit animal 
for non-combat errands, grants two dice to use 
on that related Ability, and gives you one dot 
in Cosmology or Lore. 


ecce A powerful bond allows your totem to manifest 


in solid form. That spirit offers frequent advice 
and omens, gives you three dice to use in the 
appropriate Ability, confers two dots in either 
Cosmology or Lore, and might help you in a 
desperate combat situation (as an Ally would) 
in exchange for a huge favor afterward. Among 
spirits and spiritworking people, you’re clearly 
favored by your totem and display obvious signs 
of that bond in your appearance and behavior. 


coocoo Your totem loves you! In dreams, visions, omens, 


and solid form, that spirit provides frequent 
company and aid. You get three dice toward 
the appropriate Ability, add two dots each in 
Cosmology and Spirit Lore, and may receive help 
in desperate situations. Your bond to that spirit is 
obvious to anyone and marks you as a very strange, 
primal, and probably intimidating person. 


Wonder (Device/ Fetish/ Talisman, etc.) 

A wonder by any name is still as sweet... and you have one. 
What's a Wonder? Perhaps it's a mystic Talisman imbued with 
magickal power; a Fetish whose strange properties come from a 
spirit bound within its form; or a Technocratic or weird-science 
Device, shaped by Enlightened Science into something that 
transcends mortal technology. In game terms, a Wonder is 
simply an item with Sphere Effects of its own. Although such 
items, with a few exceptions, usually work only for mages, the 
Wonder'sform and function depend on the people who created 
it and the methods involved in its creation. 


SolongasyourStoryteller agrees, a Wonder can be anything: 
an oak branch carved with Nordic runes, a plasma cannon, a 
robotic SUV, a bank card that skims money from every account 
held by that bank, an enchanted guitar, an owl -feather pen 
that writes in any human language... the Wonder's form and 
function can, within limits, be whatever you want them to be. 
Certain terms (Fetish, Device, etc.) define particular types of 
items. The Toybox section of Appendix II (see pp. 651-653) 
features details, rules, and an array of sample Wonders. 


Wonders can be temperamental... especially Fetishes, 
whose guiding spirits have personalities of their own. Even 
Devices, however, can seem uncannily stubborn, as anyone 
with a finicky car or computer can attest. They tend to have 
odd effects on the people who use them, especially mages who 
rely upon Wonders the way Elric of Melniboné relies upon his 
sword Stormbringer. In many cases, Wonders have elaborate 
backstories about their creation, history, and deeds. If your 
character begins play with a Wonder, work out an intriguing 
history and description of that item, then pass it off to your 
Storyteller for approval and further elaboration. Chances are, 
your Wonder will have secrets you won’t know about. Ideally, 
a Wonder is more than a simple “magic item”; instead, it’s a 
miracle in material form - solid proof of magick's reality. 


X No items of power. 


e A Wonder with one small power - that is, a 
Wonder worth 1-3 points. 


ec A Wonder with one or two powers, probably 
with some Quintessence and an Arete of its 
own. (4-6 points.) 

ecc A Wonder with a few notable powers or one 
respectable one. (7-9 points.) 

ecco A Wonder with impressive powers or a powerful 
Effect. (10-12 points.) 

LEELEE] 


A Wonder with mighty powers or a single 
devastating Effect. (13-15 points.) 


Arete/ Enlightenment 


Excellence. No other word typifies the ultimate 
goal of a mage than that. No mage, regardless 
of affiliation, is just another person. Each mage 
is excellent in his or her way. And so Arete - 
correctly pronounced Ahreh-TAY, though often 
rendered AlR-eh-tay - epitomizes the core of 
True Magick and those who employ it. 


Mages, as usual, disagree about what 
Arete actually is. Many shamans regard it as a 
connection to the World-Soul, and scientists 
consider it the heart of one’s inner genius. Akashayana speak 
of the enlightenment one gains through harmony with the Way, 
and Syndicate tycoons realize that certain people are just born 
superior to the Masses. Although the Traditions have agreed 


Mage: The Ascension 20" Anniversary Edition 


to use the Classical Greek word Arete as a touchstone term, 
Technocrats prefer the more straightforward Enlightenment, 
or simply Excellence. Various Disparate groups employ their 
own terms, but regardless of the specific language or culture, 
the connotation of perfection is always there. 


X Sleeper 

° Initiated 

eo Talented 

ecc Schooled 

ecce Disciplined 
coocoo Commanding 
coocoo o Masterful 
eee00 o0 Understanding 


Eva's playing Zafira Angelita — apunk-ass Celestial Chorus 
demon hunter. Zafira starts off with Arete 3, Willpower 5. 
Her Spheres — Forces, Prime, Spirit, and Time — cannot 
go above 3 until Eva raises that Arete rating above 3. 
Zafira undergoes a Seeking, and so her Arete rises to 4. 
Now Eva rolls four dice, not three, when casting Zafira's 
Effects, and may buy her Spheres up to Rank 4. 


After a series of horrific events, Zafira's permanent 
Willpower drops to 3. Now Eva's limited to three 
dice, not four, when casting Zafira's magicks. Until 
Zafira manages to get her Willpower back up to 4 or 
higher, Eva cannot raise any of her Spheres above 3. 
And if Zafira had Forces 4 at the point where she lost 
her Willpower, she'd be limited to Forces 3 until her 
Willpower gets restored. Even if Zafira experiences 
another Seeking and raises her Arete to 5, her Spheres 
and casting roll are still limited by her permanent 
Willpower rating of 3. 


eceee ecco Wise 
eeecc cece Enlightened 


eeece eccce Transcendent 


Game Effects of Arete 


e Arete reflects your character's ability to change reality to 


suit her intentions. You roll one die for each dot in this 
Trait when you're casting Effects. The higher your Arete, 
the moreyou can accomplish. (See Chapter Ten for details.) 


Your Arete also defines your magick’s potential. You 
cannot have a Sphere ranked higher than your Arete 
rating. 


Magic demands a combination of Enlightenment and 
Will. If your permanent (not temporary) Willpower Trait 
drops, or remains, lower than your Arete, then both 
your Spheres and your magick casting rolls are limited 
to your Willpower level, not your Arete level. 


a Seeking. This vision quest forces him to face and 
overcome inner obstacles. If and when he does so, he 
grows more enlightened; at that point, you can buy 
another dot of Arete to reflect his growing excellence. 
For details, see the Seekings entries in Chapter One 
(p. 44) and Chapter Seven (pp. 367-369). 


Arete, Focus, and Instruments 


* At Arete 1 and 2, a mage must focus his Arts through 


a paradigm, a practice, and at least seven instruments 
based upon that style. 


Mystic mages begin to realize that magick comes from 
internal excellence, not from external focus. Beginning 
at Arete 2, a mystic mage can begin to discard the 
instruments she uses to focus her magickal style. 
Although she doesn't have to stop using her tools, she 
can discard one instrument per dot in Arete over the 
second: one instrument at Arete 3, two at Arete 4, three 
at Arete 5, and so on. Typically, this is the instrument 
she relies upon the least, which makes it the instrument 
she’s most able to grow beyond. By Arete 9, she will have 
outgrown the need for instruments at all, and will thus 
have become an instrument of magick herself. 


Technomancers cannot discard instruments until they 
reach Arete 6; at that point, they can set aside a single 
instrument. This provides a breakthrough; from Arete 7 
onward, a Technomancer can set aside two instruments 
per dot in Arete. Again, by Arete 9, the mage will have 
transcended the need for an external focus. 


Thanks to thorough indoctrination, members of the 
Technocracy cannot transcend their focus at all. Until and 
unless he leaves the Technocratic Union entirely and 
embraces a new belief system - as the Society of Ether and 
Virtual Adepts have done - a Technocrat remains bound 
to the idea that his tools allow him to do what he does. At 
Arete 10, a Technocrat assumes that he, his instruments, 
and his approach to science are all one integrated whole. 
Technocraticoracles are essentially ghosts in the Machine: 
human consciousness incarnated in technology. 


For details, see Focus and the Arts in Chapter Ten, (pp. 


565-600). 


Chapter Six: Creating the Character — 329 


IBU 


* To raise your Arete, your character needs to undergo 


— ^ 


d 


LESE 


Willpower 


You must have Will in order to do. Thus, 
mages are very willful people. Just as a mage 
cannot unlock the doors to magick without 
understanding her ability to use it, so she 
cannot bend reality to her intentions without 
enough will to command it. The Willpower 
Trait reflects your mage's vision, confidence, 
and determination. And so, even when she's 
running low on selfassurance, her core 
Willpower remains unusually strong. 


| X Spineless 
e Weak 
| MEZ Timid 
eoe Insecure 
ccoo Secure 
T Certain 
coocoo o Confident 
TTITTET Strong 


eecce coo Controlled 
ececcee cece [Jnshaken 


eceee c0000 Unbreakable 


Game Effects of Willpower 


e Willpower has two elements: the permanent Willpower 
Trait (tracked in boxes on the character sheet) and the 
temporary Willpower pool (tracked in circles). When you 
spend Willpower points, make checks in the boxes; when 
you make a Willpower roll, base it on the permanent 
Trait. 


* As mentioned above under Arete, your magickal ability 
is limited by your permanent Willpower Trait. 


* To push beyond your character's normal limits, you can 
spend temporary Willpower points. 


e By acting according to your character’s Nature (see the 
Archetypes section earlier in this chapter), you can 
refresh those spent points and restore your Willpower 
pool to its normal confident state. 


* Mages start off with a base of Willpower 5 and go upward 
from there. Most other characters range between Willpower 
1 and 10, with average folks being between 2 and 4. 


Osing Willpower 


* By spending a point of Willpower, you can get one 
automatic success for a single action. You may spend 
only one Willpower point per turn this way, but you 


NE 330 Mage: The Ascension 20" Anniversary Edition 


can use several Willpower points to gain successes over 
the course of an extended action. See Chapter Eight, (p. 
389), for details. 


e When your mage botches a casting roll or faces a Paradox 


backlash, you can avert the pending backlash by willing 
it not to happen. This costs a Willpower point and 
results in the automatic failure of whatever your mage 
was trying to do at the time. The Paradox doesn't hit 
you until the end of that scene, and may continue to add 
up until then. This dodge works only once per casting. 
See Staving Off Disaster, under The Paradox Effect 
section in Chapter Ten, (p. 549). 


Byrollingyour Willpower Trait rating, you can help your 
mage resistthe effects of Mind Sphere magick. Successes 
on that roll subtract from the successes rolled on the 
Mind attack. The roll's difficulty is usually 6, although 
a particularly potent or subtle attack might raise that 
difficulty attheStoryteller's discretion. Botching this roll 
might end up costing you a permanent Willpower point. 
Mages and other supernatural creatures get this resistance 
roll for free, but Sleepers must spend a Willpower point 
in order to resist Mind magick this way. See Resisting 
Psychic Assaults in Chapter Ten, (p. 544). 


* A point of Willpower can also dispel a delusion brought on 


by Quiet. This requires a successful Willpower roll (difficulty 
7, or perhaps higher) as well as that point of Willpower. An 
unsuccessful roll will spend the Willpower point without 
holding back the delusions. Success also dispels a single 
point of Paradox. Essentially, your mage asserts control over 
the visions in his head... at least for the moment. See Rising 
Out of Quiet in Chapter Ten, (p. 556). 


e Youcan spend a point of Willpower to ignore all wound- 


based penalties, up to but not including Incapacitation, for 
one turn per point. Essentially, your mage pushes past 
the pain to accomplish an action or two before giving 
in to those injuries. See Health and Injury in Chapter 
Nine, (pp. 406-409). 


On a similar note, you can spend a point of Willpower 
to resist an overwhelming urge or compulsion - the 
urge to run, for example, from a furious demigod, or 
to surrender to sleep after days without rest. If that urge 
or situation continues, though, you may need to spend 
more Willpower in order to keep going. And in the face 
of some awful challenge - say, in order to laugh while 
under torture - you may need to spend Willpower points 
even if you, the player, had not planned to do so. It’s easy 
for players to remain blasé about shattering traumas, but 
for characters, that kind of fortitude is harder to come 
by and more costly to maintain. 


Losing Willpower 

Sanity-breaking ordeals - grotesque torture, intimate betrayal, 
confrontation with a Horror Beyond Madness, and similar 
excruciations - can cost your mage a permanent point of Willpower. 
This sort of thing shouldn’t happen often, but in the dark world 
of the Awakened, such traumas seem inevitable. Willpower points 
lost this way can be regained only through intense roleplaying and 
elaboratestories associated with that character’s breakingand renewal. 


The following circumstances might cost you a point or 
two of permanent Willpower. No event should cost a mage 
more than two Willpower points at a time - mages are pretty 
damned tough! 


e Amagewhosuffers an intense shock (heartbreak, torture, 
screaming horror, etc.) while his Willpower pool sits at 
one or zero loses a point of permanent Willpower. 


* Prolonged mental, physical, and emotional agony can 
destroya character's permanent Willpower if he continues 
past the point of endurance (Willpower 0). Truly awful 
ordeals may totally break that character by gradually 
reducing permanent Willpower to O over a period of 
time. Nephandi tormenters, fanatical witch-hunters, and 
NWO PsychOps specialize in this sort of thing... 


* A disastrous Seeking, extended Quiet, or long-term 
imprisonment in a Paradox Realm can have the same 
effect. Normally, such ordeals cost only one point of 
permanent Willpower; if they go on for a long time, 
though, the effects can be shattering. 


* Thedeath ofa Familiar/ Companion(as perthat Background 


Trait) costs the mage one point of permanent Willpower. 


Quintessence and Paradox 


ThewheelofQuintessenceand Paradoxreflects the 
interplayofopposingenergies. The firstreflectsyour 
connection to the essential substance ofthe cosmos, 
and the second reflects your separation from 
consensual reality. Your Avatarstores Quintessence, 
but Paradox cancels out that essential energy. Life 
for an active mage involves a constant ebb and flow 
of both energies; plenty of Quintessence grants him 
greater control over his Arts, but excessive Paradox 
makes himahazard to himselfand everyone nearby. 


The Quintessence/ Paradox Wheel 


* On the Quintessence/ Paradox wheel, you fill in your 
permanent Quintessence rating (one point for each dot 
in your Avatar Background) in the squares from the 
lefthand marker going clockwise up the wheel. 


NN AE 


For details, see the sidebar Things Man Was Not Meant 
to Know in Chapter Nine, (p. 407). 


Regaining Willpower 

Rest and success restore a person’s self-confidence. The 
following events allow you to replenish points spent from your 
character’s Willpower pool: 


En as 


e Attheend ofa successful story (not a game session), the YW 
characters regain all the Willpower they’ve spent during 
the course of that adventure. If that story went poorly, 
the Storyteller may decide to limit restored Willpower to 
half of the full pool until the heroes have had a chance 
to set things right. 


e Ifa character achieves some special success - rescuing a 
stranger, saving a sacred grove, stomping a vampire into | 
immortal ashes - the rush of victory can restore a point 
or two of Willpower. 


| 
* When your mage fulfills some element of his Nature, he r | 
gets a point or two of Willpower. The events, however, gus 
must be played out - they can’t conveniently occur JE 
offstage. M 


* The Destiny Background allows you to regain spent 
Willpower. See that Trait entry for details. 


* A good night's (or day's) sleep restores a point of 
Willpower, assuming that your character has had a 
decent chance to rest. This works only once per day and 
doesn't kick in if the mage doesn't have much chance 
to recharge her sense of self. 


e Paradoxstartsatthesame mark, butrunscounterclockwise 
across the bottom of the wheel. If you have permanent 
Paradox points (see the Enhancement Background), 
then mark those points on the wheel in ink - they never 
go away. 


* [fParadoxand Quintessence meetin the middle and then 
begin to overlap, then Paradox cancels out Quintessence. 
Quintessence does not cancel out Paradox; if that Trait 
reaches the Paradox points, then you stop absorbing 
Quintessence. 


* Because the two Traits may overlap, we recommend using 
different marks to represent them - maybe checks for 
Quintessence and Xs for Paradox. Except in the case of 
permanent Paradox, usea pencil, not ink, to mark those points. 


Chapter Six: Creating the Character 33l 


Game Effects 
of Quintessence 


* You can spend Quintessence to reduce the difficulty 
of a magick casting roll. Each point spent reduces that 
difficulty by 1, to a maximum reduction of 3. 


e That said, the amount of Quintessence you can spend at 
one time is limited by your mage’s Avatar Trait. A character 
with Avatar 2, for example, may spend or absorb only two 
Quintessence points within a single turn. 


e Yourmage can also use Quintessence to counter Paradox 
or fuel countermagick. See Prime 5 (p. 521) and 
Countermagick in Chapter Ten, (p. 545) for details. 


* A mage can absorb Quintessence through her Avatar; 
through Prime Sphere spells or Procedures; or through 
Tass or some Wonder that recharges Quintessence, like 
a battery or energy drink. 


e Channeling Quintessence through the Avatar requires 
meditation at a Node; channeling more than your 
Avatar rating through that Node requires Prime 1. 
To absorb Quintessence energy from the materialized 
Quintessence of Tass requires Prime 3. A Master can 
absorb Quintessence from anywhere by using a vulgar 
Prime 5 Effect. The number of Quintessence points 
that can be absorbed this way depend upon the success 
on the magick casting roll - see the Base Damage or 
Duration chart, Chapter Ten, (p. 504). 


* The Quintessence absorbed by your mage's Avatar 
essentially becomes personal Quintessence and cannot 
be taken away from her - only spent by her. Your Avatar 
Background rating reflects the maximum amount of 
personal Quintessence you can store. 


* [n most cases, Quintessence remains invisible except to 
mages with the PrimeSphere. Characters with Awareness 
or other metaphysical perception abilities might feel 
Quintessence being shunted around, but they won't 
be able to see it the way a Prime-skilled mage could. 
When respectable amounts of Quintessence (three 
points or more) get shifted around, lights tend to dim, 
breezes blow, and the area's temperature might rise or 
fall several degrees. Folks feel ripples even if they have 
no idea what's actually going on. 


e Large orviolent reality shifts that move around 10 points 
of Quintessence or more do become visible to mortal 
eyes. Bright lights, ribbons of color, explosions, sudden 
freezes, and so forth mark such disruptions. Effects at 
that level tear the fabric of the Tapestry, and so they’re 
always considered vulgar magick. 


For details aboutthe magick rules in general, see Chapter Ten. 


332 Mage: The Ascension 20" Anniversary Edition 


Optional Rule: 
Resonance 


Because magick is an extension of the mage who uses it, that mage’s deeds and intentions manifest as Resonance. As 
explained in earlier chapters, this force colors Quintessence, Paradox, magick, and occasionally even the mage herself. 
In extreme cases, this energy creates echoes (as per the Echoes Flaw — see Appendix II, (pp. 646-647), that can 
make a willworker stand out even when he’s trying to appear mundane. 


Mage Revised presented Resonance as a character Trait. Earlier editions of Mage had not done so. Given the various 
and contradicting depictions of Resonance throughout Mage's history, this Trait is considered an extremely optional rule. 


If your group chooses to employ Resonance and the related phenomenon called Synergy as Traits, the following scale 


represents the strength of a character’s Resonance and/ or Synergy Trait: 


Faint Resonance 
Quirky 

Odd 
Noticeable 


LU 


Influential 


eooe50e 


Unmistakable 


For details about Resonance and Synergy, see the entry of that name in Chapter Ten (pp. 560-561). 


Game Effects of Paradox 


Each time a mage employs vulgar magick, he gets at 
least one point of Paradox. For details, see Step Four 
- Results: What Happens? on the Casting Magickal 
Effects chart in Chapter Ten (p. 501). 


Botchinga magickal Effect also gathers Paradox, as noted 
on that same Casting Magickal Effects chart. 


Large amounts of Paradox energy can backlash on the 
mage, with hideous results - warped spells, explosions, 
insanity, and so forth. See The Paradox Effectin Chapter 
Ten (pp. 547-553) for the grisly details. 


Your mage’s Paradox rating becomes his Paradox pool. 
When things go horribly wrong with her magick, the 
Storyteller rolls one die per point in that pool in order to 
see what happens. Thus, you'll want to keep that Trait as 
low as possible; the higher the pool, the worse its effects. 


A mage who builds up a bit of Paradox energy can bleed 
it off by avoiding magick for a little while. For details, 
see Shedding Paradox in Chapter Ten (p. 549). 


If your mage accumulates 20 points or more without a 
backlash, she may drop into an intense Quiet, disappear 
through a crack in reality (possibly to return as a warped 
Marauder version of the person she once was), or simply 
explode. 


Certain modifications can give a character a permanent 
Paradox rating. For details, see the Enhancements 
Background entry, the Permanent Paradoxentry in Chapter 
Ten (pp. 547-548), and The Toybox in Appendix II. 


Mages who store up large amounts of Paradox energy 
become walking blights upon reality. They manifest odd 
quirks of Resonance, display disturbing Paradox Flaws, 
and simply don’t feel right to other people. Although 
very few creatures will understand the nature of the 
problem, they'll instinctually avoid a ’Doxy wizard, if 
only out of self-preservation. 


For other details about The Paradox Effect and Quiet, 


see those entries in Chapter Ten. 


Chapter Six: Creating the Character 333 


Foa 


Health 


For all their powers, mages are mortal. When 
you prick them, they bleed. When you drop 
them off buildings, they go splat. The Health 
Trait measures the distance between a master 
of reality and a slab at the local morgue. 


When the slings and arrows of outrageous 
fortune turn your mage into a bleeding hunk 
of enlightened hamburger, those attacks mark 
offlevels from your Health Trait. An uninjured 
character has eight Health Levels to lose; after 
the first two (the Uninjured default and the 
Bruised Health Level), that character starts to suffer penalties to 
his dice pools. The worse his injuries, the harder it is for him 
to accomplish anything. Pain and damage take their mortal 
toll, and if those penalties exceed the character's dice pool for 
a given activity, then that character can't perform the task at all. 


The exception here is the Arete roll. Unless a willworker 
is rendered Incapacitated or is unconscious, he can still call 
upon his Arete and Spheres, assuming he's still got enough 
Willpower left to use them. 


Life magick and other forms of treatment can heal these 
injuries; even then, however, pain and damage leave lasting 


effects. A person who gets her arm ripped off is going to 
remember the experience. Sure, she could re-grow that limb 
with potent spells, but the trauma will leave scars - physical, 
yes, but also emotional and psychological - that defy even 
magick's healing power. Although you don't need to roleplay 
the lasting terrors of every little paper-cut, significant injuries 
should have long-term story-based effects. 


Bashing, Lethal, and Aggravated Damage 
Injuries inflict three different kinds of damage, depending 
on the nature of the attack: 


¢ Bashing damage (marked on your character sheet with a 
"/ ") represents the bruising effects of fists, short falls, 
and other forms of blunt force trauma. Mages can try 
to tough it out by soaking this sort of damage with a 
Stamina roll. For details, see Soaking Damage in the 
Combat section of Chapter Nine (pp. 412-413). 


¢ Lethal damage (marked with an ^X") reflects slashes, cuts, 
gunshot wounds, crushing, and other injuries that could 
probably kill you. For the most part, mages CANNOT 
soak this type of damage without special armor, magickally 


334 


Mage: The Ascension 20" Anniversary Edition 


tough skin, or other forms of protection beyond normal 
human frailty. They may, however, heal it with the 
appropriate magick or technology. 


e Aggravated damage (marked with an “*”) represents massive 
trauma - werewolf claws, vampire fangs, raging fires, 
and the metaphysical injuries inflicted by destruction 


Ra S SEES 


of a person's essential Pattern through magick or other 
paranormal means. Mages can't soak this type of damage 
without special protection either (remember that when 
you sass a werewolf...), and even Masters of Life find such 
injuries exceptionally difficult to heal. 


For more details about injuries, healing, and the Health 
Trait, see Health and Injury in Chapter Nine (pp. 406-409). 


Part Ill: Character Progress 


So there you are - fresh character sheet in 
hand, anew-minted mage ready for action. The 
chronicle starts, the tale begins, the adventures 


unfold... 
Now what? 


Once your chronicle's underway, your 
characters will changeand grow. The challenges 
they face and overcome, even the ones that 
bowl them over and leave 'em weeping, will 
transform your mages from initiated upstarts 
to experienced agents of change. So as the Fragile Path takes 
them from Awakening to Ascension, the following steps will 
help you chart their progress throughout the game. 


Experience Points 


People grow and change, learning new things and improving 
the skills they already possess. In game terms, your characters 
earn experience points: points that let you raise their Traits or 
buy new ones to reflect the things they learn as they progress. 


At the end of each chapter (a game session) of your chronicle, 
the Storyteller gives experience points based on that session’s 
accomplishments; at the climax ofa particular story arc, the players 
geta few bonus points to reflect the things they've done and learned 
over the course of that tale. The more things that you and your 
character do, and the better you do them, the more points you 
get. This way, your characters improve by being active within the 
story, and the players get rewarded for being creative within the 
game. Conversely, a player whose character does little or nothing 
in the course of the game progresses very slowly, if at all. It’s in 
each player’s best interests, then, to play each character to the hilt. 


End of Each Chapter 


As you wrap up each chapter, the Storyteller awards a few 
experience points based on the following accomplishments: 


One Point - Automatic: Each character gets some small 
degree of experience from simply having faced the challenges 
of that session's events. 


One Point - Learning Curve: Characters who've truly 
learned something new, important, or significant to the plot 
or their personal stories can earn a point to reflect how that 
knowledge has expanded their horizons. To earn that point, 
though, the player should explain why that knowledge changed 
her character's world. 


One Point - Roleplaying: A player who goes above and 
beyond the group's usual level of roleplaying should be rewarded 
with an extra point for exploring his character, delving into his 
backstory, following his quirks or Archetype even when the player 
realizes that his character's making a mistake, and so on. Excellence, 
after all, shouldn't simply be a trait that only mages can enjoy! Of 
course, a really good group will keep raising the bar for exceptional 
roleplaying - but seriously, that's not a bad thing at all! 


One Point - Focus: Because belief and practice are so 
important to a mage, a player who really gets into the way her 
character performs magick - who plays up that mage's beliefs, 
details her practices, and uses her instruments in cleverly 
appropriate ways - may get a point for emphasizing the mage's 
approach to the Arts and Sciences. This way, your chronicle 
focuses less on "Life 3/ Prime 2, difficulty 6" and more on 
telling a cool story about people whose faith moves their world. 


One Point - Heroism: A character who faces incredible 
odds to perform some memorable act of sacrifice or risk 
ought to be rewarded for stepping up courageously and doing 
what needed to be done. Heroes, as we saw earlier, are folks 
whose deeds are worth singing about, and that sort of risk 
deserves rewards. That which does not kill us, after all, is worth 
experience points! 


End of the Story 


At the tail end of a self-contained story arc, the Storyteller 
gives out a few extra experience points to reward a job well done. 
Obviously, there'll be more points awarded if the adventure was 
a success. Even failure, though, can be instructive. If nothing else, 
the School of Hard Knocks teaches you what not to do next time! 


One Point - Success: Everyone involved in the adventure 
gets an extra point at the end of that story, assuming that they 
met their major goals and gained a sort of victory. 


One Point - Danger: If the characters faced major hazards 
- harrowing temptations, trips to the Hell of Being Flayed 
Alive, fights in which survival was seriously in doubt - they 
might gain an extra point for surviving the tale. Note that this 
needs to be an above and beyond sort of situation. Mages are 
always in some form of danger. If the threat had a good chance 
of ending their journey forever, though, the surviving heroes 
might benefit from coming through it intact. 


One Point - Wisdom: If your mage used beyond-the-call- 
of-duty cleverness, then he ought to be rewarded for using his 


335 


Chapter Six: Creating the Character 


head. Again, this needs to beasituation where things could have 
gone seriously sideways if that character hadn't shown sudden 
insight, wit, or intellect. Mages are expected to be smart, so this 
bonus point should be earned only by exceptional brilliance. 


One Point - Drama: The Storyteller can, of course, 
decide to give out extra points for especially deep roleplaying, 
dramatic self-sacrifice, or other memorable moments. Mage, 
after all, is a collaborative storytelling experience, and great 
stories deserve great rewards. 


Experience Costs 


Trait Cost 
New Ability 3 
New Sphere 10 


Affinity Sphere current rating x 7 
Other Sphere current rating x 8 
Arete current rating x 8 
Attribute current rating x 4 
Ability current rating x 2 
Background* current rating x 3 
Willpower current rating x 1 


* Might not be available with experience points — see sidebar. 


Raising and Learning Traits 


When your character uses her Attributes and Abilities, she 
gets a chance to improve them. In game terms, you take the 
experience points you’ve earned and spend them to raise the 
appropriate Traits. If Jinx gets into lots of fights over the course 
of an adventure or learns some new tricks from Synder or Khan, 
it makes sense that her Brawl and Melee Traits would improve. 


Different Traits have different costs... and those costs 
usually go up as you get better with a given Trait. Once you’re 
good at something, after all, it gets harder to top what you’ve 
already done before. Certain Traits, like Spheres, are especially 
expensive; the higher levels require more learning and expertise 


to master than the beginning levels had demanded... and so, in 
game terms, they cost a lot more time and experience to raise. 


In order to raise a Trait, your character needs to do something 
in the story that would improve it. You can’t raise your Computer 
Knowledge, for instance, if your mage hasn’t been anywhere near 
a computer during this story. Raising an Attribute demands some 
serious exercise with the Trait in question - long hours at the gym, 
for example, to raise your Strength, lots of brain-games and study 
to raise your Wits, or practice refining your senses in order to 
raise Perception beyond its original level. Life Sphere magick and 
cybernetic implants can make certain improvements possible - see 
the Enhancement Background and the entry for the Life Sphere 
in Chapter Ten. In any case, there has to be a reason behind that 
raised Attribute or Ability. 


In no case can you raise a Trait by more than one dot at a 
time; sure, Jinx might be scrappy as hell, but she's not going to 
jump from Schoolyard-Brawler level to KickJet-Li’s-Ass level overnight. 
Beyond that, your Storyteller needs to approve raised Traits - you 
can suggest, "Hey, I'd love to buy another dot in Brawl for Jinx because 
she's been in lots of fights this chapter," but the Storyteller makes the 
final call about the Trait itself. 


(Note: Storytellers, don't be douchebags about this sort 
of thing. If there's a reasonable in-game explanation, then let 
the player raise her Traitunless there's some compelling reason 
not to allow it.) 


Buying New Traits 

Beyond that, you can also buy new Traits to reflect things 
your character learns over the course of his adventures. Again, 
you'll need a story-based reason behind that new Trait - lessons 
from a mentor, dedicated lab-time, that sort of thing - and this 
process demands opportunity, time, and practice. À phrase 
book, for example, will teach you only so much about speaking 
Greek; if you want a working vocabulary, you'll have to practice 
using it too... preferably with real Greeks. 


Even with all the right factors in place, it takes time and 
effort to gain a practical knowledge of new things. The amount 
of time involved really depends on what it is you're trying to 
learn and could range from a few days to a month or more. It's 


Optional Rule: Raising and Buying 
Backgrounds With Experience Points 


As mentioned earlier under the Backgrounds section, these Traits could not originally be raised with experience points, 
only by events within the chronicle. Mage Revised changed that rule, so the final decision rests with your Storyteller. 


Under this optional rule, players can raise certain Background Traits, but not all of them. It makes sense to improve certain 
Backgrounds with experience points: Allies, Backup, Chantry, Contacts, Enhancements, Influence, Library, Sanctum, and 
Spies all seem like Traits a person could improve through a little extra investment. (Enhancement and Sanctum would cost 
double the usual amount.) Other Backgrounds, however — Arcane, Avatar, Destiny, Dream, Familiar, Mentor, Node, 
Patron, Resources, Requisitions, Secret Weapons, Totem, and Wonder - ought to remain outside a player's control, raised 
only through the events of the story. It’s too easy to simply allow a player to buy new dots in Resources, for example, and 
then wind up with her dominating the game through financial power. If you, as the Storyteller, decide to allow players to 
purchase or raise their Background Traits with experience points, please consider how certain Backgrounds can upend 
the game if their value depends on points spent at a player’s discretion. 


336 Mage: The Ascension 20" Anniversary Edition 


pretty easy to pick up some basic cooking skills, for example; 
learning conversational Mandarin if you're an English-speaker, 
though? That'll take a bit longer. 


Raising or Learning Spheres 

Mages are sponges for knowledge, so, in many cases, new 
skills come easily to them. New Spheres, on the other hand, 
are far more difficult to learn. Beyond the challenges involved 
in learning the principles behind whole aspects of reality, 
there’s the matter of belief and practice. A mad scientist, for 
example, won’t be able to learn much from a witch about the 
Life Sphere - their approaches to that Sphere are too alien for 
one another's comprehension. Sure, he can teach her about 
plasmodic variables and she can teach him about calling the 
corners, butthey'll probably spend more time telling one another 
how utterly WRONG you are than they will actually learning 
anything from one another. This goes triple for members of 
the Traditions or Technocracy who try to learn one another's 
techniques. Even if you could get two such rivals to sit still in 
the same room long enough to listen to one another, they'd 
both be trying to overcome their ingrained resistance to the 
other's ideas about reality. In short, then, it doesn't work. 


In order to learn a new Sphere, or improve the ones 
you have, your mage will need to study with someone whose 
magickal focus is more or less the same as your 
character's own. Generally, this means 
studying with a member 
of your Tradition, 
Convention, or sect, 
then applying the 
lessons to suityour 


individual approach. Such learning takes significant amounts 
of downtime - the time characters spend offstage in between 
adventures -dedicated to learning and practicing new principles 
and techniques. (See What Do You Do During Downtime? in 
Chapter Eight, p. 385.) And although a mage can learn things 
from different sects, that knowledge can take two, three, or even 
five times as long as it would have taken if he'd been studying 
with a member of his own group. 


Apprenticeship 


Obviously, you can’t learn much about the higher levels of 
knowledge from mentors who know less than you do. Personal 
exploration, meanwhile, will get you only so far. Most people 
- mages in particular - wind up studying with someone who's 
really good at the subject in question. This leads, in many cases, to 
apprenticeships: relationships wherein an experienced teacher agrees 
to pass on knowledge to a student in exchange for fees or services. 


Apprenticeship has a long, respected history in Awakened 
circles. Many groups - particularly the Hermetic Order, lineage- 
based witchcraft sects, clerical orders, and most Technocratic 
Conventions - will not accept a member who hasn't served 
an apprenticeship with an established member of that group. 
Such apprenticeship may be kind and nurturing, harsh and 
brutal, even whatwould commonly be called abusive. Although 

it's less common in this modern, more democratic age, 
traditional apprenticeships 
usually involve complete 
obedience, servitude, 
and deference to the 
master in all matters. 


337 


Chapter Six: Creating the Character 


338 


Ma$e: The Ascension 20^ Anniversary Edition 


Even now, though, ancient traditions die hard, and mentors 
who follow the old ways can be remorseless taskmasters. 


And so, in the course of your character's story, he might 
enter an apprenticeship to learn a new Trait, improve his 
knowledge, or both. He might well be in such a relationship at 
thestartofthe chronicle (see the MentorBackground) or have 
recently leftitunder good or not-so-good circumstances. In any 
case, there's a story involved, especially if your mentor is still 
engaged with your character's instruction. That relationship 
will make a vast impression on your character's approach to 
life, magick, and everything. Even if he rejects the mentor's 
guidance, the things he's learned from her will, for better and 
worse, shape the mage he will become. 


Avatar and Genius 


And then there's the inner mentor: the Genius or Avatar 
who guides your mage's Path. As we've already seen, that can 
bea complex relationship that no one else will share. As your 
mage advances along her Path, that relationship might grow 
and change. The Avatar may become more insistent and 
demanding, pushing the mage to new extremes in pursuit of 
Ascension or a Fall. 


Part of the Avatar's role involves challenge; without 
challenges, after all, we don't grow. And so, even the most 
subtle, agreeable Genius will nag your mage toward new 
accomplishments and potential failures. A truly strong Avatar 
(one rated at 4 or 5) can bea terror - a literal demon, perhaps, 
that drives the mage night and day. Your mage's Essence 
determines the sort of challenges it gives you. A Dynamic 
spirit ignites passions, a Static one demands perfection, a 
Questing one tugs you to pursue new avenues of experience, 
and a Primal one presents constant enigmas and puzzles that 
apparently defy solutions. In many ways, the Avatar is an 
internal mentor... one that never goes away. 


Seekings 

At crisis points, your Avatar can drop your mage into 
Seekings: the metaphysical journeys that push you past your 
comfort zone and force you to confront obstacles that block 
your Path. Sometimes this pops up unexpectedly - in the 
middle of a dark night of the soul, for example, while your 
mage questions her beliefs and actions. At other points, a mage 
chooses to undergo the Seeking, facing up to those challenges 
in order to grow. Each Seeking is an internal matter. Your 
companions won't join you there except perhaps as figments 
of your mage's imagination. 

In game terms, your mage needs to go Seeking whenever 
you wantto purchase a point of Arete. Chapter Seven features 
more details about the Seeking process from the Storyteller's 
perspective. In the game itself, you can either play out a 
Seeking as a sort of solo adventure, or else simply let the 
Storyteller tell you how things went when you go to raise 
that Trait. Ideally, though, you'll play out your Seekings, if 
only as short interludes in a larger story. By winning Arete 
through symbolic internal challenges - challenges that you 


could potentially lose, and thus delay that next point of Arete 
until you pass the test - you turn that magick-roll Trait into a 
vital part of your mage's life story. 


Changing Focus 
and Allegiance 


Some challenges force people to change the things that 
matter most to them. Even mages, whose beliefs bend reality 
itself, can lose their faith and accept another Path. Most times, 
this process helps the mage transcend her reliance upon rituals 
and tools - the growth of Arete that lets you put those tools 
aside. Occasionally, though, a mage can face a radical conversion 
and become a different sort of mage altogether. 


Changing sides isn't always difficult. The Sons of Ether 
and Virtual Adepts defected from the Technocracy without 
changing much about their overall approach to the Enlightened 
Arts. Nephandi convert rival willworkers so insidiously that 
few people notice the change of allegiance until it's too late. 
Mages who shift from one group to another without changing 
their essential beliefs about magick and technology can do so 
easily. Let's say that Malcolm Jamal Leonard gets won over by 
his Syndicate boss; his approach to the Art of Desire doesn't 
really change, just the way he puts it to use. Ah, but if he were to 
convert to the Society of Ether, his focus - the beliefs, practices, 
and tools behind his Arts - would change rather radically. 


In such cases, assume that your character adopts an entirely 
new focus - a fresh paradigm, practice, and setofinstruments. He 
doesn'tlose Arete, but he must begin with at least seven tools from 
that practice, regardless of his previous accomplishments. After 
all, he's learning an entirely new way of doing things, with all 
the doubts and questions that come with such transformation. 
For at least a story arc or two (several game months, in any case), 
his Spheres will function at half their usual level, with the exception of 
his affinity Sphere. Again, he's learning a whole new way of doing 
things, though some principles will come more easily than others. 
Eventually, he'll regain his old power with a new understanding 
of how such things work; once he does, he can begin shedding 
tools (say, at a rate of roughly one instrument per story arc) until 
he reaches the level he had enjoyed before his radical conversion. 


Such transformations have massive roleplaying potential: 
angst and brooding and tearful confessions and full-out fights 


with the people your mage holds dear - it's the sort of stuff 
roleplayers live for. So if your character shifts focus, allegiance, 
or both, play that shift for maximum drama. It's a HUGE 
event in the life of a mage, and it can provide those coveted 
drama bonus points when that story comes to an end and a 
new one begins... 


Nafure and Demeanor 


On a similar note, a character can change her Archetype 
as well. People do change over time, so it's reasonable to allow 
shifts of Demeanororeven Nature over the course ofa chronicle. 
Given the right reasons, a reckless Trickster could become a 
selfless Martyr, a brooding Rogue, or even a repentant Prophet. 


Changing Demeanor is easy: the character simply acts 
differently toward other people. A shift in Nature, though, runs 
deeper than that. It’s a fundamental change in character that, like 
a rededication of focus, involves drastic alterations of behavior 
and belief. As with a paradigm shift, a change of Nature shakes 
the core of who a person believes herself to be. Her relationships 
and self-image, the way she dresses and acts, the company she 
keeps, and the person she sees in the mirror... they all shift in 
unpredictable ways. Imagine Jinx forsaking her street-punk ways to 
become a Chorister nun or Akashic sage - weird, right? And yet 
such shifts are no less likely than the transformations we make in 
real life every day. Sure, mages are pretty set in their ways - they 
have to be, to do the things they do. Still, even willworkers can 
have monumental changes of heart... which provide you, as a 
roleplayer, with lots of great material. 


Resolution 


In time, your mage’s Path will lead that character to 
some greater resolution - to stagnation, a Fall, or ultimate 
transcendence. Either way, you'll probably become a potent 
force for change in your chronicle. It's not power, though, that 
really provides the greatest rewards for a long-running Mage 
chronicle. Although the motivations that inspire folks to play 
Mage are as varied as the players themselves, the best reward 
for a veteran player may be the many opportunities you'll have 
to face implacable odds, dare impossible things, and change 
the world in ways that seem like magic... and to come out on 
the other side of those experiences with great stories to share 
and a sense of power you'd never expect from a simple "game." 


Chapter Six: Creating the Character — 339 


TN d 


Ed 


Chapter Seven: 


Telling 
The Story 


The horizon melts into a limitless question mark, and like the cartographers of old, 
we glimpse yawning monstrosities and mind-forged utopias beyond the edges of our paltry and provisional maps. 
— Erik Davis, Techgnosis: Myth, Magic + Mysticism in the Age of Information 


“Are you sure about this?” 

“Ofcourse l’msure! Aren’tlalways sure?” 
Dr. Hans von Roth was tripping balls 
again. Scary thing was, he was behind the 
wheel this time, flying down I-5 at a speed 
that would make the Highway Patrol check 
its instruments before issuing a warrant 
for Hans’ immediate execution. 

Why I do I let myself get talked into these 
sorts of things? 


The caretaking of eccentric geniuses is sort of my 
specialty. I can talk just enough shop that they consider 
me a kindred spirit without also considering me a threat. 
I’ve got to admit, Hans is one of my favorites -a car-loving 
Etherite with a warehouse full of toys and a high-grade 
cloaking device that lets him take them for a spin without 
doing time every time he hits a gas pedal. Still, Hans 
has a thing for hallucinogens, too. Claims they “open 
him to the profound answers to the profound questions 
that guide the most profound layers of quanto-physical 
applications” or something along those lines. Anyway, 
that seems to work for him. 


But opening up the throttle on an experimental mod 
while peaking on high-grade Electroplex? With ME in 
the car? I should have just taken the night off. 

The collision-aversion sensors blinked a steady red 
as Hans drifted through the traffic like those other cars 
were standing still. Given his work with chronological 
adjustment technology, they just might have been. I grafted 
on my cutest smile and tried not to white-knuckle my way 
through the demonstration. 


“My calculations indicate,” he said, his eyeballs like 
something out ofa cartoon, "that the chance of Paradoxical 
anomalies with this particular configuration under the 
present circumstances is less than 32.5476 percent.” 

"Oh," I breathed while alarms went off screaming in 
my head. “You mean we have less than a 33% chance of 
triggering a Paradox like this.” 

“Substantially less,” he giggled. “Sort of.” 

On nights like that, I tell you, I sort of wish I'd 
stayed asleep. 

Except I really DON’T. 

To be honest, even on the crazy nights, I pity people 
who don't have this sort of thing in their lives. 


Chapter Seven: Telling the Story 341 


N 


Ev Zr 


At Pla 


in the Fields of the World 


Let's play. 
Let's remake the world in our own image. 


That's what Mage is all about. At the heart of 
all these cosmic conspiracies and metaphysical 
paradigms, Mage invites you to play with 
possibilities and turn reality inside out simply 
because you can. Forall of its Many Big Important 
Ideas™, Mage is a game, and wewantyou to enjoy 
it. Because without that sense of playful creativity, 
the many words collected in this weighty tome 
are all just ink on paper or pixels on a screen, signifying nothing. 


The Game's the Thing 


If you've gotten this far in this monumental tome, you're 
probably familiar with storytelling games - a.k.a. roleplaying 
games, or RPGs. Those terms, though, can mean different 
things to different people. For clarity's sake, then, let's sketch 
out some basics before getting more ambitious. 


The Big “S” 
What do we mean when we say Storyteller? Put simply, she’s 
the player who sets everything else in motion. The Storyteller 
lays out the setting, shoves the characters together, kicks off the 
action, and then keeps things moving from start to finish. The 
Master of Ceremonies for your group’s chronicle, a Storyteller 
provides the framework and momentum for adventure. 
Although each participant collaborates with the other players, 
the basis for that chronicle originates with the Storyteller. 


The Chronicle 


A chronicle takes a collection of characters and sends 
them into harm’s way. And for the Storyteller, that chronicle 
becomes a sort of character - an extension of herself. A great 
chronicle takes on a life of its own, with passion, drive, vitality, 
and a memorable sense of personality. 


How can you invest such qualities in your chronicle? By 
caring about the story and the things you can say in it. Because 
when you take issues that really matter to you - war, abuse, 
corruption, love - and then put them into the thing you're 
creating, you invest that creation with a vibrant sense of life. 


Troupe Collaboration 

You're not alone, either, in that sense of creativity. 
Collaboration is essential to the Mage experience. Everyone 
involved brings a bit of themselves to the table too. And by doing 
so, your gaming troupe - a group of folks working together - 
crafts a larger whole from unique parts. Each roleplaying group 
creates its own experience, and no two chronicles are ever alike. 


Contrary to the old-school stereotypes about "Game 
Masters" who run their players through a gauntlet of terrors, 


Ma$e: The Ascension 20^ Anniversary Edition 


each member of a Mage gaming troupe becomes a story-teller 
in his or her own right. The capital-S Storyteller makes the big 
decisions regarding rules and settings, but every player hasa part 
in the creative process. Such collaborative storytelling reinforces 
the chronicle's sense of magic. In place of competition, you 
achieve unity. And that unity helps you sort through the more 
challenging aspects of Mage. 


Improvisational Storytelling 

Mage, more than many other games, is improvisational. You 
take what you have and then run with it - usually in unexpected 
directions. The various players take on their roles and then 
pursue agendas based in the concepts of each character. Magick is 
freeform, based more upon whata character knows and needs than 
upon a determined list of spells. Although certain frameworks 
(which we'll explore below) can help you guide the potential 
chaos, Mage is not a game for rigid preconceptions. With help 
from notes and systems, you make it up as you go along. 


Improvisation and the Power of Yes 


There’sa tradition in live theatre called improv: usinga loosely 
established foundation, the actors improvise their characters, 
relationships, and lines. A storytelling game is essentially a cross 
between improv and chess - improvised stories with a framework 
of rules. Many theatre troupes use improv as a game in its own 
right or as a tool that helps them understand a script. Certain 
troupes perform entirely through improvisation, relying upon 
trust and creativity to make the magic happen. 


As an improvisational theatre game, Mage works best 
when you treat each situation as an invitation to move the story 
forward. A certain amount of structure is important, obviously; 
again, we'll go into that below. Within that structure, though, 
look at every challenge as an opportunity to ask What if? and 
then to run with the answers as they appear. 


A common rule in theatre games involves "the power of 
Yes.” Instead of shutting things down with a No, which limits 
possibilities, meet almost every challenge with a Yes. That Yes can 
be conditional, of course: Yes, you can TRY to pull the moon from 
orbit... but don’t expect to succeed without consequences you probably 
don’t want to deal with. And sometimes you really DO have to say 
No in order to keep the game from getting out of hand. (No, you 
CAN'T be a vampire-changeling Garou mage...) For the most part, 
though, let the power of Yes open the doors to further possibilities, 
so long as those possibilities fit in with your chronicle as a whole. 


Let’s say, for example, that you’d planned to run a mad- 
scientist chronicle with a bunch of Etherites throwing their 
inventions against the Technocracy. That might be where your 
game begins, but it probably won’t stay that way for long. One 
player might decide that the Union’s not that bad; another could 
pursue a Pagan Path instead, and a third might spark an uneasy 
friendship with a Black Suit who’s just discovered thatsomething's 


Gaming as Ritual 


Gaming is ritual — notin the sense of occult indoctrination, butin the sense of creating a sacred space for your imagination. 
In gaming, as in ritual, the participants focus their attention upon a task that includes certain consistent elements and 
achieves a certain goal. For the gaming group, that ritual takes everyone away from their mundane concerns and opens 
the doors to imagination and art. The Storyteller sets the stage for that ritual, directs the group’s intentions, and — ideally 
- brings everyone to a sense of heroic accomplishment before transitioning back to the everyday world and sending 
folks into their usual lives again. 


And so, as that Storyteller, be aware of your role as the “high priest/ess” of your troupe. Although you’re not summoning 
demons or any of that nonsense, your group trusts you to take them on an interactive journey of imagination. The more 
you focus your creative intentions, and leave space for their creativity as well, the more effective and entertaining your 
games will be. 


Watch Your Audience 


Storytelling games, like live theatre, involve the interplay between performers and their audience. Ina storytelling game, 
however, the performers and the audience are one. Everyone's playing off everybody else. As the Storyteller, though, 
you occupy the key role. It’s vital, then, to watch your players and gauge your performance by their reactions. 


As you describe events, observe the expressions, activities, and body language within your troupe. Do folks seem bored? 
Pick up the pace. Is someone distracted? Move the spotlight to her character, asking “And meanwhile, what are YOU 
doing?" Don't drone endlessly or focus on any one person for too long, but move instead from player to player, keeping 
everyone engaged. And if somebody looks upset, take a time-out to check in to see what's bothering him. It might not 
be related to the game... but then again, it might be, too. 


Reading an audience is an acquired skill. The more you do it, the better you get. Even so, certain cues — frowning, talking 
off-topic, surfing the web in the middle of a game - are pretty easy to catch. If you treat your Storyteller role as a part 
in a play and make a point of interacting with your audience, you'll be more engaging in that role. Your players will be 
more invested in the game, you personally will have more fun, and the chronicle will be more entertaining than it might 


be otherwise. 


rotten in the New World Order. All these characters possess the 
power to change reality more or less at a will, so, within a few 
sessions, thatoriginal concept has morphed into something rich 
and strange and not at all what you had planned. 


What do you do, then? 
Go with it. 


What if the first player's mage gets courted by à NWO 
recruiter? What if the second one leaves the Society of Ether and 
becomes a Verbena technopagan? What if that third character's 
friend is the NWO recruiter who's trying to snag the first player's 
character because the Black Suit has recognized the corruption 
within his Union? By being flexible and regarding those player 
whims as invitations to shift the chronicle's direction, you can 
transform that mad-scientist chronicle into an insidious game of 
cat-and-mouse wherein tech-savvy mystics ally with Project Invictus 
in a dangerous plot to purge the Technocratic infiltration and 
perhaps bring out the best elements of that Union. It’s not what 
you had in mind initially, but it’s got serious potential. 


An important note: “Sorry, but that doesn’t work” is not a 
No. It’s a “Nice try, better luck next time,” not a complete denial 
of possibilities. “That doesn’t work” is a totally appropriate 
answer within Mage, especially because the power of the Spheres 
relies so much upon expansive knowledge and heightened 
Will. Something might not work now, but that doesn’t mean 
it ll never work if the mage just keeps trying... against greater 
odds of failure, of course. 


Even so, there are times when No is a totally appropriate 
answer. No, you cannot perform a Rank 5 Effect when you 
have an Arete of 2. Some things really are off-limits, if only 
to keep the Storyteller from going stark raving mad. So if the 
Storyteller says No, then the answer is NO. 


A Consistent Foundation Concept 

All that being said, keep that creativity based upon a 
consistent foundation. Don’t let your chronicle spiral off into 
chaos. It’s easy, given Mage’s freeform magick and its wide variety 
of options, to get lost. And so, when you run your chronicle, 
focus your What ifs around a central concept. That way, you'll 
encourage possibilities without going too far afield. 


We'll cover the idea of a concept shortly. For now, just 
remember that your concept - combined with Tone and 
Theme, two other elements we'll address shortly - will provide 
the necessary gravity for your adventures. By keeping them in 
mind, you can all be creative without making an imaginative 
mess of your chronicle. 


Fairness and Maturity 


Given the game'sflexible nature, a Mage chronicle demands 
a sense of fairness from each member of the troupe. Seriously, 
you have to trust one another. If someone in your group - the 
Storyteller included - tries to use Mage's freeform nature as a 
license to screw over everybody else, the game's just not going 
to work. That's where maturity comes into play. 


Chapter Seven: Telling the Story 343 


The word “mature” gets tossed around a lot, usually to 


justify lots of sex and violence. And yeah - Mage adventures 
can include lots of sex, drugs, carnage, and words Mama told 
you not to say unless you can use them properly in a sentence. 
That's not the sort of maturity we're talking about here, though. 
The core requirement for Mage, beyond imagination and the 
will to use it, is the maturity to not bea dick when folks play the 
game. That shouldn't need saying, but sometimes it still does. 


So yes - Rule One: Don't be a dick. And Rule Two: Don't 
game with dicks. 


Those two rules will save you lots of hassle in the long run. 


Rules of the Game 

Magick has rules. So does Mage. Think of those rules 
as laws of physics that keep things from flying off into space. 
And though the idea of rules governing a game about endless 
possibilities might seem a bit... um, paradoxical... those same 
rules help you define what those possibilities look like. A 
reliable structure gives you and your players a framework of 
consistency; without that, your chronicle has no reliable form 


- endless whimsy, but nothing you can count on. 


AstheStoryteller, you getto define just how much those rules 
affect your chronicle. Maybe you prefer a loose improvisational 
style in which dice play a minor part in the overall experience. 
Or perhaps you need a firm set of rules so that your players don't 
rip your chronicle apart. Most often, you’ll probably choose a 
middle path between those extremes, balancing the needs of 
your story with the stability that rules provide. Fortunately, the 
Storyteller System that gets detailed in the following chapters 
allows you a lot of flexibility. Detailed rules have been provided 
for those times when you need them - most especially in 
Chapters Nine and Ten; even so, the Golden Rule detailed 
in Chapter Eight (p. 384) allows you to modify or junk the 
rules when it serves the story to do so. The extent to which 
those rules constrain your imagination is ultimately up to you. 


All the same, Mage has elaborate rules for good reasons. 
The raw power of the Spheres is enough to turn your chronicle 
upside down. Given Mage’s improvisational magick system 
(detailed in Chapter Ten), you'll need the reliable structure 
of those rules in order to define what your players can and 
cannot do and how they can go about achieving what they 
want to achieve. Improvisational theatre games feature certain 
guidelines and constraints, and a Mage chronicle must do the 
same. Otherwise, you get chaos... and not the fun kind of chaos, 
either, especially not when you’re the Storyteller! 


The Storyteller, though, isn’t the only person who depends 
upon the rules. Your players need them too, if only to help them 
figure out what their characters can accomplish. Consistent 
rules protect your players from capricious “story tyrants” and 
even protect the players from one another. Like the limits and 
boundaries discussed nearby, a set of clear, consistent rules 
allows everyone to relax and have more fun. 


344 Mage: The Ascension 20" Anniversary Edition 


In your role as Storyteller, be fair and consistent in your 
application of the rules. You don’t need to use every system in 
the next three chapters, but it’s wise to at least be familiar with 
your options. That way, if you need them, those systems will be 
there. Like the laws of physics (or of magick), game rules help 
define the shape and potential of your world. 


Ops and Downs 


Like mages, players often have very strong ideas about the 
“right” way of doing things. Such differences can usually be 
worked out without much trouble, especially when you bring 
a spirit of compromise to the group as a whole. Assuming 
that everyone chooses to be reasonable, it’s often easy to work 
through conflicts with a few brief words and awin/ win attitude. 


Also like their mages, Mage players are only human. Certain 
conflicts - nasty breakups, political rivalries, vastly different styles of 
play, and so forth - can be difficult to work out. In such situations, 
it’s a good idea to set the game aside while the players (Storyteller 
included) try to find a comfort zone for everyone involved. If that’s 
not possible, the person or people who can’t sort things through 
might have to step aside for the good of the troupe as a whole... 
hopefully without hard feelings toward everybody else. 


Problems, Boundaries, 
and the Three-Strike Zone 


Every so often, someone either can’t or won’t cooperate. 
Maybe it’s a personality clash or a difference of preferred playing 
styles. At worst, that person might step over the line and offend 
or even harm another member of the group. If such things 
happen, that person probably needs to go. 


Minor mistakes are easy to understand, especially if the 
offending party is new to the group and doesn't quite understand 
the way everybody rolls. And, one would hope, little quirks are 
excusable between friends. Certain things, however, ought to be 
no-ly zones within your troupe: ethnic, gender, or religious slurs, 
unwanted sexual advances, outright harassment of any kind - 
generallyanythingthatleavesa member of the troupe feelingunsafe, 
unwanted, or uncomfortable. It'd be nice to think that we're all 
above that sort of thing... but sadly, we've all seen otherwise. Some 
mutual trash-talk is fine as long as everyone's cool about what's being 
said. Ifsomeone's getting seriously angry or freaked outbya gaming 
mate's behavior, though, then that shit's not cool. And yes - it’s 
the Storyteller's responsibility to make sure it stops. 


(Itd also be nice to think that a Storyteller is above such 
behavior... and folks have witnessed otherwise. Let's put 
things this way: if your idea of a good time involves abusing 
your friends without their consent, then you have no business 


running games at all.) 


The Triggers, Limits, and Boundaries sidebar offers 
up some guidelines about potential trouble spots and the 
methods you can use to avoid them. If someone within the 
group continues to go over the lines, however, invoke a three- 
strikes policy: first strike = warning; second strike = last warning; 


third strike = yer outta here. A major violation - threatening 
or hitting another player, for example - is an instant strikeout. 
Mages might go for one another's throats, but Mage players 
should be better than that. When one member of the troupe 
hurts, the entire group suffers as well. 


Obviously, these rules apply to the Storyteller as well. 
That should go without saying, but there have been stories 
of at least one "game master" who slapped her players and of 
several Storytellers who deal out serious emotional abuse in 


the name of fun. This should not fly. EVER. 


The F-Word 


The key to a great gaming experience can besummed up in 
oneword: FUN. Everyone involved should be having a good time. 
Although your characters may be up to their necks in Paradox, 
the players ought to be having the time of their lives. That's 
yet another reason to avoid the old "DM vs. Players" tradition: 
although that sort of game can be fun for certain groups, it all 
too often leads to hurt feelings and shouting matches... and 
really, don't y'all have better ways to spend your time? 


It's worth noting that the Storyteller is a player too. She 
should be having a good time as well... and if she's not, then 
something has gone wrong. Back in the early Mage days, 
anguished Storytellers would often call the White Wolf offices 
asking for advice. Once the rules questions got cleared up (an 
important step in those early days!), the best piece of advice we 
could offer - then and now - was this: don't game with assholes. 
If you, as the Storyteller, don't enjoy running a game, then 
there's no point in playing it at all. 


Ideally, none of these reminders will be necessary. Most 
gaming troupes manage to enjoy themselves for years without 
driving one another up the nearest tree. For folks with 
imagination and nerve, the Storyteller's role tends to be a great 
deal offun: though other people get to share in your chronicle's 
creative process, the heart of that creativity belongs to you. 


Setting the Space 


Before kicking off that great adventure, you might want to 
set your space - that is, prepare a dedicated gaming area where 
you and your troupe can get the most of out that experience. 


Triggers, Limits, and Boundaries 


It's one thing to traumatize your characters and quite another thing to send your players into therapy. Especially in the 
Storyteller’s role, it's vital to know the limits and boundaries within your troupe. 


Those boundaries will depend upon the people in your group, the things they've experienced, and the things that they 
consider fun to play with. One group might have a grand time busting up child porn conspiracies, whereas another 
prefers leaving real-life horrors outside the gaming room door. Chances are good that you already know your friends 
well enough to understand the sorts of things they do and do not enjoy. Certain topics, though, present potential land 
mines — especially in a setting based on interactive entertainment, where characters often become extensions of their 
creators. Rape, racism, sexual or gender-based assault, domestic violence, harm to children or animals... these subjects, 
and others like them, can trigger emotional trauma simply by appearing in a tale. 


It'stempting to say, “Chill out — this is only a game." Emotions, though, aren't nearly that simple. Interactive entertainment 
encourages people to identify with their characters; such connections, in turn, inspire strong emotions. Especially for folks 
who've suffered real-life violations, the idea of experiencing such things in the context of entertainment can kick their legs 
right out from under them. I’ve seen it happen. Don't go there. 


When considering hot-button topics within your game, check in first with your players and see if those subjects disturb them. 
That's not political correctness — it’s respect. Find out terms or topics to avoid, and then step carefully around potential 
land mines. Even then, a wise Storyteller keeps an eye on her group. If folks seem uncomfortable, it’s probably time to 
back off on the throttle. Never, incidentally, tell a player that he or she has no right to feel bothered by your game's 


events. It’s not your place to invalidate their experiences. 


Safewords, Cards, and Blackouts 


Taking a page from the BDSM playbook, you might want to work out safewords within your group: unusual phrases that 
let you know when a boundary’s getting pushed. “Green card,” for instance, can show that everything’s cool; “yellow 
card” indicates that you're getting close to a limit, and "red card” tells you to back off now. You might even make up 
colored cards so that people can just wave a card if they're feeling triggered. Under certain circumstances, that might 
feel safer than speaking up. 


Meanwhile, a blackout rule allows a player to call an immediate halt to a scene that he feels is pushing the line too far. 
Any player can call “Blackout!” and conclude the scene right there. Obviously, these options demand player responsibility 
as well. It’s up to players to speak up if they feel triggered... and it's also up to them to use that power reasonably. Calling 


Blackout just to screw with the plot is kind of a dick move. 


Ultimately, mature gaming demands consent. If everyone agrees to go over the edge, then go there with style. If your 
edge, though, is someone else’s hot zone, respect those limits and move on. The words “I’m sorry” can cover a multitude 
of sins if you really mean them. Not having something to apologize for, however, really is the best way to roll. 


Chapter Seven: Telling the Story 345 


Contrary to popular belief, you don't need to be rich or have 


a big house in order to set up a good gaming space. Storytellers 
can host gaming groups in their living room, in the corners 
of packed convention centers, and even - in one memorable 
GenCon game - run games outside in a park. A good gaming 
area involves more headspace than physical space. Although 
it's nice to have enough space to comfortably accommodate a 
group of people in relative privacy, the real key to setting space 
involves establishing and retaining a suitable mood. 


Preparation 

To start with, be prepared to run your game. If you're 
scattered and disorganized, your players can tell. To avoid 
that situation, hash out some notes before things begin (see 
below) and then keep them close at hand. Take a little bit of 
time to set things up, get yourself into the right frame of mind, 
and prepare a quick transition to move the group out of the 
everyday world and into the world of your chronicle. Having 
such things prepared ahead of time will save you time and 
trouble in the long run. It's much easier to be focused when 
you've got your shit together. 


Notes 

A collection of brief yet helpful notes helps you brainstorm 
and organize your chronicle. Some Storytellers keep extensive 
notes, outlining the goals and histories of each supporting 


346 Mage: The Ascension 20" Anniversary Edition 


character, while others sketch the important stuff onto index 
cards and then paperclip them together for easy reference. 
At the very least, you ought to have a few sheets of paper or 
cardstock that feature the following information: 


* Character names and at least one significant feature of 
each noteworthy character. (See Characters, pp. 355-357). 


e At least one agenda for each listed character. 


* Similarentries for importantsettings and their features. 
(See Settings, pp. 357-359). 


* A brief summation of Who’s-DoingWhat-to-Whom. 


* A combat cheat sheet that shows you - at a glance - the basic 
capabilities of the important antagonists: Arete; Spheres; 
initiative dice pool; dice pools for Dexterity + Brawl, Melee 
and Firearms; soak roll dice pool; and other vital combatrolls 
and Traits. (See Combat in Chapter Nine, pp. 409-458). 


* Updated notes, prepared between the previous gaming 
session and theone that's aboutto begin. Those updates 
include the ways in which the last session changed the 
characters, their agendas, the settings, and so on. 


No matter how elaborate your Storyteller notes might 
be, keep quick-reference notes close at hand. Bulky notebooks 


get in the way when the action begins, so you'll want to have 
something you can refer to at a glance. 


You can clip the index cards together by rough categories 
(group of vampires, group of Technocrats, etc.), and then use 
large binder clips to collect the notes of each gaming session 
into something that fits in your hand. 


Depending on your resources, you might want to keep 
your notes in a computer, smart phone, or other data storage 
device. Even then, though, you might get the best use out of 
old-school paper notes for the sessions themselves. In the heat 
of combat, it's easier to pick up an index card than it is to search 
through a bunch of folders on your laptop screen. 


Again, don't forget to update your notes between sessions. 
Given the improvisational nature of Mage, those cheat sheets 
and index cards can provide a script of sorts, even as you make 
stuff up off the top of your head. 


Headspace 


Running games takes focus, imagination, and clarity. 
That's not always easy to find, especially if (like me) you wind 
up gaming after a long day at work or class. What then? 


Give yourself a few minutes to clear some headspace. 
Breathe. Ground and center before folks show up to or before 
you arrive at the gaming space. If you have the opportunity, 
play some music and let yourself brainstorm about all the 
things you want to have happen that evening. Go over your 
notes briefly beforehand to refresh your vision and secure 
your confidence. If you're familiar with meditation, a bit of 
meditation is always a good idea. Overall, give yourself some 
breathing room between the stresses of your everyday life and 
the creative realm of running your chronicle. You'll be happier, 
and you'll do a better job of Storytelling, if you've reached a 
creative headspace by the time your friends appear. 


If you don't have your shit together on a given night, then 
don't push things you're not ready to push. Mage really is just 
a game, and life sometimes takes precedence over gaming. It's 
better to call things off and play something else than it is to 
force out several hours of group creativity. Most experienced 
Storytellers recommend having a backup plan - possibly a 
"beer-n-pretzels" type of board game - in case your inner 
Storyteller is feeling reclusive on Game Night. If your group 
has several different people running different games, then see if 
one of your friends can run her game instead. Like other types 
of preparation, it's good idea to have a few fallback positions 
ready in case you need them. This way, you really can “bring 
your A game” to the Mage table and fall back when the magick 
isn't in you. 


Physical Space 

The ideal gaming space features a comfortable, climate- 
controlled environment with plenty of seating room, a table 
and sound system, ready access to food and drinks, privacy, and 
the ability to dim the lights when necessary. Most of us have 


to make do with a lot less than that. Although it's a good idea 
to have privacy, seating room, and possibly a table and sound 
system, you can stage a gaming session anywhere that you and 
your friends can set up shop. 


Atthe bare minimum, your physical space should allow your 
troupe to feel more or less athome. A distracting, uncomfortable 
area can block your group's creativity. So - assuming you've got 
the chance to set things up ahead of time - arrange your space 
to enhance the mood of the story you want to tell. Although 
certain physical things on your part - confidence, assertive 
body language, a voice that's clear enough to be heard and 
flexible enough to be expressive - can help you set the space 
with your body alone, a comfortably private location makes 
your job a lot easier. 


Food, Drinks, and Other Goodies 


A certain amount of food and drinks are fairly traditional 
in gaming circles. Especially if you're gathering after work or 
school, refreshment's an essential part of the experience. Even 
so, it's a good idea to get the feast out of the way before your 
game begins. The rarified reaches of the Astral Realms may be 
hard to evoke when the scent of pizza's in the air. 


Many gaming groups favor a potluck approach, with the 
members all bringing something to the table. Others pool 
their money and pitch in for a meal prepared by someone else. 
Whatever you do, please buy smart, eat healthy, and give your 
hard-earned cash to ethically-run local businesses whenever 
possible. 


If you can do so, prepare food that fits the tone of your 
adventure: venison for a wilderness tale, Indian food for a trip 
to Goa, an old-school banquet before entering the Hermetic 
Chantry, that sort of thing. Such preparations generally work 
best for groups with plenty of resources, but they can do 
wonderful things for your game if handled well. Beers, mead, 
or other alcoholic drinks work best in moderation; drunken 
gamers can be really obnoxious, and no one wants to die on 
the way home from the game. However appropriate the meal, 
though, it’s best to get the eating out of the way before your 
game begins. That way, the attention’s on you, not on the last 
piece of pizza congealing in its own grease. 


Transition 


Whenever you begin, take a moment to transition between 
thatbunch ofbuddies hangingoutand thatgroup ofwillworkers 
facing life and death. Musical cues work well for this sort of 
thing; so does dimming the lights for a moment, lighting 
candles, or reading or reciting a piece of fiction or poetry that 
sets the mood. (Don't laugh - this technique works wonders.) 
A group recap helps to set the stage as well, either as a prelude 
leading up to your transition, or as part of the transition itself. 
Whatever you do, underscore the division between social time 
and the chronicle. That helps you move your entire group into 
the appropriate headspace, focusing everyone's attention on 
the story at hand. 


Chapter Seven: Telling the Story 347 


IN A4 


/ 
l 
1 


Music 

I'mahugeadvocate for music during gaming sessions: music 
helps set up atmosphere and invokes a sense of Other once the 
chronicle begins. That said, you'll want to use the right music to 
set the scene. A menacing encounter in a Nephandic Labyrinth 
will - unless you're Quentin Tarantino - seem ludicrous when 
set against a playlist of ‘70s disco hits. 


Back in the Stone Age, Dungeon Masters used to keep a 
stack of vinyl LPs next to the stereo - both of which were of 
course within easy reach of the Dungeon Mastering chair. Later, 
groups and Storytellers made mix tapes for different moods or 
games. A well-used CD player and big stacks of CDs were essential 
components of the '90s White Wolf era. These days, you can set 
up MP3 playlists with various atmospheres, and then transition 
between them as necessary. (It's a good idea to switch that music 
when moving from social time into game time.) In general, a 
good soundscape adds immeasurably to gaming sessions. Your 
mileage may vary, but music can be a potent Storyteller tool. 


When you're setting a mood, it's often best to avoid overly 
familiarsongsunless you're going for a specific effect, like playing 
Johnny Cash to reflect an old-school biker bar. Fortunately, it’s 
easy to find cool music these days; eMusic, iTunes, BandCamp, 
YouTube, Amazon.com, and other venues are perfect for 
scouting and procuring music to suit your needs, and theme- 


based collections of classical music (Classical Heartbreak, Classical 
Thunder, etc.) contain tons of worthy material. 


In general, avoid music with prominent lyrics unless you're 
going for a specific type of mood that such lyrics emphasize. 
Orchestral or otherwise instrumental movie soundtracks work 
great for setting atmosphere, so long as you don't fall into Indiana 
Jones Theme Syndrome. Ethnic or historical music playlists are 
wonderful if you're trying to establish a sense of place. Meanwhile, 
certain obscure soundscape genres - ambient techno, industrial 
noise, witch-house, and so on - weave ideal sonic tapestries for the 
Mage atmosphere. See the Music for Mages sidebar for suggested 
artists, and bring your own tastes to the table. Keep the music soft 
enough to set a mood without overpowering your players, and 
- when possible - give yourself several options so you can easily 
switch music (or turn it off entirely) as your situation demands. 


Game Boards and Miniatures 

RPGs originated as wargames, in which the players invested 
their miniatures with personalities and played out battles with 
storylines. These days, you don't need miniatures in order to 
roleplay; such accoutrements may even seem distractingly old 
school. Still, gaming miniatures - plus their near-ubiquitous 
hex maps or white boards - provide a sense of talismanic focus. 
If nothing else, they help keep track of the distance between 
your Verbena and the HIT Mark chasing him. 


Music for Mages 


Soundtracks: Clint Mansell (The Fountain, Moon, Requiem for a Dream), Philip Glass (Koyaanisqatsi, Dracula, Mishima), 
Peter Gabriel (The Last Temptation of Christ, Birdy), Lisa Gerrard (A Thousand Roads, Samsara, The Whale Rider), Ennio 
Morricone (The Mission, Baaria), Jamin Winans (Ink, The Frame), Tan Dun (Hero, Crouching Tiger, Hidden Dragon,), 


Tyler Bates (300), Vangelis (Mythodea, El Greco). 


Mystic Techno: Moby, Rob Dugan, Karsh Kale, Tricky, Rasa, Angel Tears, Massive Attack, Portishead, Hybrid, 


TransGlobal Underground, MIDlval PunditZ, Suns of Arqa. 


Dark Sacred World Fusion: Arcana, Dead Can Dance, Vas, Lisa Gerrard, Irfan, Rajna, Azam Ali, Knossos, Djivan 


Gasparyan, Soriah, Master Musicians of Bukkake. 


Neotribal World Fusion: Delhi 2 Dublin, Kan'Nal, Dhol Foundation, One Giant Leap, Omnia, Faun, SJ Tucker, Niyaz. 


Neotribal Ambient: Diatonis, Deva Premal, Steve Roach (and his many collaborators), R. Carlos Nakai (likewise), 


Robert Rich (again, likewise), Alio Die (ditto that). 


Post-Rock: godspeed you! black emperor, Explosions in the Sky, Earth, Sigur Rós. 
Industrial Noise: Throbbing Gristle, Crash Worship, NON, Skinny Puppy, Terrorfakt. 


Black Ambient: Endura, Atrium Carcerai, Lustmord, Lapis Niger, Archon Satani, Profane Grace, The Sight Below. 


Dark Atmosphere: Caul, Gustaf Hildebrand, Sephiroth, Delerium (pre-Semantic Spaces), Shahrokh Yadegari, Svarte 
Greiner, Phelios, Stoa, Halgrath, Terra Ambient, Nick Parkin, Raison D'Etre. 


Ethereal Gothic: Death in June, Black Tape for a Blue Girl, Qntal, Dark Sanctuary, Love Spirals (Downwards). 
Witch-House: White Ring, Raw Moans, Sycorax, O0oOO. 

Cinematic: Globus, Two Steps From Hell, E.S. Posthumous, Gothic Thunder, The Immediate. 

Power Techno: Juno Reactor, KMFDM, Project Pitchfork, VNV Nation. 


Trippy Rave Techno: Infected Mushroom, Hallucinogen, Ovnimoon, Shpongle, Hilight Tribe, and, of course, Cosmosis, 


E-Mantra, and Entheogenic. 


348 . Mage: The Ascension 20^ Anniversary Edition 


|| | 


Traditionally, gaming miniatures range between 25 mm and 
30 mm in the essentially human scale. At that scale, a one-inch 
hex reflects roughly six feet, or two yards, or two meters. That’s 
not truly accurate, but it’ll do. When judging distance, then, 
figure that two hexes are approximately 10 feet, or three yards 
or meters. Vital thing to remember: 10 yards does not equal 10 
hexes! I’ve made that mistake myself, and it really screws with 
the sense of scale within a game. 


Given thevariety of Mage characters and situations, all types 
of miniatures could suit your game. A mix of modern, SF, and 
high fantasy figures is probably best. Thanks to the Internet, you 
can now secure PDF kits that allow you to print up customizable 
maps and buildings on cardstock. Such things can seriously 


crowd your gaming space, of course. Unless you've got shelves 
within close reach, miniatures can become a pain in the ass to 
employ. As the Storyteller, you should set aside groups of figures 
to represent particular characters, antagonists, and groups. Don't 
let your players see them, if you can help it. The dramatic value 
of pulling out an especially unsettling miniature and setting it 
on the table makes all the potential hassles worthwhile. 


With the right group, you can tell any story, anywhere, under 
almost any conditions. That's one of the strengths of "tabletop" 
RPGs, as opposed to computer games. Even so, the physical and 
mentalspaceyou employcan make a huge difference in your gaming 
experience. So, whenever possible, use those environments to your 
advantage when setting up your chronicle and putting it into play. 


Building a Mystery 


Mage is big. Huge, even. Packed with concepts 
and conspiracies. Faced with that abundance 
of material, where do you even start? 


Like any story-teller in the grand tradition of 
talespinning, you begin with a concept based 
upon your ideas. Sparked by your personal 
experiences (hiking? retail? relationships? lab 
work?) and your favorite influences (books? 
movies? scriptures? music?), with input from 
your troupe and the material within this book, 
those ideas will guide the creative architecture that supports 
your chronicle. From that point, you use story structure to give 
substance to your initial ideas. By taking on the Storyteller's 
role, you're deciding to build a mystery - an interactive series 
of stories for which no one knows the ending... not even you. 


That is one of the most engaging aspects of interactive 
storytelling: thatsense of mystery, the freefall feeling of meeting 
up each week with friends to see where our characters will go. 
Unlike thelinear progression of mostboard or computer games, 
a storytelling game follows its own creative direction. No two 
groups, and no two games, play things out the same way. As 
the Storyteller, it's your job to provide a framework for that 
imaginative flow. And yet, when all is said and done, the stories 
you create together contain an unpredictable chemistry - a 
sense of magick that few other pastimes can provide. 


Brainstorming Your Concept 


The foundation for that magick comes from its initial 
concept. You want to run a mad scientist chronicle? A saga 
about high-rolling mystic grifters? An intense survival tale in 
tumultuous Otherworlds? Find the concept that most appeals 
to you. Sit back and let your imagination fly. Picture images that 
inspire you: rock concerts, bloody rites, stormy romances, flying 
SUVs - whatever kicks your pulse into high gear. From there, ask 
yourself, What can I do to make these things happen in my chronicle? 


And then give yourself the answers and start writing 
down ideas... 


Who? What? Why? Where? When? How? 


Questions and answers provide a framework for your ideas: 


* Who's doing what to whom? 
e Why are they doing it, and what do they hope to gain? 


* Where are these things happening, and why are they 
happening there? 


e Whenisthisallgoingdown... and why isn’t it happening 
at any other time? 


* How does all of this affect your heroes? And how will 
the heroes affect the other characters and events? 


Here's where Mage's vast backstory comes in handy. The 
various factions ofthe Ascension War have agendas, motivations, 
tactics, and rivalries... all of which provide fuel for your creative 
machine. They tap into exciting archetypes, too: steampunk 
scientists, Pagan witches, martial artists and machine-men, 
old-school wizards, sleek futurians, and many more besides. 
Let all of those ideas bounce around inside your skull, and 
then draw your concept from the one that most excites you. 
Give it substance from your personal Q&A sessions... and in 
that process, look for common ground upon which to build 
the rest of your chronicle. 


Common Ground 


Some mages play really well with others. Most, however, do not, 
unless there’s some powerful motivating force, a shared situation, 
mutual enemy, or other relationship that binds them. In order to 
cooperate for any length of time, your players need a mutual purpose. 
And in order to last beyond a single adventure, they'll require 
compelling ties that unite them beyond their various differences. 


Chapter Seven: Telling the Story — 349 


The Epic and the Intimate 


Mage doesn't have to be all about HIT Marks and Horizon Realms. In fact, it usually works best when you focus on the 
human element. And yet, Mage is full of metaphysical conspiracies. What's a Storytellerto do with all those possibilities? 


Simply choose the ones that appeal most to yov. 


Mage is full of options. You don't need to know them all, use them all, or bring all of them into the tale you choose to run. 
Mage can be as epic as Game of Thrones or as intimate as Closetland. The most vital thing for you, as the Storyteller, 
to recall is that you decide how large or small your chronicle will be. 


Think of Mage as a spectrum between the epic scope of an Ascension War waged across the Tapestry, and the intimate 
journey of one person walking a treacherous Path alone. Along that spectrum, you could craft a chronicle around a 
single newly-Awakened mage - say, Jinx from Chapter Six — or open up the heavens and send a cabal of mages 
throughout the Otherworlds. Although it's generally best to start small and work up to the big stuff, you can choose the 
size and scope of the chronicle you run. If grand-scale adventure is what you crave, then go for it. This book gives you 
plenty of material to use! 


Throughout Mage 20, we offer flashes of humanity: the grieving lover, the dedicated healer, the dancing Ecstatic at the 
heart of a crowd. Whatever adventures they face in the long run, such intimate moments define those characters and their 
approach to the Arts. Atthe same time, this book reveals the dizzying swirl of Otherworlds and histories that transcend any 
human life. From that interplay of passionate mortals and titanic events, you can choose a spot on the spectrum and then 
focus your chronicle there. Jinx's chronicle, for instance, might not leave the hidden corners of Seattle; she might never 
meet a Man in Black or step beyond the barriers. For all its epic scale, Mage isn't really about cosmic throwdowns with 
all Reality at stake — it's about flawed human beings whose eyes have opened so far that they'll never fall Asleep again. 


Mage, first and foremost, is about people. Those people have hopes, fears, relationships, and lives. Even the grandest 
Archmage has human frailties that complement his godlike capabilities, and that contrast between sublime power and 
mortal weakness is essential to the spirit of Mage. As a Storyteller, then, keep that human element in mind. If nothing 
else, it provides a rich source of material for the stories you choose to create. 


The contentious nature of the Ascension War and the Assuming that you don’t enforce a concept that your 


smaller discords between different factions and sects can often players hate, this can be the simplest option. That said, it's 


make it hard to find common ground, especially between 
radically diverse characters. From a Storyteller perspective, 
therefore, you'll need to create a suitable connection between 
your players... one that - if you want your chronicle to continue 
for a while - ought to stand the tests of time and tempest. 


Creating Common Ground 


Whenever possible, brainstorm with your players before 
the chronicle begins. Decide upon a concept that fits their 
desired characters, and characters that fit your desired concept. 
Although a bit of tension between characters is a good thing, 
a group of characters who remain terminally incompatible will 
kill your chronicle deader than disco. The same holds true for 
characters who are incompatible with the chronicle’s concept. If 
the Storyteller wants to run a Black Suit saga and the players start 
making up Etherites and Ecstatics, things will hit the skids like 
Santa sleigh-riding in July. 

Fortunately, you have several options when sorting out 
chronicle compatibility: 


* The Group Concept: After deciding upon the concept, 
tell your players to create characters that fit into an 
appropriate group (all mad scientists, Black Suits, gutter- 
orphans, etc.). Only characters who suit your concept 
will be approved, and you retain Storyteller veto power. 


350 Mage: The Ascension 20^ Anniversary Edition 


pretty restrictive, and if one player wants to be a shaman 
while another plays a Templar, you've got problems. 


The Shared Situation Concept: Like the group concept, 
all the player characters must fit a certain requirement. 
In this case, though, the requirement is based around 
an external situation that unites the characters in spite 
of their differences. Examples could include people who 
all share the same mentor, mages all attending the same 
university lecture, kids going to the same high school, 
inmates at the same institution, and so forth. This way, 
the situation unites otherwise diverse mages - hopefully 
beyond that initial episode. Chantries, Horizon Realms, 
political upheavals, and related factions can all provide 
shared situations, and assuming that your mages have 
good reasons to forge lasting bonds amongst themselves, 
this may be the strongest option you have. 


The Looming Threat Concept: Something awful is 
coming down, and that threat unites mages who would 
otherwise have nothing to do with each other. This one 
can be a pretty stale trope, though, and it depends upon 
prior connections (like those shared by John Courage 
and Lee Ann in the Prelude), shared ideals or enemies 
(as in a revolution), or outrageous coincidences (“Look! 


Up in the sky! It's a Nephandic warship!” Um, no...). Natural 
and man-made disasters can unite strangers or enemies, 
but that bond probably won't last for long. 


Whatever you do, set up parameters around your concept 
before the players start making up characters. Decide upon 
hooks that will unite your players' characters, and then work 
them into the backstories for those characters, as described 
below under Hook in Mouth. Maybe two of the characters 
went to school, or dated, or worked together. Perhaps everyone 
has common friends, allies, or enemies. Whatever hooks you 
decide to use, make sure that your heroes have reasons to 
cooperate beyond the first crisis. 


Trying to retrofit a Mage chronicle around a diverse range 
of characters is possible but difficult. So just save yourself the 
headaches. Decide what you want to do beforehand, and then 
tell your players to work within that idea. 


Hook in Mouth 


Great stories need sharp hooks: characters or situations 
that grab people and drag them into the tale. When the phone 
rings at 3:00 a.m., or the car next to you explodes, or the crow 
flies in your window telling you to fuck off and die, the hook 
has been baited, cast, and taken. 


Any good hook pulls the characters and audience out of 
their usual flow. By its nature, a hook penetrates the skin of 
everyday events and snags the meat of the people involved. It 
doesn't have to be explosive, but it must possess an irresistible 
force. Hooks are not polite suggestions but calls to action that 
no one can ignore. 


AsaStoryteller, make certain thatyour tale contains several 
sharp hooks - one or two to set the story into motion and 
others along the way to keep your players and their characters 
engaged. Don't wait for the players to motivate themselves. 
Instead, keep things moving with hooks that your players 
cannot resist. Vary your approach as well - the So-and-So got 
kidnapped by the Nephandi AGAIN hook quickly loses its edge. 
In between gaming sessions, brainstorm up new hooks that suit 
your chronicle, and then bait them with tidbits along the way 
so that your players can’t help biting when the hook appears. 


Binding Ties 

Once you've established the sort of common ground you'll 
want within your concept, hash out a few specific ties that 
encourage your players and their characters to work together. 


Some potential ties include: 


Personal Affection 


Atthe most intimate level, the characters may be bound by 
loveand friendship. Perhaps they're family, orlovers, or members 
ofatight-knitband of musicians or warriors. Disputes may arise 
but the characters sort them out - not merely because they must, 
but because they want to. Such relationships can weather intense 
strain, although certain internal schisms (cheating, addiction, 


loss of faith, and so forth) are more likely to wreck them than 
external challenges might be. 


Shared Association 

In the most obvious connection, the characters belong 
to the same group: a Tradition cabal, an intimate Chantry, 
a Technocratic amalgam, or some other similar band. The 
individuals within that group might not actually like each other 
much, but their loyalty to the group in question overrides 
potential conflicts. Protocols and duties forge a sense of 
solidarity. The group has ranks, answers to superiors, and quite 
often follows orders that the individual members dislike but 
obey. From a Storyteller perspective, such groups have built-in 
story hooks; someone tells them “Jump,” and they respond. 
From a player perspective, though, this sort of bond can feel 
restrictive - and it is. The option works best for Technocratic 
groups, military personnel, or law-enforcement officers because 
such groups do function within chains of duties and commands. 
Individualists, however, are rarely welcome in such groups. 


Similar Allegiance 

Loyal to the same society or culture, our heroes share that 
dedication even ifthey have little in common beyond thatallegiance. 
In this case, that loyalty must be strong enough to withstand the 
other differences between characters - differences that could derail 
your chronicle unless those characters build new bonds once the 
tale begins. Six characters who belong, say, to the Council of Nine 
will have little in common beyond similar dedication to the ideals 
of mystic liberties and global transcendence over the Technocracy’s 
objections. It’s the Storyteller’s job, then, to weave tighter ties 
between the various members of your players’ group. Without a 
stronger bond, factionalism can challenge and possibly demolish 
the group’s integrity... especially if those factions have different 
ideas about what allegiance actually means. 


Shared Territory 


You're all in a tavern when the walls explode. What do you do? The 
shared territory option places your group’s characters in the same 
place at the same time and then gives them a common emergency 
to face. Perhaps the territory in question is a matter of chance: a 
festival, club, laboratory, or other location where something just 
happens to go wrong. That's a pretty traditional game-hook, but 
it’s also rather lame - dependent upon outrageous coincidence 
and (im)perfect timing. A stronger option links that territory to a 
patch of turf that your heroes feel strongly about: a neutral ground 
in the Ascension War, a beleaguered city block, a school to which 
they all belong, and so forth. The Harry Potter series presents an 
excellent example of this sort of connection: the kids start off as 
students at a wizards’ school before they forge deeper connections 
and rivalries among themselves. 


Collaboration 


A mutual project can inspire intense cooperation. In this 
case, the players might be members of a sports team, lab group, 
assembly line, theatrical troupe, orsome other source of teamwork. 


Chapter Seven: Telling the Story 


ec OAL 


Although rivalries can spring up over differences of personality, 
opinion, or methodology (No, it works better if you DO IT THIS 
WAY...”), the heroes care enough about what they're doing that 
they'll cooperate even if they don’t much like each other. 


Obviously, this option demands a goal of some importance. 
If it’s going to unite a group of mages, it has to matter to them 
all. Odds are good that it’s a dangerous project (cleaning up a 
high-crime neighborhood); a work of art, science, or business 
(“We WILL create the perfect cloning process!”); or some other 
venture with risks that equal its potential rewards. Quite 
often, this option combines several other possibilities - forced 
cooperation, shared territory, and so on - into a fertile source of 
common ground that might last beyond the collaboration itself. 


Forced Cooperation/ Forced Antagonism 

The Dirty Dozen option: a bunch of badasses get shoved 
together by a greater force that demands that they cooperate 
or die. Inverted, this becomes the Hunger Games scenario: folks 
get forced to fight one another by someone they hate enough 
to unite against. In both cases, the bond comes from external 
pressure. If and when the heroes defeat that larger antagonist, 
the group could fall apart and the chronicle might end. 


Then again, people tend to connect with one another for 
their own reasons, especially under intense circumstances. So 
although you might have to encourage deeper levels of connection, 
your players will probably handle part of the bonding process for 


^ à 
rA 
m 


352 Mage: The Ascension 20" Anniversary Edition 


you. Either way, the group's cooperation hinges on the power 
of that other party. If they could easily oppose it, after all, they 
wouldn't be in this situation to begin with. 


Mutual Friends 

On the flipside, your characters might be united by a 
common friend, mentor, child, dependent, ally, or other 
intimate acquaintance for whom they feel great loyalty or love. 
Although they might not have much in common beyond that 
bond (or they might, in fact, hate each other's guts), these folks 
could risk everything for the person they adore. The friend 
in question could be a group as well: an allied gang, friendly 
competitor, "sister" band, and so forth. Whatever the ties might 
be, your heroes join forces in an effort to aid them even in the 
face of danger. 


Shared Enemies 

Maybe your players have united to kick somebody's ass. 
Or perhaps they're running from the same Big Bad. Cops, 
Nephandi, Technocratic hit squads, vengeful Tradition mages... 
anyone who poses a mutual threat can be grounds fora temporary 
(and maybe even lasting) alliance. 


That threat doesn’t have to be deadly in order to be binding. 
Maybe the heroes all loathe the same teacher, boss, or co-worker. 
A rival band or despised clique can generate fellowship simply 
by being the focus for other people’s hatred. Obviously, that 
hatred must be fairly intense. Folks who merely annoy people 


Common ground doesn't have to inspire affection. In 
fact, alliesoften find themselves atone another'sthroats, 
especiallyifthatalliancefeatures enemies united under 


atemporary truce. Even among friends, such common 
ground can breed contempt. So long as your players 
aren't antagonizing one another, the characters can 
hate each other's guts. Such rivalries may, infact, make 
your chronicle much more fun... and certainly far more 
interesting... than it would be if everybody got along. 


don'tprovide much common ground. Assholes who make their 
rivals want to piss liquid glass, on the other hand, can inspire 
many hands to dig a grave for them together. 


Onlikely Alliance 


In this book's Prelude, an Ecstatic seer and a renegade 
Black Suit display a long-running alliance that contradicts 
their apparent opposition. Such unlikely allies share common 
enemies, friends, viewpoints, or other goals that jump the 
chasm between them. These bonds can tie powerful stories 
together, especially in the contested-realities realm of Mage. 
The social pressures against such alliances, of course, can be 
equally intense, adding new layers of drama and antagonism 
to the mix. Faced with such pressures, the heroes must commit 
themselves to the partnership... and decide what to do when 
and if it fails. 


A Greater Good or Evil 


In the grand spectrum of mutual enemies, there are the 
folks you just can’t stand... and then there are enemies so vast 
that they threaten existence as you know it. The greater good 
or evil option unites your players to either bring about some 
epic act of goodness or defeat some menace to everything 
they hold dear. In both cases, every other consideration pales 
in comparison to that ultimate alliance. Implacable enemies 
may find themselves on the same side of a fight if the fight in 
question is meaningful enough. 


As usual in Mage, “good” and “evil” remain relative. An act 
of “goodness” might mean the destruction of logging operations 
in the Pacific Northwest, whereas the “evil” in question could 
come from the resurging Nine Traditions if your characters are 
Disparates or Technocracy agents. More often, however, that 
grand unification comes by way of massive natural disasters 
(hurricanes, earthquakes, chemical spills, etc.), human threats 
(Nazism, Fascism, or Imperial Japan), metaphysical incursions 
(aliens, angry gods, dimensional rifts), or Awakened factions 
with unspeakable victory conditions for their Ascension ideal. 
In Mage 20, the Technocracy, Traditions, or both might be 
infiltrated by Nephandic corruptors; against that threat, even 
Men in Black and Ecstatic outlaws could find themselves on 
the same team... 


E 


These options can be mixed and matched, of course, and 
a combination of ties creates a stronger sense of common 
ground. Whichever options you select, make sure to keep 
that ground moving under your heroes' feet. Mage, ideally, is 
unpredictable, and the mutual friends of one tale may become 
the greater evil of the next. 


Bringing the Pieces Together 


When you brainstorm up a Mage adventure, take the 
elements you wantand then leave the rest alone for now. There'll 
be plenty of material to choose from if you want to use it later. 


Players, Characters, and the Concept 


Let’s say, for example, that Kellywants to run a Mage chronicle. 
Inspired by her teachingjob, her love ofthe outdoors, and the time 
she spent hiking on the Appalachian Trail, she decides that she 
wants to run a chronicle based around a wilderness witch-school. 
She envisions high mountains, steep cliffs, the roll of smoke at an 
early morning campfire, and the dark reach of endless trees. Yoga 
poses at dawn. Strange sounds in the middle of the night. A full 
moon rising over valleys where the lights of civilization seem like 
ghosts of a very different world. There's Kelly's foundation. Cool. 


From the brainstorming session with her group, Kelly knows 
that her players have some very different ideas. George wants 
to play a Syndicate enforcer, Sandi has a rich mad scientist in 
mind, Inky plans to make a club-based character, and Kevin 
has been dying to play a shamanic trickster. Kelly wants them 
to all run with their inspirations, but that character group is 
almost impossibly diverse and essentially antagonistic. 


Clearly, it’s time for creative overdrive. First off, Kelly 
decides to strike an unlikely alliance through a shared situation 
concept. She tells her players to make characters who'll meet 
up at the Catastrophe Collective Arts Festival and become 
friends as a result. That’s a weird fit for George’s hitman, but 
the player assures her that his enforcer is a street-level operative 
who’s exploring transhumanist subcultures as a way to move 
up within the Syndicate. After casting a wary eye at that 
justification, Kelly decides to allow it... “as long as you play up 
his personal investment in the friends your guy makes in the process.” 
This way, George’s character could find himself caught in a 
web of conflicting loyalties - a dramatic situation, to be sure! 


Questions, Answers, and Motivations 


So now, Kelly hits the stage of Who? What? Why? Where? 
When? and How? 


Who's Doing What to Whom? 


Kelly’s brainstorming images suggest a group of mystic 
Pagans who’ve made a retreat deep in the Appalachian woods. 
Although there might be two or three mages among them, these 
folks are largely aware but not Awake. Kevin’s shamanic trickster 
belongs to that community, though, so the player group has 
personal ties to the situation. 


Obviously, someone's going to be threatening that refuge. So... 


Chapter Seven: Telling the Story 353 


Why Are They Doing it, 
and What Do They Hope to Gain? 


Kelly's obvious answer involves a company that claims 


fracking rights over a rich supply of natural gas that supposedly 
lies beneath the woods. That company has significant influence 
within the political and business communities, so the necessary 
permits have been granted, the necessary palms have been 
greased, and the necessary systems have been set into motion. 


That, at least, is what’s happening on the Sleeper side of 
things. Beneath the surface, so to speak, there’s a lot more 
going on there. This could be a simple matter of mages versus 
mortals, but there’s really not much of a challenge involved 
there. Kelly decides to have other mages pulling the strings 
behind that fracking project. Is it the Technocracy... or worse? 
And what, really, are they after? 


Where Are These Things Happening, 
and Why Are They Happening There? 

Kelly decides to have a powerful sacred space - a Node - in 
those woods. The community has dedicated itself to protecting 
that Node, and the rival mages have dedicated themselves to 
taking or destroying it. This means wiping out the refuge, killing 
the folks who live there, and turning that area into a hive of 
industry... probably a corrupt one, at that! 


Because two of her players want to run Technocrats, Kelly 
decides to have the Union involved in the effort. In order 
to push her players over to the side of the mystics, however, 
she decides that the Technocracy is corrupted by the Fallen. 
Dropping hints about that Nephandic corruption into the 
backstories for Sandi’s and George’s characters, Kelly gives them 
reasons to turn against the Technocracy... or at least against 
the infiltration within the Technocracy. This, in turn, gives 
Sandi and George a reason to divide their loyalties between 
their friends and their Union - and to pursue the fight once 
this particular adventure ends. 


When Is This Happening... 
and Why Isn't It Happening af Any Other Time? 
Maybe the fight has been going on for a while. The 
wilderness mystics have dug themselves in, and legal skirmishes 
and covert violence have gone down before the player characters 
get involved. Kevin’s trickster is already invested in the situation 
by the time he meets the other characters. Maybe he was 
even searching for allies, and although the folks he’s met at 
Catastrophe are unlikely allies, they might want to help out. 
Kelly makes a note to give them reasons, because things have 
reached a crisis by the time the players get involved. Unless 
someone steps up to the plate and changes the game, the 
wilderness refuge is going down hard. 


How Does This Situation Affect the Heroes? And 
How Will the Heroes Affect the Other Characters 
and Events? 

In order to setup the adventure in the wilderness, Kelly runs 
brief preludes for each of the characters and then an opening 
“origin story” for the group. (See The Prelude, Chapter Six, 
p. 262). Planting clues about a Nephandic plot within the 
Technocracy, Kelly gives each player and character a reason to 
fight that conspiracy. The origin story brings everyone together 
to defeat a Fallen sect that's exploiting the Catastrophe Arts 
Festival. Kelly and Kevin use that alliance as a jumping-off 
point for the wilderness adventure, and soon the stage is set 
for some serious fish-out-of-water adventure, where the urban 
characters face a setting they're not used to dealing with and a 
group that might not appreciate their interest in the situation... 


In short, then, Kelly has the foundation for a Mage 
chronicle: a collection of dynamic elements, potential conflicts, 
and a bit of something for everyone involved. And now that 
she's got that foundation, the Storyteller can begin to craft the 
stories that her chronicle demands. 


Telling Your Story 


A fine story is essentially a ritual. The story- 
teller - a ritual officiant - takes other people 
out of their everyday lives and into a short-lived 
yet extraordinary experience. Those people, in 
turn, invest their attention and imaginations 
into that experience. Without both doing their 
part, the ritual or tale falls flat. 


In Mage and other storytelling games, 
mutual collaboration takes that ritual in 
unexpected directions. Even so, a good 
interactive game still shows the same characteristics as a more 
linear story. As the Storyteller, it’s both your job and privilege 
to lead your players into the world you create together. How can 
you do that? Read on... 


354 Mage: The Ascension 20" Anniversary Edition 


Story Structure 


Rituals and stories take their participants on a journey. 
Ideally, the people they are at the end are not the people they 
were in the beginning. That sense of travel and transformation 
is vital. And without high stakes and drastic change, everyone's 
just going through the motions. A strong story, like a potent 
ritual, needs to feel like it matters to everyone involved. 


To provide that sense of transformation, every good ritual 
or story has a structure that follows the pattern of a mythic 
journey: 


* An opening hook leaves the everyday world behind; 


* An introduction brings the participants into the realm 
of transformation; 


* A sense of emotional investment adds meaning to the 
outcome of that journey; 


* An escalating series of challenges must be met and 
overcome; 


* A gradual build of energy intensifies that journey, 
culminating in... 


* A climactic revelation, through which some end is 
achieved, often followed by... 


* A final cool-down period where things get wrapped up 
and the participants rejoin the familiar realm again. 


In a storytelling game, that structure helps you keep 
dramatic tension tight, elevating a series of die rolls to an 
imaginative odyssey in which your players change their world. 


Elements of the Story 


In stories, certain elements - character, setting, conflict, and 
resolution - come together to form a greater whole. Character 
provides a focus, setting establishes the where and when, conflict 
spurs those characters to action, and resolution wraps the 
whole thing up. A Storyteller juggles those elements with his 
imagination. From its various pieces, the story takes form. 


Characters 


"Once upon a time," there was a character: a clever witch, 
a boy wizard, a mad scientist or sacred shaman, a hacker, a 
trickster, a lover, whatever. Every story has at least one character; 
withoutthatfocus, theaction has no meaning. Which characters, 
then, drive your chronicle? Who provides its focus, its tension, 
its backdrop and stakes? In Kelly's chronicle, the significant 
characters include the uneasy alliance of player heroes, the 
inhabitants of the woodland refuge, the various parties trying 
to bring it down, and probably a few supporting roles who'll 
add color and surprises to the plot. 


As the Storyteller, you get to play all the supporting roles 
and probably some major ones as well. Your players take center 
stage, of course, but the rest of the cast belongs to you. You're 
the cranky mentor, the snarky familiar, the innocent kids, and 
the predators who feed on them. In Mage's bizarre world, you 
could become the North Wind, too... or an avatar of Crow, 
a city-spirit, or the vengeful angel who's come to purge the 
world of sin. Anything can assume a personality in Mage; if 
an Ecstatic stoner Awakens his herbs, you could find yourself 
playing the laid-back spirit of Pot Incarnate. (For details, see 
Mary Jane in Appendix I.) 


When you play those characters, have fun with them. 
Decide upon memorable traits, like a hooked nose or unusual 
accent, just so long as you avoid obnoxious ethnic slurs. (See 
Roleplaying the Otherin Chapter Six, p. 258.) You don't need 
to fill out character sheets for every character, of course, but 
some scribbled notes can help you keep each persona straight. 


Whenever possible, work up names, agendas, and a distinct 
feature or two, even for your walk-on roles. Dynamic characters, 
after all, make for interesting stories. 


Motivations and Tactics 


As we've seen in Chapter Six, all characters have agendas. 
Everybody wants something, and certain folks will do almost 
anything to meet those needs. Think like an actor, then, when 
you assume a character. Ask yourself What do I want? What stands 
in my way? What will I do to get it?, and then let the answers guide 
your performance. Those motivations can keep your players 
on their toes and might surprise even you. 


Motivations also help you flesh out Backgrounds Traits. 
Allies, Backup, Mentors, Familiars, and so forth are far more 
interesting (and far less predictable) when they want something 
from their associated heroes. That's especially true when those 
desires aren't immediately obvious; sure, the Backup agents 
expect to get paid, but what does an Ally really desire from the 
mage who holds that Background Trait? Are there genuine 
feelings of loyalty and friendship, or is that Ally pursuing a 
hiddenagenda? From theStoryteller's perspective, unpredictable 
alliances offer excellent complications and hooks for your tale 
- especially if the Background character happens to be a living 
Sanctum, Node, or Wonder with an agenda of its own. (See 
Inhuman Entities, below.) 


Strong motivations drive dynamic characters. And so, 
whenever possible, frame a supporting character's motivations in 
compelling terms and short-term goals. A barista, for example, 
wants to score a big tip; a vampire wants to recruit an ally; whereas 
acop wants to get home alive. Such agendas invest your characters 
with personality, give you more material to play with, and tell 
you a lot about your character's offstage life. After all, a cop 
who wants to get home alive must have some reason to believe 
he won't make it and something (or someone) worth living for. 
With such motivations, that cop suddenly becomes more than 
justa faceless walk-on character. He's gotemotional attachments, 
reasons to avoid danger, and potential personality quirks that 
might come out as he interacts with the player characters. 


Tactics: The Means to an End 


To reach those goals, characters use tactics: the means they 
employ to achieve their desired ends. Those tactics inspire a 
character's choices and activities. The cop, for instance, will try to 
talk his way through potential hazards, might negotiate to avoid 
conflict, and could duckand run ifviolence erupts. Now your cop 
has a sense of individuality and an unpredictable streak - traits 
that make him far more compelling than your typical list of stats. 


Asingle dynamic word can often tell you what those tactics 
might be. The cop could be described as wary, the barista might 
be flirtatious, and the vampire might act in a flattering way. By 
noting the character's tactics, you give yourself a miniature script 
for the things that character might say and do. After all, the 
ingratiating vampire won't act the same way that a condescending, 
fearful, or indifferent vampire would act. 


Chapter Seven: Telling the Story — 355 


IASA 


Covert Agendas 

Mage’s world is rarely obvious. People often use deceptive tactics 
to pursue covert, or hidden, agendas. The ingratiating vampire, for 
example, would be acting like a genuine friend, but in reality she’s 
trying to win a powerful ally over to her cause. That flirtatious 
barista’s angling fora tip, nota date. The cop’s apparent good nature 
masks his fear of impending death. By giving covert agendas to your 
Storyteller characters, you keep your players on their toes while 
investing your chronicle with a dramatic sense of unpredictability. 
Beyond that, however, you also reflect the ambiguous and often 
surprising nature of reality - a key element of Mage - and the 
human drives and individual lives that lie behind dismissive labels 
like “Sleepers” and “the Masses.” 


A Reason to Believe 

Beyond the short-term actions that people take when pursing 
their agendas, there’s another good reason to think about a 
Storyteller character's motivations when you're running a Mage 
chronicle: beliefs influence activities, and needs influence beliefs. 
Especially in the modern world, where people are freer to believe 
what they choose to believe, folks tend to select beliefs that meet 
their needs. Poor people need to believe in something better for 
themselves, rich people needs to believe there's a reason that they 
have more than other people get, folks in warlike cultures need 
to believe there's a reason that they subject themselves to endless 
violence, and folks who cultivate serenity need strong principles 
that help them cope with their animal passions. 


The Common Mage Paradigms shown in Chapter Ten 
reflect worldviews based in need and circumstance. Beliefs, 
after all, let people face the complexities of life. For Mage 
players and Storytellers, the needs behind a paradigm inform 
the reasons for that belief. Folks in a technological society, for 
example, tend to place a lot of faith in technology because that 
technology allows them to live happier, healthier, easier lives. 


Ifamage wants to changea paradigm, then, he must choose 
one that meets the needs of the people within that area... or 
change their needs to meet his paradigm. The primary reason 
for the Technocracy's domination in the modern world, for 
example, is simple: advanced technology makes life easier 
for the Masses. Why would Joe Average choose to live in the 
woods, worshipping the Old Gods, when he could have fast 
food, a warm house, and the Internet? If the Verbenae want 
to get Joe and Jane Average to accept their beliefs, then, they 
have to give those people a reason to change those beliefs. Those 
mages must understand the motivations that drive those people, 
then either change the paradigm to suit the Sleepers’ needs (as 
technopaganism might do), or change the needs so that the 
new paradigm suits the new set of needs. On the sunny side 
of the street, such changes make life better for the Sleepers, so 
that the people accept new beliefs that reward their faith. At 
the darkest end of the spectrum, those changes can make life so 
hideous that the Sleepers accept new beliefs out of desperation, 
if only to keep worse things at bay. It’s been said that fear lies 
at the heart of faith... and in the real world, that saying is not 


356 Mage: The Ascension 20" Anniversary Edition 


always wrong. There are reasons, after all, that religious folks 


often use the term God-fearing as a reflection of righteousness. 


As a Mage Storyteller, you command the powers of need 
and belief among your characters. You decide what they need 
and determine how those needs suit their beliefs. If and when 
your players want to tilt the balance of the Ascension War, 
winning people over to the mages’ chosen worldview, you can 
reveal the needs of your characters and then suggest how the 
mages can meet those needs... and thus, also shift the people’s 
beliefs. If, for example, Jinx shows the wary cop how her bonds 
with the Goddess Risk and the Spirit of Seattle help her to 
stay alive, that cop might adopt the same beliefs... assuming, 
of course, that they benefit him as well. 


For more details about changing the landscape of reality, 
see The Reality Challenge in Chapter Nine, (p. 432), and 
Reality Zones in Chapter Ten, (pp. 611-617). 


Inhuman Entities 


Mages deal with non-human characters too: spirits, 
demigods, robots, familiars, demons, angels, totem entities, 
and the essences of cities. As the Storyteller, you get to play 
god (literally and figuratively) and take on the personalities and 
motivations of these weird entities. Such characters clearly aren't 
“people” in the usual sense. And yet, from the Storyteller’s 
perspective, they have the same sorts of wants and needs, even 
if they express them in very different ways. 


When you’re playing a non-human character, choose 
distinct mannerisms that mark that entity: a weird voice, 
disturbing description, archaic mode of speaking, and so forth. 
Use jagged movements, or very smooth body language, when 
acting out that character. Describe how that character affects its 
surroundings, too: the way the light dims and the wind blows 
cold when the demon manifests, the musky smell and shiny eyes 
of the talking wolf, the way the air pressure builds when an air 
elemental swirls into existence... that sort of thing. By crafting 
an uncanny atmosphere, you can invoke a sense of mystery when 
such characters appear. A HIT Mark, for example, seems far 
more menacing when it speaks in a deep voice with oddly flat 
inflections, glancing down at the bloody holes in its bleeding 
meat where the glint of metal shines through. 


That sense of mystery is essential when such characters 
appear. Don’t refer to weird entities by blunt game terms. That HIT 
Mark is just a list of stats if you call him by that name. If, on 
the other hand, you simply describe what your players perceive, 
and then let them draw their own conclusions, then your killer 
cyborg becomes a lethal force of nature, not just another set of 
health levels that need to be destroyed. 


No matter how weird or mysterious an entity might be, 
remember this: everyone wants SOMETHING, and that “something” 
isn’t always obvious. Provide motivations, tactics, and covert 
agendas to inhuman entities as well - and then throw in the 
occasional surprise. If that HIT Mark would rather hang out 
and discuss My Little Pony than turn mages into hamburger, 


he suddenly becomes a very different character. A crow spirit 
who prefers fast food over carrion, a demon who loves to play 
chess, a tree spirit who wants to see the world... such entities 
keep your Mage chronicle hopping and your players engaged. 


Relationships 


No mageisan island. Everyone of them, regardless of affiliation, 
has allies and lovers, relatives and acquaintances of some kind or 
other. Even misanthropic hermits have animal friends and spirit 
allies. A truly solitary character has no place in a roleplaying troupe to 
begin with, because such groupsare social by their nature. Therefore, 
each character in your chronicle has a network of relationships, any 
one of which can provide story material. 


When your players create their characters, ask them about 
the significant people in each character’s life. Have them describe 
these people, and then make notes you can work from later. These 
“people,” incidentally, don’t need to be human; in a mage's world, 
animals, spirits, and so forth are people too. Penny Dreadful’s cat, 
Mister Mistoffelees, is as much a person as the pretty boy next door, 
and the cat probably has a more interesting personality. Once you've 
got a few ideas, bring those characters into the story whenever it 
seems appropriate to do so. Old Aunt Marie probably won't show 
up in a Horizon Realm, after all, but she might provide the heart 
of the chronicle when things take place on Earth. 


From the Storyteller's perspective, such relationships 
serve several purposes. Such people fill out the background, 
obviously, but they also provide flashes of color and emotional 
leverage that can move your players to action. They personify 
Background Traits, furnish story hooks, and help you give a 
face to the abstract ideals of the Ascension War. It's one thing, 
after all, to fight to protect the Masses on general principle; 
when it's your next-door neighbor in the wheelchair, though, 
it suddenly becomes far more important to make sure he stays 
safe when mad cultists kick in your own door. 


Setting 


Like character provides the who, setting provides your 
story's where and when. In most cases, it's more than just a 
backdrop, too. Especially in the world of Mage, a setting has a 
huge effect upon the mages and their activities. It establishes 
an atmosphere, determines obstacles, establishes the set of 
localized reality, and often becomes a character in its own right. 


Your story's setting often influences the chronicle's 
activities. A tale set in Seattle's underground during a cold 
November, for instance, has a very different tone than one set 
in thatcity's Capitol Hill district during a sunny July. And given 
the cosmic scope of Mage, your range of potential settings is 
essentially infinite. One week's session could find the heroes 
hitchhiking along 1-40 in the middle of a snowstorm, whereas 
the next week’s tale might drop them in a haunted forest, an 
industrial laboratory, a Boschian hell, or the mindscape of 
a demented colleague who’s lost in a Victorian steampunk 
dream... and a single story arc could involve them all! 


T Se 
a Wie 4 


The Internet can be a Storyteller's best friend. Thanks 
to Google Earth, the various Internet map options, and 
the ability to search for blueprints, schematics, and 
images of all kinds, you can whip up helpful visuals 
withinseconds. When you placea story ina real-world 
setting, a Google Earth fix on that location can give 
you eyes on the local geography — perhaps even 
score you a street-level panorama of that location as 
the characters would see it. 


Beyond its obvious capacity for visual reference 
material (maps, symbols, evocative pictures, and so 
forth), the Internetcan also help you dig up information, 
find and play cool music, establish a Wiki page for 
your chronicle, and employ all kinds of other tools 
that Game Masters would have given their eye-teeth 
to obtain two decades ago. All hail the Virtual Age! 


Atmosphere and Description 

Settings, like characters, have distinct personalities. One 
restaurant might feel friendly, with good smells and friendly 
waitstaff, whereas another feels menacing, with disconcerting 
pictures on the walls and an undercurrent of fear among the 
patrons. As the Storyteller, you can enhance chronicle settings 
by providing memorable atmospheres and descriptions as often as 
possible. Such details make your story come alive and often 
influence the flow ofaction and the choices that your players make. 


Let’s say, for example, that Jinx and Synder grab lunch in 
a neighborhood café. It's been a good day for panhandling, so 
they can afford something nice for a change. As the Storyteller, 
you could simply tell your players, “You go to lunch” and then 
simply move on. But if, instead, you describe a small Indian 
restaurant with a rich Tandoori scent, peeling wallpaper, faded 
prints of medieval Indian people riding elephants, and a waiter 
whose ragged nails and eager demeanor suggest a desperate 
business owner who's trying to stay afloat, then that lunch adds 
color to your chronicle. Now let's say that the owner's wife glares 
at the homeless girls from behind the counter, and something 
smells not quite right about the food; now you’ve added tension 
into the scene. Maybe there’s a bloodstain in the bathroom, 
or the sound of arguing or weeping in the kitchen; now you’re 
inviting the players to take an interest in the restaurant. The 
richer the atmosphere and description of a place, the more 
evocative that setting becomes. 


Alive to the Senses 

No place, no matter how simple it might appear to be, is 
“simple” when you get to know it. Every tree or street corner 
has its own unique features and history. Mages tend to be 
more sensitive to such things than most people are, and so the 
personality of a given place can reinforce the inherent magick 
of the Tapestry. Check out the Prelude and the ways in which 
Lee Ann and John Courage perceive their surroundings, and 


Chapter Seven: Telling the Story 357 


then present your own descriptions with a similar view to detail 
and atmosphere. Characters with the Awareness Ability, high 
Avatar Backgrounds, keen senses, or a habit of scanning their 
surroundings with perception-enhancing magicks notice things 
that most people miss. By describing those vivid perceptions, you 
can show your players just how incredible a mage's world can be. 


To play up those perceptions, go beyond the usual senses 
of sight and sound. Describe to your players how a room 
smells, feels, or tastes. Remember, too, that sensitive people can 
perceive emotional impressions in the air as vibes or other 
tactile sensations. Strong passions leave powerful impressions 
on the landscape, so emphasize those vivid descriptions to 
reveal clues about the setting's past, present, or - especially 
when Time Sphere magick is involved - its potential future. 
For advice about an especially helpful technique in this sort 
of story-telling, check out the sidebar called Sense Memory, 
and then put its suggestions to good use. 


Metaphysical Sensations 

Theuncanny currents of Quintessence, Resonance, Synergy, 
Nodes, gateways, and other paranormal phenomena have sensory 
effects as well. Most mages can sense energy and determine its 
flavor even when there's no physical contact involved. Strong 
Resonance and Synergy cast impressions that sensitive characters 
can perceive and potentially read. One location mightripple with 
corruption even when the sun shines on its apparently peaceful 
ground; another could hold a calming sense of peace thatsoothes 
a troubled soul in the middle of a storm. 


Magickal workings can ripple the environment as well, 
especially when the Correspondence, Entropy, Forces, Spirit, 
and Time Spheres are involved. Mages who understand those 
Spheres stand a pretty decent chance of sensing familiar magicks... 
which can, in turn, warn your heroes (or their enemies!) of some 
impending spell. Let’s say that Nix has a few dots in the Time 
Sphere; a faint breeze that smells like the past and future shaking 
hands could alert Nix to the presence of a rival mage who’s using 
temporal magicks to attack Nix by surprise. In game terms, you 
can offer a vague description and see if your player gets the hint; 
if so, let him roll Perception + Alertness... and if he succeeds, let 
him catch sight of the magick before it strikes. 


Sensation, Poetry and Metaphor 

Perception is the first thing a mage learns about when she 
begins studying a Sphere. And so, despite their tendency toward 
intellectual analysis - sometimes perhaps because of it! - mages 
can be extremely sensual. That’s especially true of Ecstatics and 
shamans, who use sensation as an instrument (see Sex and 
Sensuality, Chapter Ten, p. 598), but it can apply to other 
mages as well. Awakened people perceive a sensuous world that 
transcends the limited perceptions of the Masses. To capture the 
essence of that world, then, you could employ poetry and metaphor: 
evocative imagery that transcends straightforward descriptions. 


Poetic descriptions operate beyond the level of everyday 
thought. By using them, you open your mind - and the minds 
of your players - to a more abstract way of thinking. Writers like 
H.P. Lovecraftand Storm Constantine use baroque language to 
reveal dreamlike vistas to their readers. Filmmakers like Darren 
Aronofsky (The Fountain, Black Swan) and musicians like Trent 
Reznor employ similar techniques with other media, mixing 
deeply symbolic sounds and images in with more conventional 
impressions in order to invoke sublime experiences. Of course, 
this sort of thing can be overdone... or worse, done badly. As a 
Mage Storyteller, save this approach for situations where it'll 
have maximum impact - and then bring your best game to the 
table when you do. 


Differing Perspectives? 

Along similar lines, different mages tend to perceive their 
surroundings in different ways. A woods-loving Verbena would 
regard the city as a reeking sprawl of environmental ruin, 
whereas a proud scion of Iteration X views that same city as a 
shining testimonial to the power of technology. An imaginative 
Storyteller could describe the same setting through differing 
perspectives - each one suited to the characters in question. 
That's an advanced technique, one that could easily become 
confusing while bogging down the game. Still, an occasional 
situation in which the characters all perceive the same landscape 
in vastly different ways could rattle your players' expectations 
while underscoring the idea of subjective reality within the 
world of Mage. 


Sense Memory 


A potent acting and writing technique, sense memory involves setting up mental "files" filled with memories of various 
sensations. When you find yourself in a place or situation you wantto recall, take several minutes to focus on the various 
impressions you feel. Close your eyes and concentrate on hearing, as deeply as you can, every layer of sound. Open a 
mental file based on the place or situation in question, make a mental note of the sounds you hear, and then close that 
file, move on to scent, and repeat the process. Moving from hearing to smell, to taste, to touch, to that nameless sense 
of awareness that hovers somewhere in between all the other senses, establish mental files for each one of them. When 
you're finished, close your eyes again, shut the mental file drawer, and go back to what you'd been doing before. 


Sense memory not only lets you recall places and circumstances long after you've left them behind, but it also helps you 
appreciate the richness of your surroundings while you're still there. By opening yourself up and truly concentrating on 
each sense, you'll deepen your understanding of the world we so often miss. 


358 . Mage: The Ascension 20" Anniversary Edition 


Settings as Characters 

Sometimes - especially when you’re dealing with 
magick - the world around you really is alive. Cities have 
spirits, winds have names, and the walls actually can listen 
to what you say. Powerful Nodes and Wonders often 
have sentient consciousness, and certain types of magick 
can awaken the slumbering spirits within a place, item, 
or element. In such situations, your setting becomes a 
character in every sense of that word, with needs, tactics, 
and agendas that can rival any human character. 


Live settings and objects occasionally communicate 
in voices anyone can hear. More often, though, they 
express their desires through shifts in the environment: 
chilly breezes, books falling open to important pages, 
a pulse or thrill of eagerness that surges through the 
area in question, and other signs of sentient activity. A 
haunted house might feel displeased, a dagger can be 
thirsty, and a car could have its own ideas about travel 
and destinations. Most people won’t notice such things, 
of course... or, if they do, they'll write those perceptions 
off as anthropomorphism - after all, everybody knows 
that houses, knives, and cars don’t think for themselves! 
Certain mages, however, catch clues about the living 
world and recognize what’s really going on. Witches, 
shamans, Ecstatics, and technopagans tend to be quicker 
on the uptake in such settings, but any mage whose 
beliefs accept weird shit might find herself staring into 
an abyss that’s staring right back at her. 


Environmental Threats 


Aware or not, settings can be dangerous. Blizzards, 
deserts, and exploding fuel depots don’t need to be 
malicious in order to killsomeone. Especially in the wild 
frontiers of the Ascension War and Otherworlds, your 
players will face environmental hazards that make every 
move a risk. As the Storyteller, then, it’s your business 
and pleasure to keep the heat on and the ground shaky. 


Dangerous settings provide exciting set pieces, as 
described in the sidebar nearby. Chapter Nine features 
aselection of Environmental Hazards in the section of 
that name (see pp. 435-444). When mountains crumble 
and storms hit, those systems provide you with the tools 
of character unease. Remember, too, thata hazard doesn't 
have to be obvious or epic in order to be dangerous. A 
patch of ice can end a mage’s career just as surely as a 
bolt of lightning can. 


Conflict 


When different parties seek opposing goals, conflict 
is inevitable. Such disputes range from the Earth-shaking 
battles of the Ascension War to the intimate - yet still 
painful - spats between lovers. 


Chapter Seven: Telling the Story — 359 


Despite common preconceptions, most conflicts are neither 
life-and-death affairs nor duels between Good and Evil. Instead, 
they boil down to people trying to meet their needs. When 


those needs clash, the people involved clash too. 


Tradition defines three essential sorts of conflict: 


* Character against Character, wherein opposing people 


collide; 


e Character against Environment, wherein the primary 
character(s) clash with the world at large; and... 


e Character against Self, wherein conflict is self-contained. 


In Mage, all three conflicts can come into play within a 
single story. When Jinx fights off a would-be mugger, that's 
Character against Character, when she tries to survive a harsh 
winter storm, that's Character against Environment; and when 
she enters Quiet, that's Character against Self. Those conflicts 
can cross over, too: a seductive drug dealer from a rival gang 
brings Jinx into all three conflicts at once. And in Mage, more 
than in most other storytelling games, an existential crisis may 
be as deadly as a firefight. 


Goals, High Stakes, and Common Ground 


Chantry rivalries, clashing ideologies, romantic tensions, 
and other subtle conflicts can be as intense as exploding 
laboratories. The key to such intensity is simple: make your 
blayers care about what's going on. When they've got an honest 
emotional investment in the outcome of such conflicts, you 
don't need pyrotechnics to keep your players in suspense. 


Conflicts demand three things: opposing goals (a reason that 
the characters disagree), high stakes (something the characters 
are willing to fight for), and common ground (the reason they 
don't just walk away; see the section of that name, earlier in 
this chapter). When these elements collide, the characters face 
aconflict. If they can negotiate a solution, then everybody wins. 
The higher the stakes and the greater the opposition, however, 
the more intense that conflict becomes. 


As an example, check out this book's Prelude. Lee Ann 
and John Courage belong to factions with violently opposing 
goals. Both mages believe strongly in who they are and what 
they do... 
share a history of fighting together against mutual enemies, one 


strongly enough to kill and die for it. Even so, they 


of whom is chasing John Courage. The conflict involves them 
each overcoming their innate hostility (and the manipulative 
tendencies within each character) long enough to unite against 
something they do right about the time that 
enemy catches up with them. 


the real enemy... 


That Prelude also underscores an important point, 
especially in the often-martial world of roleplaying games: conflict 
doesn’t have to be physically violent. Nasty glances, pointed words, 
passive-ageressive manipulation, and even apparent surrender 
that isn’t really giving in... they’re all forms of conflict that 
have nothing to do with losing health levels. In real life, most 


360 Mage: The Ascension 20" Anniversary Edition 


people get through their entire lives without ever throwing or 
taking a hard punch. And yet conflict is universal. The stakes 
and weapons vary, but opposition remains. 


Good vs. Evil? 


The Prelude’s conflict also points out another fact: very 
few people consider themselves villains. Most folks feel they're doing 
the right thing even when what they've done is monstrous. 
The old Good vs. Evil dynamic is pretty rare in real life; hell, 
even the Nazis considered themselves to be epic heroes in a 
decadent world. Given the subjective morality of Mage, such 
clear-sided conflicts - unless they involve the Fallen - tend to 
be nonexistent. The truth, in Mage, is this: every side, even that 
of the Nephandi, is heroic and horrific in its way. Pure Good 
is as absent as Pure Evil, and even the most virtuous mages 
can be real dicks when you get in their way. 


(Okay, the Nephandi are pretty Evil with a capital E. Still, 
in their philosophy, they're simply pragmatic enough to realize 
that the universe is fucked up, and enlightened enough to be 
on the winning side of ultimate extinction.) 


Black and White conflicts, then, aren't really true to the 
spirit of Mage. As a Storyteller, you can play up the ambiguity 
of the Ascension War and its many small reflections by showing 
that everyone - even a Nephandus - has a valid point of view, 
understandable goals, and some vision of Ultimate Truth. That 
doesn't mean, of course, that folks won't kill each other over 
differing opinions - theywilland often do. Still, keep each character's 
motivations in mind, and drop little hints about those goals and 
the ultimate humanity of each antagonist, even as those antagonists 


blast their rivals into atoms... “for the common good,” of course! 


Esealation 


Actions have consequences, so conflicts tend to escalate 
in intensity until someone either defuses the conflict or ends 
it in some other way. Hurt feelings often breed bitter words. 
Words turn to insults, insults to shouting, shouting to slammed 
doors and very often worse. Unless a character does something 
to de-escalate the situation - offers a compromise, walks away, 
talks everybody down, and so forth - a conflict stands a good 
chance of growing. That's especially true among mages, whose 
incredible powers come from the strength of their convictions. 


In the Storyteller's role, you've got the power to throw fuel 
or water on that fire. By adding complications to a conflict, 
you can escalate your player's response to it. And by offering 
potential resolutions, you give the player paths out of the 
growing conflict. If Kelly decides to have George's Syndicate 
bosses order him to stage some "accidental" fires around the 
Appalachian woods, his loyalty comes into conflict with the 
goals of his companions, and the conflict escalates. If she 
brings in a forest spirit who's powerful enough to de-escalate 
the situation, Kelly presents her players with an option other 
than violence. In many cases, though, the Storyteller should 
simply lay out possibilities and then let the players determine 
the flow of conflict. Given the incredible powers of Awakened 


The Memorable Set Piece 


Exploding airships. Thundering nightclubs. Car chases and impossible stunts. Hollywood refers to such scenes as set 
pieces: dramatic backdrops for explosive action. Take a cool location, add high stakes, throw in a ticking time bomb, 
and you've got a set piece. When James Bond chases the parkour terrorist near the beginning of Casino Royale, that 
chase becomes a memorable set piece. 


A strong set piece combines novelty and emotional stakes with a dramatic location and a sense of audacity. The bloodbath 
at the beginning of Blade remains a classic set piece because it takes an audience surrogate (the dude with the pretty 
lady), lures him out of his everyday world, throws the story’s main characters in his face, and then explodes into an orgy 
of violence through the absurd yet thrilling idea of vampires bathing in strobe-lit showers of blood. By the time Blade 
shows up, the audience is hooked. That's how a great set piece works: Emotion + Stimulation + Action = Wow. 


Like any other device, of course, the set piece can be overdone. When the same things happen again and again, with 
no real sense of investment in the outcome, mere action becomes boring. As a Storyteller, then, craft imaginative set 
pieces that take your players by surprise. Combine cool settings - wreckage, nightclubs, Mount Rushmore, whatever — 
with a sharp hook and a vital outcome, throw in something your players don't see coming, and guide the action to an 


exciting payoff. 


magick, and the temperaments of the people who use it, the 
outcome of almost any conflict remains fairly unpredictable. 


Complications 

Among all World of Darkness characters, mages may be 
the most complex. Nothing, it seems, is ever straightforward 
in their world. George's bosses may be Technocrats, but his 
immediate supervisor holds a secret allegiance to the Fallen. 
The mystics from the wilderness retreat turn out to have several 
internal schisms based upon romantic relationships, and the 
spirit of the forest is frankly sick of them all. The various covert 
agendas and hidden conflicts complicate the apparently simple 
goal of Save the Woods from the Bad Guys. The lines of conflict 
andallegiance blur, and every character mustwatch the shadows 
for some new and unexpected trap. 


Complications often escalate a conflict, too. The tension 
between Kevin's trickster and Sandi's Progenitor rises if those 
characters wind up sleeping with one another. Maybe George's 
hitman takes offense at such intimacy, or Inky’s bouncer wants 
to join the action too. Maybe the trickster was already involved 
with a forest witch who's none too thrilled with his new affair. 
Tensions escalate, and no one knows which way the wind will 
blow once the fire starts. 


Tension 


Tension comes from a word meaning “to stretch,” and 
that’s what tension in a story does: it stretches the characters 
and audience on a rack of complications, tightening the strain 
until something pops. As a Storyteller, you can increase the 
tension within a conflict by keeping things from happening 
until just the right moment, dropping pauses and delays into 
the pacing of your story. Let’s say that George’s hitman plans 
to have a little chat with Kevin’s trickster; just as he prepares to 
approach his rival, the Storyteller has a cute little witch kid ask 
the hitman to investigate the strange sounds she heard over by 
the creek. By adding both a delay (the child) anda complication 


(the mysterious sounds), Kelly ups the tension and stretches 
out the conflict with a bit of delicious antici... pation. 


How much tension and how many complications should 
you add? That depends upon your troupe. Keep an eye on your 
players, and watch their reactions as events unfold. If they seem 
to be getting bored, or lost, or frustrated with the various delays, 
pick up the pace. If they’re hanging on every word you say, let 
them dangle just a little bit before you let the action explode. 


Deadly Force 

Despite their capacity for carnage, mages don’t generally 
fight to the death if they don’t have to. They don’t heal like 
werewolves or vampires unless there’s Life magick involved, 
and they lack the inner beasts that drive other Night-Folk to 
violence. Enlightened and typically intelligent, mages prefer 
to use subtler forms of warfare whenever possible. Even the 
Technocracy usually keeps the HIT Marks and power armor 
in reserve for use as a last resort. And so, despite the massive 
Combat section in Chapter Nine, conflicts in Mage tend to 
be more mental, emotional, social, and spiritual than physical. 


That said, the Awakened can blow shit up with the best 
of them. If and when fireballs start flying, the resulting havoc 
is impressive... and dangerous... for everyone involved. 


Being mortal, mages have more to lose in a fight than 
their monstrous contemporaries. A raging werewolf can take 
a tank-shell in the chest and live to howl about it, but a good 
kick in the chops can send the average mage to the hospital or 
the grave. And then there's Paradox - the constant spectre of 
Awakened violence. Any wizard who tosses lightning bolts too 
freely, regardless of her paradigm, is looking for a smackdown 
of epic proportions. As a Mage Storyteller, then, remind your 
players of the consequences of deadly force... when need be, 
by making examples of them. 


Lethal violence, in Mage, tends to be risky and dramatic... 
and therefore rare. When such violence does erupt, make it scary. 


Chapter Seven: Telling the Story 36l 


PX CN ai 


Let it hurt. Show blasted ruins and weeping widows. Post APBs 
to every cop in town. Have Resonance ripple in the wake of 
atrocities. And unless you plan to run a high-adventure game, 
remind your players that mages don't soak lethal and aggravated 
damage unless they use potent and often vulgar magick. When 
those vulgar spells pee in the reality pool, have Paradox nail 
the guilty parties. By giving teeth to violence, you'll underline 
the essential humanity of mages and stress that magick, like 
force, has its costs. 


The Good Death 


As a general rule, a Storyteller shouldn’t let random 
chance kill a player character. Unless the player and his mage 
do something truly stupid, it’s generally good policy to give 
your player an escape hatch from mortal harm. Maybe those 
seven levels of aggravated damage knocked him into a coma 
and left him in a heap of bloody meat. He’ll need healing, of 
course, but he’s not dead YET. Death ought to be reserved for 
dramatic moments of heroism or disaster, not a chance fall of 
the dice. After all, heroes don’t often trip over a curb and die. 


That said, death should remain a real possibility in Mage, 
especially if that death comes about through spectacular acts of 
heroism, stupidity, or pride. The Akashic Brother who tries to 
school a werewolf deserves a bloodily ornate end; if that’s what 
the dice tell you, then let it happen. Paradox ought to remain 
a lethal threat, and tackling a HIT Mark should be something 
only a crazy or desperate mage would attempt. 


Thanks to advanced Life magick, it’s possible to bring 
dead characters back from the grave. That sort of thing tends 
to be vulgar, of course, especially if said character endured an 
especially public and unsurvivable demise, but it can be done. 
A character who’s been resurrected, though, winds up marked 
by the experience. The grim temperament of many shamans 
and Thanatoic mages attests to the legacy of their death and 
rebirth. However, other folks who’ve stared mortality in the face 
and returned to the living world enjoy a deeper appreciation for 
life’s miracles. Such people, having survived death, understand 
how precious it is to live. 


Resolution 


All things - good and otherwise - must come to an end. As 
a Storyteller, you'll need to guide your stories toward eventual 
resolution: the satisfying end of a tale well told. 


A strong resolution requires three elements: 


* A payoff, with drama that suits the intensity of the 
conflict; 


e A sense of finality, through which things are put to rest; 
and... 


* Emotional satisfaction, for a job well done. 


Withoutthese elements, the resolution becomes an anticlimax 
- all tease, no payoff. If Kelly resolves her woodland conflict with a 


Mage: The Ascension 20" Anniversary Edition 


sudden offstage strike from the Friends of Courage, her players will 
rightfully feel cheated. In any sort of story, interactive or otherwise, 
the audience must feel like they've completed an importantjourney 
- one in which the goal was worth the fight. Without that sense 
of accomplishment, even if that accomplishment is tragedy, the 
audience has been wasting its time. 


Dark Victory 


“Accomplishment” doesn’t always mean “success.” Even 
in a game, the heroes can lose while the players win. Romeo 
and Juliet is not exactly a successful game scenario, but it surely 
offers a satisfying - if tragic - climax. 

How can you, the Storyteller, turn a bloody reversal into 
a dark victory? It’s simple, really: make sure that your heroes 
achieve some greater end with their sacrifice. If George's hitman 
goes down in a hail of gunfire, make sure he takes that Infernal 
Manager down with him. If the heroes lose and the forest 
burns, make certain that some spirit takes root in the ruins 
and begins to redeem the ashes of that failure. Inky’s bouncer 
might wind up losing her job, but the connections she makes 
over the course of this adventure help her find a new vocation 
outside the club scene. The vital element in any resolution - 
tragic or otherwise - involves a sense of achievement. To feel 
satisfied, your players need to make a difference, even if their 
characters perish in the process. 


(Yes, it's possible to run games based around the theme 
of existential futility. A lot of people would not enjoy such a 
game, though.) 


For a Storyteller, the most satisfying resolution usually 
involves a bunch of happy players whose victories have been 
won through hard work, good luck, and some really killer 
roleplaying. To that end, then, give your players something 
to strive for, something to struggle against, and some tangible 
accomplishment at the end of the tale. Resolve the primary 
conflict, even if you leave loose ends for future stories. That 
way, each story you share with your players will have a clear 
and satisfying climax... one that will, with luck, leave the door 
open for future adventures. 


Coming Soon...? 


Okay, so the forest has been saved, the conspiracy stands 
revealed, and the shaky coalition of heroes shares an unlikely 
bond. Now what? 


In a continuing series of books or TV seasons, the main 
characters carry over into a newset of situations. The framework 
might shift but the core remains. In Buffy the Vampire Slayer, 
the characters faced a different Big Bad every season, moved 
from high school to college to adulthood, suffering losses (Oz), 
enjoying gains (Spike), and often doing both (Tara). The heroes 
changed - sometimes drastically - but retained their common 
ground. In game terms, a continuing chronicle works the same 
way. Your player characters evolve (see Character Progress, 
Chapter Six, pp. 335-339). Some leave, others enter, and all 
of them share the bond that keeps them strong. 


When setting the scene fora new adventure, drop occasional 
hints into the current story that show where things could be 
headed soon. Introduce minor characters who'll play major 
roles in the next story, or craft new adventures from passing 
moments in the chronicle. Build upon the things your heroes 
do; if Jinx, for example, makes friends with a vampire, feature 
that vampire's family in an upcoming story. Most importantly, 
let the chronicle find its own flow. Be open to unexpected change. 


Mage revolves around the theme of change, so your 
chronicle will probably change too. Street-kids might become 
executives while scientists pursue the arcane Arts. Your 
settings could range from the rain-swept Seattle streets to the 
backstage of the universe. As the Storyteller, you should suit 
those changes to the nature of your troupe; a cabal of Ecstatic 
shamans probably won't do well if the setting jumps to the 
world of industrial espionage. So long as those shifts fit in 
naturally with the evolution of your character group, however, 
your Mage chronicle can take many unexpected turns. 


The Deeper Level 


A rich story has deeper levels too: themes that reflect the 
story-teller's intentions, moods that grant emotional atmosphere, 
and a tone that conveys a particular attitude. We touched on 
theme and mood way back in the Introduction, but your own 
chronicle can range beyond the overall ideals of Mage and into 
territory that you create yourself. 


Theme 

What, beyond the simple chain of events, is your tale about? 
What ideas are you trying to convey? Things are rarely simple 
in the Awakened world, and so you'll want to have at least one 
theme - and possibly others, too - in each Mage story you tell. 


Looking back to the Prelude, you can see several themes 
evolving through that tale. Beyond the obvious ideas like Find 
strength in numbers and Put rivalries aside, there's the Contrast 
between the elemental and technological worlds, an impression that 
We all exist in several streams of time, a strong suggestion that 
Memory is unreliable, and that Trust is essential when Reality is at 
stake. Both John and Lee Ann realize that Wisdom is found in 
strange places, Reality demands compromise and Rules often need to 
be broken. Meanwhile, the climactic firestorm reminds them that 
There’s no napping when the dogs of war are loose, with the awful 
fate of Ryk reminding them (and us) that The scope of that war, 
and the cost of negligence, are bigger than the mages involved. That’s 
just one short story, but it’s loaded with ideas. 


Within your own chronicle, run with ideas that matter 
deeply to you. If you’re like Kelly, plant ecological concerns 
into your story; if you're hacked off at Congress, drop political 
bombs between the lines. Mage offers a broad (if often satirical) 
canvas for ideas, and its various elements let you work almost 
any theme into the plot. Although you should probably avoid 
building a soapbox too high - blatant hectoring gets old real 
fast - Mage makes an ideal vehicle for big ideas. 


How can you get those ideas across in your game? Here 
are a few suggestions: 


Symbolism 

Mages exist in a rich world of symbols. All things can be 
perceived with several layers of meaning. A cup, to a mage, is 
never just a vessel for drinking water: it’s also a reflection of 
nourishment and possibility; a symbol of feminine principles; 
a promise of vitality and refreshment; an extension of the 
Water element; and typically an emblem of class and culture, 
as shown by the differences between a simple wooden cup, an 


Sioryteller Resources 


The following books provide helpful advice for Storytellers who want to hone their narrative chops: 


The Art of Dramatic Writing, by Lajos Egri. 
The Art of Storytelling, by Nancy Mellon. 


Violence: A Writer’s Guide and Facing Violence, by Rory Miller. 


Bullies, Bastards & Bitches: How to Write the Bad Guys of Fiction, by Jessica Page Morrell. 


The Complete Kobold Guide to Game Design, by Wolfgang Baur and other contributors. 


Robin’s Laws of Good Game Mastering, by Robin Laws & Steve Jackson. 


Creating the Story: Guides for Writers, by Rebecca Rule & Susan Wheeler. 


On Writing: A Memoir of the Craft, by Stephen King. 


Interactive Storytelling: Techniques for 21 Century Fiction, by Andrew Glassner. 


The Mythic Imagination: The Quest for Meaning Through Personal Mythology, by Stephen Larsen. 


Supernatural Horror in Literature, by H.P. Lovecraft. 


On that note, the TV Tropes wiki (http:/ /tvtropes.org) provides an invaluable resource for story-tellers of all kinds. Be 
warned, though: once you bring it up, you might get lost in it forever! 


Chapter Seven: Telling the Story 363 


ati 


elegant wine glass, and a plastic Slurpee cup. Numbers, seasons, 
animals, flowers, raw materials, manufactured goods - everything 
can be invested with rich symbolic significance. Mages of all 
kinds look at their world through a symbolic perspective, and 
so you can say volumes by simply placing the right symbol in 
the right place. 


As a Mage Storyteller, you'll probably want to keep several 
encyclopedias of symbolism close at hand. That way, you've got 
plenty of material to work with, and you have answers if and 
when a player asks you what that cup on the table really means. 
You can also have lots of fun, and add in levels of apparent 
yet enigmatic meaning, if you simply place symbolic objects 
throughout your story and then never tell players what they mean. 
The universe doesn't explain itself clearly, after all, and mages 
must usually infer meanings from the things they see. Those 
meanings won't always be correct - even Freud admitted that 
a pipe sometimes is just a pipe. Still, the symbol-laden realm of 
Awakened existence inspires mages (and players) to seek, observe, 
question, and interpret deeper levels in everything they see. 


Contrasts 

We often notice things more clearly when they're thrown 
into contrast by something else. White shows up better 
against black than against gray. So, in your Mage chronicle, 
emphasize ideas by accentuating strong contrasts: plants against 
pavement, blood against snow, Ecstatics against Men in Black. 


364 Mage: The Ascension 20" Anniversary Edition 


By juxtaposing such contrasting elements, you'll invest them 
with richer meanings and more obvious significance. 


Although contrast reveals itself most vividly in objects (like 
Tupac Shakur's famous reference to "the rose that grew from 
concrete"), it also appears through contrasts of ideas. In the 
Prelude, a Technocrat quotes a mystic passage - a contrast that 
surprises his Ecstatic counterpart. Such contrasts deepen the 
mentaland emotionalspectrum ofa tale by revealing unexpected 
layers to an apparently simple element. With them, you show 
that not even prophets can possibly understand everything. 


In Kelly's chronicle, the contrast between primal woodlands 
and predatory machines brings out the nature of that conflict. 
A bulldozer shoving down ancient trees becomes an accurate, if 
unsubtle, reminder that technology will fuck shit up. If a tree then 
falls on that bulldozer, the same contrast can underscore an ironic 
(and probably amusing) counterpoint: and Nature will fuck your 
shit up too. In both cases, the symbolic contrast of bulldozer and 
trees makes a point larger than the events themselves. 


Irony 

Old hit songs aside, the term irony refers to something that 
means the opposite of what it appears to mean or thatruns counter 
to the expected results. A tree that falls on the bulldozer that 
has been pushing down trees is ironic. A haughty Hermetic who 

H [11 H + t . B H . 

misspells “Hermes” is ironic. Rain on your wedding day is not 
ironic - it's just bad luck. Irony is a potent tool in a Storyteller's 


kit when it's used properly. Before using it, however, make sure 
you're using it the right way. Otherwise, the one on the receiving 
end of irony's Kick Me sign is you... and that'd be pretty ironic. 


Significance 

Things that appear to be important get invested with 
significance. Whether or not they actually do have a deeper 
meaning, people are likely to perceive significance in those things 
because those things seem to be important. A crow sitting on 
your windowsill might simply be a curious bird. If he happens 
to appear on that windowsill just as someone says, “Oh, God, just 
give me a sign,” however, that bird becomes an avatar of divine 
significance, if only because the viewer thinks it is. 


As they do with symbols, mages look for significant 
connections everywhere. One of the many talents of the magi, 
after all, involved reading omens from apparently meaningless 
events. As a Storyteller, you can plant all kinds of apparently 
significant apparent symbols throughout your story. Some of 
them - like the dog who shits on a city councilman’s shoe - 
might be intentionally significant on your part. Others - like 
that crow outside the window - can be dropped into the story 
in order to make your players look for deeper layers. Because 
mages - and Mage players - tend to look for omens and symbols 
everywhere, your chronicle can seem rich and strange if you 
dress it up in significant contrasts and symbols. So long as 
you put intentionally symbolic weight behind some of those 
significant figures and events, your stories will acquire a mystic 
gravity that suggests even more than it actually means. 


Mood 


Where theme reflects ideas, mood reflects emotions. The 
first one thinks; the second one feels. For mages - who often 
spend way too much time in their heads - mood represents their 
intrinsic humanity. With cunning use of mood, you can shift 
a story’s spectrum from intellectual conceits to rawer passions, 
remindingyour players thateven a cyborg has some kind of heart. 


Despite the pervasive gloom of the wellnamed World of 
Darkness, Mage works best when you evokea variety of moods. The 
contrast between despair and hope explored in the Introduction 
and Chapter Three remains a signature of Mage: The Ascension, 
but your own chronicle can sweep from cheerful euphoria to 
incandescent rage, depending on what you wish to portray. 


Showing, Not Telling 

How do you portray moods within your stories? First of all, by 
showing, not telling. Use atmosphere to set the mood. Instead of telling 
your players, “Wow, it’s a really depressing day,” describe the gunmetal 
skies weeping a slow but penetrating haze of rain, the soggy trash 
decomposing in the gutter, the trickle of water running down the 
collars of their coats, the chill that seeps up through the soles of 
their shoes, and the heaviness of their limbs as they trudge through 
gray fog. Describe an atmosphere and then let your players decide 
how they react to it. From a story-telling perspective, that's far more 
effective than telling them how their characters feel. 


Description can be your biggest ally when you're trying to set a 
mood. Symbolism, as described above, can be a potent tool as well, 
although mages (and Mage players) tend to over-intellectualize about 
symbols, which can diffuse the emotional impactsuch omens might 
bring. Lush descriptions, however, about the physical landscape and 
emotionalinnerworld can be marvelously evocative. Especially given 
theirinhuman perceptions (also described above), the Awakened feel 
their surroundings more acutely than most people do. Use that to 
your advantage, then. Let your players experience the story as their 
characters move through it... and let thatstory move them in return. 
For details and suggestions, see the Atmosphere and Description 
section, earlier in this chapter, (pp. 357-358). 


Enigma 

Whatever that emotional landscape might be, remember 
that a sense of mystery is essential to Mage. Your descriptions, 
whenever possible, ought to suggest stuff that your heroes never 
clearly see. Drop hints about “odd images you can’t quite decipher” 
and "a sense that you’re being watched.” Use unexplainable omens 
and undefined symbols. Whenever you’re setting an obvious 
mood, add an undercurrent that contrasts with it: a faint sound 
of weeping underneath a comedic scene, a ludicrous detail 
in an otherwise harrowing crisis. Give a Nephandic badass 
a fondness for lollipops. Have a devil speak in rhymes, give a 
lascivious voice to a machine and then don’t explain why things 
are the way they are. By implying questions that have no answers, 
you'll instill that essential atmosphere of mystery. 


Whether you're running a game of high-rolling hijinks 
or deadly serious intrigues, the mood you set will influence 
the way your players experience that game. Given the diverse 
emotional textures within Mage, you've got a lot of material 
to work with. Beneath those emotional layers, however, there 
ought to be an enigmatic atmosphere that suggests cosmic 
implications behind ordinary events. In a mage's world, nothing 
is quite what it appears to be. 


Tone 


Avariation on mood, tone reflects the overall approach you 
take. One Storyteller might prefer an intensely serious tone, 
whereas another favors a satirical tone and a third employs a 
bitterly defiant one. The differences between Mage editions 
could beseen asa shift in tone, from the extravagant philosophies 
of Mage 1* Edition to the passionate complexities of Mage 2™ 
and the gritty defiance of Mage Revised. Tone comes across in 
thewords you choose, the images you highlight, the descriptions 
you invoke, the characters you create, and the things you have 
them do. From a Storyteller perspective, it's always a good idea 
to be aware of the tone you employ, if only so you can play it 
to your advantage. 


Generally, tone comes across in the obvious things you 
do. The serious Storyteller above might present everything 
with straightforward earnestness, whereas the satirical one 
portrays exaggerated characters and events with large helpings 


Chapter Seven: Telling the Story — 365 


IASA 


£i 


of sarcasm and absurdity. Mr. Bitterly Defiant rages against 
all machines with his Fuck the Man! approach, and all three of 
them incorporate elements of this book. Given Mage's diverse 
possibilities, there's no single right way to run it, and although 
broad silliness often seems like the wrong tone for Mage overall, 
certain settings or story arcs might favor that as well, if only 


as a change of pace. Ultimately, tone is both a tool you can 
manipulate and a reflection of who you are at heart. Certain 
tools - description, theme, contrast, mood - can affect your 
tone, but those tools, and the way you use them, express the 
tone that feels most true to you. 


Elements of Mage 


Mage features some pretty challenging concepts. 
And as the Storyteller, you’re kind of in the 
hot seat with regards to those concepts. How 
does someone run a Seeking, Resonance, or a 
Paradox backlash, anyway? The simple answer 
here is: as deeply as you want, or as superficially 
as you can manage. No one’s gonna come down 
from on high and smack you for not running 
Mage correctly. As the Storyteller, you have the 
ability to dodge certain elements while delving 
into others. If something seems too complex to deal with, then 
just skip it and run the game you want to run. 


That said, Mage is more than D&D with leather trench 
coats. A game in which folks run around blowing up gas mains 
with impunity isn’t really Mage. The esoteric elements and 
themes give Mage its compelling atmosphere, so it’s worth 
exploring them whenever possible. To that end, this section 
gives you tips and suggestions for handling things that go 
beyond game systems and into the realm of sheer imagination. 


The Path 


One of Mage’s defining features concerns the Path: that 
journey from Awakening to Ascension. Detailed in Chapter 
One, this journey is far more than an acquisition of power; 
in fact, the pursuit of power may be its biggest trap. This 
transformation of each character from a sleepy initiate to an 
Enlightened Master may be unique to Mage, and it’s worth 
playing up that element when you run your chronicle. 


How do you do that, exactly? From a Storyteller’s perspective, 
how does one play up the gradual process of enlightenment and 
the various ways it might crash and burn? By emphasizing the 
various aspects of each mage’s Path, by making them unique 
to each character, and by using the tools described earlier in 
this chapter to give your chronicle an epic feel that transcends 
raw violence and naked power. 


Collaborative Questions 

That’s not a one-person job. To follow that Path, you 
must tap into the creativity of your players as well. After all, 
someone else could not tell you how your mage sees the world, 
her Avatar, and everything else besides. Only you, as a player, 
could describe those things to someone else. And so, in your 
role as Storyteller, encourage your players to take the creative 


366 Mage: The Ascension 20" Anniversary Edition 


reins in hand. After each gaming session, ask questions and 
invite creativity from your players. Look at the various Character 
Questions in Chapter Six (pp. 262-265), and then come up 
with your own variations on those questions - ones that suit 
your chronicle and the characters within it. Maybe ones like: 


* Where do you see your Path headed these days? 
* How are your beliefs and ideas about magick changing? 


* What old preconceptions do you still hold on to, and 
which ones do you see changing into something else? 


* How does your Avatar appear and relate to you these days? 


e What challenges do you think you've faced, and which 
ones do you see rising up in the near future? 


Taking notes from the player responses, incorporate those 
answers into the brainstorming for your next few episodes. You 
don'tneed to integrate all ofthatinformation atonce, naturally. 
Once you've got it, though, you'll have a rough blueprint for 
the evolution of your chronicle as a whole. By asking such 
questions, and employing the answers, you bring your players 
into the evolution of the story. And in return, your players help 
to guide the chronicle toward greater results than the ones you 
might come up with on your own. 


The Avatar: Portraying the Inner Self 

Every mage has an individual relationship with the inner 
Avatar. It's “your own personal Jesus,” or Buddha, or Lucifer, 
or Past/ Future Self, or whatever other guise it might wear. 
Every player, too, will have ideas about that Avatar. As the 
Storyteller, let your players create their Avatar of choice, and 
then run with those ideas... hopefully in directions your players 
might not expect. 


As Chapters One and Six suggest, the Avatar gives you a 
massive creative canvas and many colors to paint with. Each 
Avatar is a character in its own right, and the details depend 
upon the things that you and the player in question want to do 
with an Avatar. That Avatar’s Essence influences the personality 
of a given Avatar, and the mage's beliefs and faction play a 
huge part in the spirit's appearance, behavior, and interactions 
with the mage. An It X cyborg's Pattern Avatar might take the 
form of hovering geometric hallucinations, and a Wu Lung's 


Primordial Avatar looks and acts like a revered ancestor. That 
appearance and personality might shift as the mage's Arete 
grows... but then, it might simply remain the same as that 
mage overcomes his early preconceptions. Ultimately, there 
are no hard and fast rules for an Avatar. You'll probably want 
to make notes about that guiding spirit, but this is one of the 
places where imagination trumps game systems. 


Who plays the Avatar? Generally, I'd suggest that you do, 
possibly with input from the player in question. Camille, for 
instance, might see Jinx's Avatar as the seductive fallen angel 
Talon. (See Chapter Six, p. 260). Talon’s kind of a shit, egging 
Jinx toward crazy feats of bravado and risk. Whenever Talon 
appears, Camille's Storyteller takes on that role. Camille gave 
Talon her essential form and personality, but the Storyteller 
could have his own ideas about where things go from there... 


The Mystic Asshole 
Here's a really important point that often gets lost, even in 
certain Mage sourcebooks: Avatars can be real dicks. 


They're NOT all nice. They're NOT all pure. They do not 
always have a mage's best interests at heart, and one could, in fact, 
be pushing its mage toward disaster. The Nephandi are pursuing 
a valid (if awful) cosmic destiny, and the Mad follow inspirations 
thatare every bitasvalid as those ofthe kindest Celestial Chorister. 
The forces of madness, stasis, and corruption are parts of Mage's 
universe, justlike the forces of goodness, progress, and imagination. 
Although you can, of course, treat the Avatar as a cosmic chaperone, 
that's not Mage's default assumption. 


Even if an Avatar is "good" in its inclinations, it can still 
display an awesome cruelty. The Old Gods are not pleasant 
entities, and the God of the Book revels in slaughter and 
plague. Angels traditionally kill people if their god wills it so, 
and animal Avatars often reveal the implacable indifference 
of Nature personified. In an Avatar's role, you can be harsh, 
obnoxious, or downright horrific. An Avatar can be a cosmic 
asshole if that seems appropriate. Don't make the mistake of 
assuming they're all sweet. 


Like other characters, Avatars have goals, tactics, and perhaps 
even beliefs. For suggestions you can use when playing an Avatar, 
see the section about Charactersearlier in this chapter, especially 
the portions about Motivations and Tactics, Inhuman Entities, 
and Relationships. For two truly detailed treatments of the 


Avatar and its role in a Seeking, see the Mage: The Ascension 
supplements The Book of Mirrors (pps. 53-61) and the Mage 
Storyteller's Handbook (pps. 99-127). 


Seekings: Journeys of Insight 

The internal journeys known as Seekings also depend upon 
the mage's beliefs, allegiance, and personal Avatar. You can get 
alotof ideas about them from the various groups described in 
Chapter Five, the various paradigms and practices detailed in 
Chapter Ten, and the culture of the mage himself. After all, 
it's a good bet that a Cheyenne Dreamspeaker who practices 
medicine-craftwould experience Seekings as horseback rides and 
hunts across a limitless Great Plains, possibly in the company 
of an Avatar who takes the form of Raven, Wind Horse, or 


White Buffalo Woman. 


That said, each Seeking depends upon the individual 
mage. If that same Cheyenne mage is a Virtual Adept who 
performs reality-hacking, then his Seeking is more likely to 
be a run through an impossible digital maze in the company 
of an anarchistic computer Sim. Hell, he might even dream- 
journey into his old high school with the boy he had a secret 
crush on, who now - as the Avatar - forces him to deal with 
his unresolved gender issues. The details of a Seeking come, 
ultimately, from the heart and soul of the mage who has it. 


Rules of Seeking 

For the most part, a Seeking plays out without rules. 
It’s a contest of imagination, not dice. At certain points, you 
might demand a Willpower roll when the character needs to 
stand firm or make a hard choice. Beyond that, however, you 
should avoid chart-checking. There's no Paradox in Seekings, 
and magick works (or doesn’t work) by default. The ultimate 
results, get determined by the decisions your player makes, not 
by his dice pools or luck. 


Managing a Seeking 

Seekings are deliberate events. The player and his mage 
decide that they want to advance along the Path (that is, buy 
another dot in Arete), and so you plot out the details of that 
Seeking and then run a one-person mini-episode. Each mage 
goes Seeking alone, and the other players sit out - perhaps 
taking on supporting roles if you want them to do so - until 
the Seeking ends. 


Avatars, Rules, and Reality 


When you get past all the mystic doublespeak, Avatars are personifications of capital-R Reality. As such, they're immune 
to Paradox even when they manifest in forms that other people can see. Most often, however, they don't violate the 
Consensus in public ways. A given Avatar might look like a flying, irradiated, silver brain when the mage sees it in her 


mind's eye. If that same Avatar appears to other people, though, it'll probably look like a man with silver hair andan 
unusually large head — walking, not flying, down the street. An Avatar can fuck with a mage's sense of reality, sure, but 
it’s not likely to fuck with Reality at large because it is a little piece of Reality at large. That, at least, is an arbitrary rules 
decision. If you want Avatars to manifest uncanny forms in public, then feel free to run with your own creative impulse. 
Your chronicle, your rules. 


Chapter Seven: Telling the Story — 367 


Tadi 
S diim: 
wee 


WA 


(For obvious reasons, a Seeking makes for an excellent = * Each chamber and test is more difficult than the last, 
"solo episode" between regular game sessions. Thanks to the and theSeeker must pass through the previous chambers 
Internet, you can now play outSeekings in chat, Instant Message, (and face the previous tests) again before he can reach 
Skype, text, or some other virtual format.) the next one. And yes, he can fail a test that he has 


passed before! 
Consistent Elements of a Seeking 


Certain Seeking features are universal. As The Book of | * TheAvatar serves as both a cheerleader and a taskmaster. 
Mirrors points out, all Seekings follow a predictable pattern: The exact amount of cheering or hostility will depend 
: : - upon the mage, the Avatar, and the relationship between 

The mage enters a dream world in which things have dem Ge Tire M sm Assholes doe 


symbolic forms. 
* Failure dumps the mage back into the waking world, 


* Thatmageencounters fearsome hazards, traps, dilemmas, often in physical and existential pain. No Arete for him 


and obstacles based upon that mage’s real-world issues. E 
this time! 


* Each major obstacle reflects a chamber through which 


ME * Success triggers an Epiphany: a sudden rush of bliss and 
that mage must pass before he can move forward in his 


understanding. The mage awakens with another dot in 
his Arete Trait and a deepened appreciation of his place 
within Creation. 


quest for more enlightenment. 


* Each chamber features a test. Until he can successfully 
meet that challenge, he'll keep returning to that chamber Remember that these tests are supposed to be frightening 
and that test. and hard to pass. Creation is not handing out Enlightenment 

merit badges, and the keys to Reality are not obtained without 

a struggle. Low-Arete Seekings will be relatively easy, but the 

higher-level ones (Arete 5 and higher) are harrowing things. A 

mage will fail such Seekings many times before he succeeds. 


* Specific elements of each chamber and test change from 
visit to visit, but they ll all deal with a related obstacle that 
the mage faces in his external life (fear, grief, egotism, 
selfrighteousness, hesitation, greed, power lust, and so 


forth). 


There are reasons that Mastery can take lifetimes to achieve. 
If it was easy, then everyone could do magick! 


368 — Mage: The Ascension 20" Anniversary Edition 


ne. 


—— —-—— oe OO Le — ual EE A. cm 


Are Seekings difficult because mages believe that they'll 
be difficul? Good question. For whatever reason, a mage is 
his own worst enemy in a Seeking. If you play up that aspect 
of the quest, your chronicle will be thematically richer for 
having done so. 


Six Steps to a More Enlightened You 


Whatever the specifics ofa Seeking might be, you can plan 
out a Seeking using the following six steps: 


* [nitiation: Enteringa trance (often through meditation 
or dreaming), the mage passes into the landscape where 
he'll be tested. For all practical purposes, the landscape 
is internal, although metaphysicians could argue that it 
exists out there in the Maya too. 


* Impediment: That mage encounters the traps, chambers, 
and challenges described above. Although one major 
impediment blocks him at each chamber, smaller traps 
and puzzles might delay him between chambers. 


* Trials: Here'swhere he needs to face his demons, typically 
without the use of magick. In game terms, these trials 
come through in roleplaying and narration, not as dice- 
rolling contests - see Rules of Seekings, above. 


* Choice: Atleastonce for each chamber, the mage must 
make a hard choice between deeply desirable (or deeply 
undesirable) options. You know which choice is correct; 
your player, obviously, does not. The outcome of that 
choice is always an either/ or situation, which leads 
him to... 


* Acceptance or Denial: Denial means that the mage isn't 
ready just yet. Having made the wrong choice, he falls 
back into his material body - usually suffering from 
headaches, depression, other ailments, and possibly a 
loss of Willpower. (At the higher levels, a failed Seeking 
always costs one or two points of temporary Willpower.) 
A really bad failure during a high-level Seeking may 
even drop the mage into Quiet (see Chapter Ten, pp. 
554-561), or reveal one of those Things Man Was Not 
Meant to Know (Chapter Nine, p. 407). 


Acceptance reflects the right choice. Flooded with bliss 
and wisdom, he awakens back in his body with a renewed 
sense of confidence (one temporary point of Willpower 
or the restoration of all Willpower he had lost before 
that point) and the new dot of Arete. 


* Closure or Failure: As mentioned in the previous step, 
success or failure during a Seeking has long-term effects. 
After the mage returns from his journey, the things he 
has faced and endured haunt him... possibly as lingering 
doubts or as a shining sense of triumph over incredible, 
selfimposed odds. 


The Seeking’s Goal 


A Seeking's features and goals always depend upon the 
mage's Path. An Akashic mage will strive to disassociate 
himself from mortal delusions, a Bata'a mage will Seek for 
greater unity with the Loa, and a Nephandus will embrace 
deeper levels of corruption and deceit. Seekings are not about 
being "good" or "virtuous" by conventional morality standards. If a 
given mage pursues a Path of selfishness and greed, then the 
obstacles she faces would involve compassion and doubt, not 
selfishness or greed. 


The vast differences between a Seeking's goals and mages' 
diverse ideas of what Ascension should be provide fuel for 
the many disagreements mages face. No matter how much 
a given belief might insist otherwise, Mage assumes that all 
answers have some validity. The Tellurian is composed of all 
things, from diamonds to shit. Although it could be said that 
ultimate wisdom involves piercing the veil of illusions around 
material existence, a Seeking brings each mage closer to personal 
transcendence, not a single moral state. 


Arete: Expanding Awareness 

Asamage’s Arete Trait rises, that person’s view of the world 
expands. Early on, the mage is beginning to get clues to the 
deeper levels of the universe; further along the Path, ze starts 
to see zir place in that bigger picture. Assuming that the mage 
continues to grow in excellence, zir perceptions will continue 
growing as well. That mage will see patterns where most folks 
see empty space and strengthen zir grasp upon answers in 
situations in which the average person doesn’t even realize ze 
could ask a question. In game terms, that person is learning 
how to rework reality. So how, as a Storyteller, can you reveal 
that sense of recognition in story terms? 


First off, go back to the sections in this chapter that deal 
with Atmosphere and Description and The Deeper Level. As 
your chronicle goes on, incorporate more vivid descriptions 
and more significant symbols. Instead of explaining what 
those symbols mean or giving obvious descriptions, make your 
descriptions more poetic and mysterious and then let your players 
figure out what those symbols and descriptions mean. That way, you 
reflect the ways in which a mage sees things more deeply and 
recognizes the symbols all around zir. At the same time, you 
also subtly invite your players to look deeper too - to use their 
imaginations and find significance throughout the chronicle. 
This way, all parties contribute to the enigmatic atmosphere 
of your chronicle. You don't have to do everything yourself, 
your players add their own creativity to the mix, and Mage 
grows richer and more mysterious as its characters expand their 
awareness of its world. 


Ascension: Can There be Only One? 

Okay, you might ask, how can a character Ascend? When 
Ascension is literally the name of the game, what can you do 
in order to bring that concept into your chronicle? 


Chapter Seven: Telling the Story — 369 


EE | 


l 
l 
1 


Words, like gender, are dynamic, notstatic. As mentioned elsewhere inthis book, ze and zir are gender-neutral pronoun 
alternatesto they/ their. Generally used in socially progressive circles, these pronounsrespect an all-encompassing view of 
gender, as opposed to the gender polarities of his and her. Because they're still new terms, these pronouns seem unusual. 
Some folks consider them to be punchlines, and others insist upon using them. In a game dedicated to inclusiveness and 
change, it's cool to see how language and the concepts behind it are changing too. So despite the contested nature of 
these pronouns, we choose to use them to show how language, like reality, can change in small yet significant ways. 


As The Book of Mirrors points out (pps. 60-61), Ascension 
is not hitting Arete 10 or maxing out all your Spheres. It's not 
about power but about the transcendence of the need for power. 
Mere power, in Mage, is a trap. The more a mage pursues it, the 
further she gets from ultimate Ascension. Even if her Path is all 
about power (see the Might is Right paradigm in Chapter Ten), 
that person must still grow beyond the need to acquire power. 
And if that sounds paradoxical, you’re right. There are reasons 
that Ascension is easy to talk about but difficult to achieve. 


Personal Ascension 

Individual Ascension depends upon the beliefs and Path of 
each character. For one mage, it could mean sacrificing himself 
for the greater good, whereas another mage wants to transcend 
mortal illusions and become one with the energy of the All. 
At the climax of Darren Aronofsky’s brilliant, if puzzling, film 
The Fountain, the apparently immortal protagonist achieves 
Ascension through orgasmic cosmic unity... an Ascension his 
wife reaches far earlier than he does. Jacob’s Ladder provides a 
quieter form of Ascension when its hero accepts things he has 
hidden from himself. It could even be said that the heroine of 
the French horror movie Martyrs (which is exceedingly strong 
stuff, and not a film recommended for most viewers!) reaches 
Ascension through atrocity, although it's an extremely bleak 
form of transcendence. Jesus achieves it. Buddha achieves 
it. Many who seek it, though, do not... and those who do 
reach Ascension do not return, except perhaps as ephemeral 
manifestations of inspirational guidance. A person who Ascends 
does not become a super-mage. At best, she manifests as soft 
voices or a vision in the trees, holding out a vision of something 
beyond the scope of human consciousness. From a Storyteller's 
perspective, then, Ascension is the end of a character's Path, 
winding into places no mortal can truly understand. 


Just Below Transcendence 

One step below full Ascension waits the realm of the 
bodhisattvas: those people who reach the brink of Ascension 
but then step back and stick around to help other people 
reach that destination too. Although such people often display 
incredible gifts (and may, in certain cases, be incredibly powerful 
if their Path demands raw power), this stage is not Archmagery. 
Archmages pursue power and knowledge but typically fail to 
transcend that quest... indeed, they usually trap themselves that 
way. A bodhisattva, on the other hand, typically epitomizes the 
ideals of his Path, often beneath a perfectly normal exterior. 


370 . Mage: The Ascension 20" Anniversary Edition 


In game terms, a bodhisattva-type character appears to bea 
typical mage of his or her sect, albeit one who radiates an aura 
of sublime accomplishmentalong that Path. An Etherite would 
be formidably competent, and an Ecstatic would shimmer with 
incandescent sensuality. Technocrats and Disparate mages can 
reach this level too, though they rarely use this name for that 
achievement. (Actually, a bodhisattva almost never claims that 
title. Anyone who calls herself a bodhisattva isn’t one.) And 
yeah, the Fallen and the Mad can be bodhisattvas too - and 
such mages are among the most fearsome entities alive. 


As a Tibetan Buddhist could point out, bodhisattvas are 
not necessarily serene, peaceful sages. There are bodhisattvas 
of war, pain, lust, and plague. Whatever her Path might be, the 
bodhisattva epitomizes its ideals. Essentially, that person has 
reached the peak of Ascension, but she decided to hover there 
inastate of near-perfection, sharing wisdom and enlightenment 
with people who seem worthy of her attention. Game-wise, 
that character has had a chance at personal Ascension but 
refused to embrace it until she’s had a chance to lead others 
down her Path as well. This character isn’t necessarily more 
powerful than she was before; a fundamental element of her 
personality, though, has changed. She lives and breathes her 
Path and represents it as she moves throughout her world. 


Global Ascension 

As for the idea that one faction will bring all the world to 
a state of global Ascension, it's generally considered more of an 
ideal than a reality. People, creeds, and nations have sought such 
goals throughout human history, and yet we're as far from that 
state now as ever. We're evolving, no question... but into what, 
exactly? Despite suburban folklore about Indigo Children and 
Ascended Masters leading humanity into a glorious New Age, 30 
seconds spent online shows thatwe're pretty far from such ideals. Is 
Ascension, then, impossible? That, dear Storyteller, is your decision. 


The sourcebook Ascension provides a number of potential 
scenarios in which some climactic endgame resolves the fallen 
state of mankind. Obviously, that book’s not canon in Mage 20 
(if it were, there'd be no Mage 20!), but you could draw some 
ideas from it if and when you want to bring global Ascension into 
play. Even better, create your own idea of what global Ascension 
means, and then guide your chronicle toward that goal. On a less 
Apocalyptic level, your players could shift the balance of belief and 
acceptance among the Sleepers, changing the state of their world 
even if they’re not capping off the End of History in the process. 


Ultimately, Mage is not about accomplishing Ascension but 
about pursuing it. That's why one assertion of the Mage Revised 
years - that Ascension has been lost - is incorrect. Mage is 
about transcendence, not survival or triumph in some cosmic 
win/ lose game. As long as humanity exists in its current flawed 
state, Ascension remains possible. It might notlook the way you 
expect it to look... hell, it's often just the opposite. But for any 
mage of any faction, some level of transcendence can be found. 


Running With Magick 


Ah, magick - the core of Mage. Most RPGs feature lists of 
prescribed magical spells with damage, duration, and so forth 
regulated by levels or power points. That’s not how magic (no k) 
actually works, however, in the real-life applications of the Arts. 
Both the real-life mystic practices involved with magic and the 
literary form of fictional magic show magic as an extension of the 
person who uses it. There are spells, true, but they're guided by 
intention; certain times, objects, places, and practices support 
magical phenomena, but unless they operate under their own 
power - like the Nodes and Talismans described throughout 
this book - the person using them must know what he's doing 
in order to employ their powers. And so, although Mage is 
not some occult teaching tool, its approach to magic(k) as an 
extension of the magick-user is true to both life and fiction. 


And, like "real" magick, that can be challenging to deal 
with at times. 


One of the reasons we invoke the “pretentious ‘k’” at the 
end of the term magick is because we want to drive home the 
difference between static tricks and dynamic extensions of the 
mage. As Chapters Two, Six, and Ten make clear, a mage's Arts 
and Sciences come from that mage's expertise and excellence. 
More than goal-oriented combat maneuvers, Mage's magickal 
workings both project and reflect the person who employs them. 
From aStoryteller’s standpoint, that often means that you decide 
the potential and results of a player’s magickal activities based 
upon the situation, not upon a set of clearly defined specifics. 
And that can bea pain in the ass, because those situations change 
not only from chronicle to chronicle but also from player and 
session to player and session. So what, then, do you do in order 
to run magick without tearing out your own hair? 


The Simple Method 

You could, if you want, simply run magick off of the 
Common Magickal Effects chartin Chapter Ten, (pp. 508-510). 
On that chart, you look up what the mage wants to accomplish, 
check the necessary Spheres, and then have the player roll his 
Arete Trait to see how much effect that spell has when cast. 
This method’s probably the best one to use if you’re not an 
experienced Storyteller, and although it limits flexibility, this 
simple method makes it easy to run Mage’s Sphere-based magick. 


The Character Method 


The standard method for running Mage magick involves 
askinga player, “What’s your character doing, and how is she doing it?” 


If she responds with something like, “I’m using Forces 3/ 
Prime 2 to inflict aggravated damage,” ask her, “But what is YOUR 
CHARACTER doing in order to make that happen?” This way, you 
invite the player to think in terms of the mage and her practices 
rather than in terms of the game systems involved. 


Once you've figured out how the character is weaving 
belief, Will, and knowledge into a magickal Effect, then check 
Chapter Ten for the rules involved. This way, you put story 
first and let it guide the rules and their results. Check out the 
nearby Example of Play to see how this sort of thing plays 
out in action, and although you shouldn't let players succeed 
too easily too often, reward good roleplaying and imaginative 
descriptions with success whenever itseems reasonable to do so. 


What? A Coincidence? 


The answer to that question will also help you decide one of 
the thornier aspects of Mage’s flexible magick system: whether 
or not a given Effect is coincidental or vulgar. As Chapter Ten 
explains, magick is easier and safer to perform when its effects 
(and Effects) fit into what people accept as possibility. Showy, 
obvious magick is vulgar, smacked down by the High Court 
of Reality Itself. Where, then, are the boundaries between 
coincidence and vulgar magick? 


Chapter Ten deals with that subject in great detail (as 
shown below), so it's not important right now. The vital thing, 
from a Storyteller's perspective, is that you make a decision and 
stick with it. The Questioning Coincidence sidebar will help 
in that regard. If most of the answers to those questions are 
Yes, then the spell probably fits the definition of coincidental 
magick. If not, then it's most likely vulgar. 


Enforcing Your Decision 

Ultimately, that decision belongs to you, the Storyteller. 
In Chapter Ten, you can find a section that explores the 
boundaries of potential. Check out Coincidental Magick 
vs. Vulgar Magick, (pp. 530-534), particularly the Axis of 
Coincidence section. Most of the questions and debates 
about that subject are addressed right there. Meanwhile, 
the Reality Zones section, (pp. 611-617), deals with the kind 
of wiggle room your players might find in different places 
around the world. 


In the end, however, you are the goddamned Storyteller. If you 
say, “No, that's vulgar,” then it's vulgar, period. End of discussion. 
A certain amount of debate is essential within creative 
collaboration. If, however, you're having endless arguments 
about some technomancer's ability to teleport fireballs from 
out of the Sun "because it's in my paradigm," then feel free to 
lay down the law as you see fit. 


Enforcing Focus 

Ultimately, in Mage, magick does flow from the mage. The 
ways in which a mage makes things happen, however, depend upon 
his focus: that combination of belief, practice, and instruments 
thatwe've talked aboutso much in other chapters. We emphasize 


Chapter Seven: Telling the Story 


~~ eo 


TN AE 


"rtr. 


Questioning Coincidence 


For those times when you’re not sure whether a given spell — in game terms, an Effect — is coincidental or vulgar, ask 
yourself the following questions: 


Obviousness: Is the mage's spell essentially invisible, or can people sense it without using some sort of specialized 
perceptions? 


Paradigm: Is the mage using a type of magick that's appropriate for that mage and focus? For example, a martial 
artist catching arrows or healing herself through intense discipline fits that mage and focus; the same mage using a 
laptop to infect a person with rabies would not fit her at all. 


Possibility: Do the spell, focus, and results fit into the local reality zone? That is, would normal people in that place 
expect this sort of thing to be possible? A cyborg firing rockets from his arm in New York City might seem possible, but 
a shaman turning into a wolf would not. In the primal wilderness of Romania, however, the reverse could be true. 


Practice: Is the mage using his usual practice in the usual way (a martial artist using kung fu, a cyborg using rockets), 
ds opposed to making shit up on the fly (either mage using mind power to make trees fall down)? 


Resources: |s the mage working with things that are already present (summoning a taxi that’s just down the street), 
as opposed to conjuring up things that had not existed there before (making a cab and driver out of thin air]? 


Upheaval: Does the spell take the subtle form of least resistance, like a falling cinderblock, as opposed to causing 
massive changes of state and form (turning someone into soap bubbles), and/ or violating obvious physical laws 
(disintegrating a house)? 


Drama: Does the spell make dramatic sense within your story (an angry martial artist kicking a tree down), as opposed 
to.seeming absurd (that same martial artist kicking the moon out of orbit)? 


You don’t need to answer every question each time somebody casts a spell. In most cases, the answers will be obvious. 
If you need a tie-breaker, though, err on the side of drama. Mage is, after all, a storytelling game about magick. 


Whenever possible, let it be magical. 


this point throughout this book because it’s so easily forgotten: 
the mage does what he does because he believes he can do it when he 
puts those beliefs into practice. As a Storyteller, then, enforce that 
point by enforcing each character’s focus; by doing so, you favor 
story over rules and also keep those rules from being easily abused. 


In previous editions of Mage, the term focus applied to 
the tools that a mage used when casting Effects. As he gained 
Arete, a mage could abandon his foci and work magick through 
Arete alone. In Mage 20, however, focus refers to the entire act 
of focusing Arete through belief, activity, and tools. The mage 
can grow beyond the need for tools, but he still needs to believe 
in what he’s doing in order to make things happen. 


That’s a really important distinction, because focus gives 
both the players and the Storyteller something to hold on to 
when using the flexible rules of Mage’s magick system. The 
player can say, “I can do such-and-such because my character believes 
he can do it,” and the Storyteller gets to say, "You can’t do such- 
and-such because it doesn’t fit your character’s focus.” This, in turn, 
gives a player permission to be creative while also giving the 
Storyteller the ability to say, “No, you can’t just make up stuff that 
doesn’t fit your character.” Jinx can use her bond with the city 
and her goddess in order to make weird things happen; she 
can’t simply do whatever the player wants her to do once she 
has enough dice to have a decent chance at succeeding. Again, 
the story and the character drive the rules. 


372 Mage: The Ascension 20^ Anniversary Edition 


Jacob's Focus 

In the movie Ink - which, incidentally, is a film every 
Mage player should see - the Pathfinder Jacob manipulates 
a series of events in order to stage a car accident. He doesn't 
simply say, “Hey, I’m a mage, so I Will that car to crash.” Instead, 
he literally orchestrates people and elements to collide in a 
way that fits his focus. 


Jacob, as Ink reveals, is a story-teller, so his focus plays out 
a drama of coincidences, set to a chant of “One-two-three-four, 
Onetwo-threefour...” In game terms, Jacob employs Entropy 2 
and Forces 2 to move things without touching them, possibly 
augmented with Time 2 so that they all fall together in a 
coordinated pattern in time to cause the car crash. It's asublime 
moment of movie magic that also perfectly suits the style of 
freeform magick of Mage: The Ascension. If you want to see 
what enforcing a focus looks like, this scene (also available, 
as of this writing, on YouTube) presents a perfect example of 
belief, practice, and instruments in motion. 


Within this book, Chapter Two reveals the importance 
of belief, Chapter Six ties focus into character creation (see 
p. 256), and Chapter Ten presents an extensive collection of 
paradigms, practices, and instruments in the section called 
Focus and the Arts. As the Storyteller, make sure that your 
players keep these things in mind as their characters cast Effects. 
Doing so will eliminate a lot of the ambiguity and rules-abuse 
so often associated with Mage. 


Chapter Six also includes an extra carrot to go with this 
particular stick: bonus experience points that can be given to 
players who really explore the roleplaying possibilities of their 
characters' focus. This way, you may reward collaborators who 
go the extra distance and bring the details of their characters 
into the game. (See Experience Points pp. 335-336.) 


Example of Play: Jinxing the Cops 

"So Camille — what is Jinx doing to make sure that the cops 
don't find her?" 

“Well, Pm using Entropy 2 in order to...” 

“No, what is JINX doing?” 

“Oops, sorry. Jinx takes out her knife and concentrates on a sort 
of chaos-maze design. Whispering a prayer to Risk, she scratches that 
design into the brick, being really quiet so that the cops don’t hear her.” 


“Good. Make a Dexterity + Stealth roll, difficulty 7, just to 
make sure yow're not heard.” 


“Okay. Three successes.” 
“Cool. So now, what are you doing in game terms?” 


“Entropy 2 to scramble the odds of being noticed in MY favor, not 
theirs. That's subtle and invisible — no one could reasonably connect a kid 
carving graffiti into the wall to the cops who are passing her by.” 


“So, coincidental, then. Okay, good call. Let’s see... Sphere Rank 
2, plus 3 for being coincidental, so difficulty 5. Roll your Arete.” 


“One success.” 


“And you made your Stealth roll, too. It doesn’t seem like they 
notice you. Jinx feels a rush of breeze past her skin, as if the Goddess 
Risk approves of what you’re doing. Out of the corner of your eye, you 
see Talon tipping her hat to you. The cops pass by, their voices fading 
in the night. Well done. NOW what do you do...?” 


Paradox: 
The Hammer of Reality 


Every once in a while, you still need to bring the hammer 
down. And although Chapter Ten’s sections about Paradox 
(pp. 547-553) and Quiet (pp. 555-561) deal with that subject, 
it’s worth some brief attention in this chapter too. 


Paradox is not a monster that you sic on your players. 
Although Paradox Spirits can be monsters, the forces of Paradox 
represent the forces of Reality. Mages push against Reality, and 
sometimes Reality pushes back. If you make that pushback suit 
the push that inspired it, then your Paradox backlashes will 
seem fair instead of arbitrary. 


Going With Reality’s Flow 


In general, Paradox takes the path of least resistance. A seer 
who employs Time magick to look into the future is more likely 
to be struck blind (a Paradox Flaw) than be hit by a sudden storm 
of exploding energy (a physical backlash) or visited by Wrinkle 
(a Paradox Spirit), if only because that Flaw disrupts Reality less 
than an explosion or a weird old man who turns back time. 


373 


Chapter Seven: Telling the Story 


D 


^ 1 


Pi 


Mages who stir up alot of Paradox, however, become walking 
reality-warps. And so, when Reality finally does push back, it 
pushes back hard. That's when the Storyteller brings out the 
war hammer and belts the mage upside her skull. Truly weird 
manifestations of Paradox kick in only when a mage has been 
doing really weird stuff. Again, the pushback suits the push. 
If a player stirs things up a little bit, send her some ripples of 
Paradox. And if she throws a big rock into the reality pool, 
figuratively speaking, let Reality dunk her in return. 


Resonance 

Those ripples of Paradox often manifest as Resonance, 
the metaphysical echoes of a mage’s deeds. From a Storyteller’s 
perspective, these energies influence the mage and her 
surroundings - often in subtle ways, occasionally in really 
strange ones. 


Generally, you'll want to play up the story effects of Resonance 
rather than tracking points and assigning names to each little 
quirk of magickal behavior. Although some of the later Mage 
sourcebooks featured a complex (and often contradictory) 


system of Resonance types, it’s far simpler and more evocative 


to describe the uncanny atmosphere surrounding the characters. 
See The Deeper Levels, earlier in this chapter, for suggestions 
about how you can emphasize those ripples of Resonance, 
and check out the section called Resonance and Synergy in 
Chapter Ten (pp. 560-561) for details about the ways in which 
Mage 20 Resonance can appear in your chronicle. 


Poetic Justice 

When Storytelling the effects of Paradox, use a strong sense 
of poetic justice: the principle that someone gets what he deserves. 
A haughty wizard will be humiliated by Paradox; a rigid Black 
Suit will be made more rigid, or else rendered “loose” by his 
own standards. Mad scientists tend to get blown up by their 
creations, and curse-happy witches often suffer curses in return. 
In the words of Gilbert and Sullivan, let the punishment suit 
the crime. That way, Paradox is an intimately personal clue-bat 
you bop your players with when necessary... or, to quote Xerox 
the Orphan, it’s “Jiminy Cricket with a chainsaw” when mages 
and players get too naughty to endure. 


Types of Chronicle 


Magick wears many faces, and the Awakened 
can explore many chronicles. Although the 
traditional approach of Council mages battling 
an implacable Technocracy provides Mage’s 
default setting, you can actually run any sort 
of chronicle you wish. Especially with Mage 
20" Anniversary Edition, your options expand 
across a wide range of possibilities. What sort 


of chronicles might you explore within your 
troupe? That depends upon what you want to 
do with Mage. 


What Unites Your Characters? 


As we saw in the Common Ground section earlier in this 
chapter, your range of options comes down to one necessary 
element: a compelling reason to work together. Without a shared 
bond, no group of mages will collaborate for long. An important 
motivation, on the other hand, can force a Black Suit, an Ecstatic, 
a reality-hacker, a shamanic trickster, an underworld enforcer, 
two street punks, and a high-class physician to cooperate. They 
probably won't like each other very much, but that antipathy 
will take a backseat to survival if the threat uniting them seems 
severe enough. 


From the Storyteller’s perspective, then, your chronicle 
demands ashared cause: threats, friends, allegiance, aspirations, 
projects - something as simple as a neighborhood in peril, or as 
esoteric as a cosmic puzzle for which every mage involved seeks 
an answer. The following suggestions point your creativity in 
certain directions, but each one requires common cause. That 
foundation, as mentioned earlier, makes your saga a chronicle 


374 . Mage: The Ascension 20" Anniversary Edition 


rather than a series of random adventures with a bunch of 
mages who've got no reason to stick together. 


The Traditions Chronicle 


Thevisionary throwbacks ofthe embattled Council of Nine 
embody the word mage. Indeed, when Mage first appeared, every 
chronicle revolved around their struggles with the Technocracy 
and other factions. Later, Mage Revised focused on the ragged 
survivors of a shattered Council. And although it's true that 
the Technocracy and other factions present some interesting 
options, most players relate most easily with these rebels against 
an oppressive, banal future. 


In a Traditions-based chronicle, each mage belongs to 
one of the nine groups devoted to the Council. Depending 
upon your preferences (see the nearby sidebar That Damned 
Elusive Metaplot), they might be living on the edge, ensconced 
in powerful Horizon Realms, adopting new technologies into 
their practices, ruling the Digital Web, clinging to a fading 
Mythic Age idea, claiming an enchanted future, or otherwise 
pursuing the ancient ideals and novel revolutions that make 
them such a colorful crew. 


Features, Elements, and Themes 


Generally, Council-based chronicles feature a loosely 
organized cabal of young mages working toward a common 
ideal. Rivalries between Traditions come through in personality 
clashes between dissimilar allies: the eccentric Etherite, the grim 
Euthanatos, the longsuffering Dreamspeaker, and so on. For 
extra spice, however, you could suggest that your players run 


Genres 


Stories often fall into types, or genres. And although we don't have enough space to detail too many genres here, some 
of them are worth mentioning as possibilities for your Mage chronicle: 


Action/ Adventure: Gunfights, explosions, and edge-of-your-fingernails stunts typity the action/ adventure genre. 
Collateral damage comes with the territory. These high-octane tales involve elaborate violence and hair-trigger 
suspense. Tales of Magick: Dark Adventure deals specifically with such stories, and any mage who can stand 
the damage can play. 


Comedy/ Satire: Mage is satirical by default. Even so, the comedy/ satire genre takes awful subjects — humiliation, 
betrayal, disaster, even death — and accelerates them to the point of absurdity. That balance, though, is very hard to 
get right, and so comedy often becomes goofiness instead. Silly Mage adventures should be avoided on the whole, 
although silly moments - like the stern Technocrat tripping over his own trench coat — can lighten up a serious scene. 
On the whole, comedy works best when it jabs at our flawed humanity and reveals the absurdity of existence while 
getting us to laugh with, and at, ourselves. 


High Fantasy: The realm of dragons and lightning bolts, high fantasy indulges our heroic impulses. Mighty magicks 
dominate such stories, in which epic plots rage across exotic locations. Paradox limits such things in the modern world, 
but a historical chronicle (like Dark Ages Mage or The Sorcerers Crusade), or one setin the Otherworlds, can 
set your inner Tolkien free. 


Horror: A pervasive atmosphere of dread defines the horror genre, which is less about vampires or haunted houses 
than about the spectre of mortality. The word horror means “to ripple with disgust,” and this genre confronts things that 
appall us. Key to that kind of fear is a sense of helplessness. In order to do horror well in Mage, then, the Awakened 
must confront some threat their powers cannot easily resolve. 


Occult: A natural realm for mages, the occult genre focuses on dangerous secrets hidden in musty corners of an 
ignorant world. Subtlety is essential, for those mysteries could wreak havoc if they came to light. Madness, too, is a 
vital element of occult genre stories, and threats to mind and soul outweigh mere physical harm. 


Romance: Mages are not immune to passion; some, in fact, pursue it. The-romance genre — which is more about 
passion than about love — suits certain mages perfectly. Named for the artists who embraced emotion over rationality, 
romance features complex entanglements, inexorable passions, divided loyalties, and irrational bonds that do not 
always end well for anyone concerned. 


Urban Fantasy: Couched in the shadows of our modern world, urban fantasy stories feature hidden magicks, 
wondrous revelations, and threats to mysteries that few people ever recognize. Often darker and more adultthan high 
fantasy, this genre blends mystic elements with real-life concerns: rape, drugs, abuse, addiction, street life, sexuality, 
and marginalized cultures on the fringes of an age that has passed them by. Essentially, Mage is an urban fantasy; 
still, the genre's focus on disenfranchised people in cityscape environments speaks more to the orphan-style chronicle 
than to sleek action-or classic fantasy. 


mages who transcend the usual stereotypes of their Traditions: an 
Akashic hedonist, a playful death mage, an irreverent Chorister, 
and other divergent character concepts. That option averts the 
dreadedStereotypical Mage GameSyndrome, in which shopworn 
‘90s archetypes go through the motions of a quarreling pack of 
eccentrics whose doomed quest for a new Mythic Age plants them 
straight in Technocratic crosshairs. That in itself can present a 
refreshing change from the usual expectations! 


As Chapter Five shows, even the oldest dogs learn new 
tricks eventually. Despite their emphasis upon tradition, the 
Nine have adopted to the shifting ground of a 21*century 
Consensus. Faith, after all, is back in style, and the dull gray 
vision of old-school Technocrats is further away than ever. In 
this crazy, colorful age, the Council’s rebels have a major edge 
over greybeards of all descriptions. 


The wild potential of technology and the popularity of 
steampunk and reality-hacking demonstrate the vitality of 
Virtual Adept and Etherite ideals, and the growing global 
festival culture and ethnic restoration pride movements unite 


the Ecstatics, Speakers, and Verbenae in ways they’ve never 
enjoyed before. Contrasted against the grubby throwbacks and 
wretched survivors of earlier Mage editions, your 21-century 
Tradition chronicle could spotlight a surging age of mystic 
wonder. On the flip side, of course, you could run a gritty 
survival drama in which such wonder fades beneath the tide 
of Sleeper apathy and Nephandic corruption. Either way, the 
Traditions are anything but dull! 


Most Mage sourcebooks feature a Tradition-based 
worldview. As a result, there's lots of material to work with 
for this type of game. Your Council might or might not have 
been crippled by the Avatar Storm and its related disasters, 
and although most of the Mage sourcebooks from 1999 
onward assume that it has been, you can run with alternative 
ideas if you wish. Perhaps the Traditions have recovered from 
those setbacks within the last 10 years. Maybe those setbacks 
never happened to begin with. The catastrophes of the late 
1990s could have forced the Council to dump their bullshit 
and focus their energies on a new and vital vision that has 


Chapter Seven: Telling the Story — 375 


ida o 


376 


since taken the Traditions to the top of the Ascension War. 
The Council could even have been infiltrated by Nephandic 
influence, driving your heroes to confront a collection of 
wizards whose ideals have become toxic to everything they 
hold dear. Chapter Five contains material for each possibility, 
and your players don't necessarily have to know which option 
you've chosen to employ! 


Regardless of the metaplot, Tradition-based chronicles 
often feature themes like Loyalty, Wonder, Isolation, Vengeance, 
Defiance, Decay, Freedom, Rebellion, and Rebirth. Depending on 
the current state of the Council, the mood for such chronicles 
could be dreary, playful, furious, chaotic, deeply fantastic, 
paranoid, or other collisions offaith and desperation. Tradition 
mages might be bound to follow orders; even then, however, 
such characters have more leeway than their Technocratic 
rivals - a freedom that reflects the greatest ideals of magick. 


The Technocratic Chronicle 


In a world filled with crazy wizards, vampiric schemers, 
furry killing machines, and other atrocities of nature, someone 
has to make the hard calls. As a result, the Technocratic Union 
faces off against demonic hordes on behalf of the Masses, 
channeling Enlightened Science toward the advancement of 
all humanity. It's a tough and often underappreciated job for 
which these guardians of progress get unfairly slandered by 
their superstitionist rivals. True, the human omelet requires a 
lot of shattered eggs. If Joe and Jane Average can get through 
the day without suffering paranormal depredations, though, 
all the sacrifices will be worthwhile. 


To the traditional perspective, the Technocracy represents 
implacable tyranny. In a Technocratic chronicle, however, the 
illusion of a soulless monolith fractures into thousands of 
hardworking agents of order in a demented World of Darkness. 
Especiallyin the new millennium, the Technocraticvision looks a 
lot less ominous from the inside. Old-school steelheads stillactlike 
rejects from 1984, true enough, but the majority of the Union’s 
personnel have fascinating - and deeply human - stories to tell. 


A Technocratic chronicle flips the usual Mage perspective 
around. Here, the Traditions represent dangerous threats to 
human progress, to be converted when possible and eliminated 
when need be. Bloody witches, sick occultists, perverse 
scientists, and anarchistic weirdoes keep the Technocrats busy, 
and occasional threats from hairy monsters and demonic 
predators demand maximum firepower. Beyond the battle lines, 
Technocratic heroes rally the Masses, explore the bounds of 
hypertech, and craft a Consensus in which Reality Deviants 
become obsolete. Behind those “Black Hats and Mirrorshades,” 
dedicated people strive against the forces of ignorant terror, 
bringing Enlightenment to all... by whatever means necessary. 


Features, Elements, and Themes 


Lest this kinder, gentler Union seem soft, remember that 
Control is more than an abstract ideal for the Technocracy. 


Ma$e: The Ascension 20^ Anniversary Edition 


As shown throughout the many Future Fates sidebars 
throughout this book, Mage's metaplot is not set in 
steel. You could have Archmasters flying through the 
Otherworlds, a mighty Council couched in secure 
Horizon Realms, or an Umbra that’s never seen an 
Avatar Storm. If you want to tell apocalyptic tales, of 
course, you could still have soul-shredding fragments 
riding the borders between worlds while young heroes 
salvage whatever they can grab in between Paradox 
blasts and power-armored foes. As the Storyteller, you 
get to decide how and where “that damned elusive 
metaplot" impacts upon your chronicle. Think of this 
as "Schródinger's Mage," wherein the metaplot is 
both alive and dead until you decide to open the box. 


Even the most sympathetic Technocratic chronicle features 
backstabbing politics, oppressive authority, constant paranoia, 
and shiny ultraviolence. In theory and practice, the Technocracy 
is a machine. The fact that the machine isn't necessarily evil 
doesn't make it a hearts-and-flowers dispenser. 


And yet, that stylish gloss of hypertech adventure makes 
Technocracychroniclesshine. Tradition mages mightbe Gandalf, but 
Technocrats are James Bond, Tony Stark, Nick Fury, and La Femme 
Nikita rolled into one. Agents of the Union have all the best toys, vast 
resources, and the finest backup money can buy. While wizards and 
witches mumble around in their muddy fortresses, loyal Technocrats 
enjoy fast cars, sweet perks, and a key to the executive suite. 


A Technocratic chronicle reflects the ambivalent attitude we 
have about technology and control. As citizens of a wired world, 
we love our toys and fight to keep them... even when that fight 
leaves innocent people dead. Those toys might be corrupting us, 
especially in a Nephandicinfiltration chronicle, but that doesn’t 
make technology evil on its own terms. As opposed to the "science 
is evil" tone of Mage 1* Edition, a Technocratic chronicle revels 
in the trappings of progress even as it reflects their bitter cost. 


Guide to the Technocracy is the essential sourcebook for 
a Technocratic chronicle. The five Revised-edition Convention 
books presentan updated and excitingvision ofthe Technocracy, 
especially in comparison to the dated paranoia of the 1-edition 
Technocracy: Progenitors, Iteration X, and New World Order 
sourcebooks. The 2™ edition-era Syndicate and Void Engineers 
books present a more balanced (though still ominous) Union 
on the edge of corruption, and The Book of Mirrors, The 
Technomancer’s Toybox, and Tales of Magick: Dark Adventures 
balance their approach between Tradition and Technocratic 
perspectives. Thelevel ofviolence in such a chronicle will depend 
upon whether or not the Pogrom is still in force. Even if the 
outright war against other factions has cooled down, however, 
the threats of Nephandic infiltration, Threat Null, demented 
Marauders, and the Dimensional Anomaly (all covered in Chapter 
Five) are sure to keep your heroes occupied. 


With the exception of Project Invictus or Friends of 
Courage chronicles, each Technocracy-focused story features 
a team of agents working under enforced protocols. Everyone 
has a place and purpose within that team. The anarchistic 
looseness of Tradition cabals is intolerable within this faction, 
and operatives who resist top-down control will be dealt with 
harshly. Bound to a greater Union, these Technocratic heroes 
deal with themes like Order, Vigilance, Endurance, Greed, 
Corruption, Cooperation, Ruthlessness, Honor, Paranoia, and, of 
course, Control. Moods within such chronicles range from 
gleaming idealism to oppressive tyranny and blood-soaked 
carnage. Frontlines adventures, of course, would feature more 
excitement, but the high stakes of executive capers or deep-cover 
espionage hold their own glamorous allure. 


The Disparate Chronicle 


Magick is not defined by war, nor truly even by Ascension. 
Forpeople throughouttime, the Arts have metother needs: food, 
shelter, comfort, artistry, love... The so-called Crafts were shaped 
by human needs and cultures. By definition, these Disparates 
refused to take sides in someone else's war, or else took sides once 
and then dropped out of the fight. Even so, that Ascension War 
did not leave them in peace. Now, they gather for their mutual 
protection, just as the Traditions and Conventions did long ago. 
Does that mean that the Disparate Alliance plans to join the 
War? Perhaps a Disparate chronicle could answer that question. 


The radically diverse nature of the Disparate sects makes 
this Alliance a tricky proposition. Because so many of them 
follow very specific religious creeds, cooperation becomes even 
more precarious than it is among the more tolerant Traditions. 
Although most of those sects go back for centuries, even 
millennia, collaboration is a very new thing for them. Characters 
involved in a Disparate chronicle will be testing freshly built 
bridges and seeing just how much weight the bridges can stand 
before they collapse. 


Each group has a proud heritage and traditions all its own. 
You could run a chronicle composed of members from a single 
group - a Bata'a chronicle, for instance - or from members of 
several close Allies, like the Solificati and Hollow Ones. A mixed 
group of Allies could test the bonds of cooperation between 
groups, or a tight-knit pack of Allies might stand for unity in the 
face of pressure. In each case, however, the cultures of each Craft 
will play a significant role in a Disparate chronicle. A Kopa Loei 
kahuna might be a laid-back surfer boy in many respects, but his 
reverence for the ancient ways is what makes him what he is. 


Features, Elements, and Themes 


From a Storyteller perspective, a Disparate chronicle lets 
you take Mage's metaplotin radical directions. You mightignore 
it completely because the Crafts refuse to play along, or show it 
from an unexpected side. Perhaps the Hollow Ones really did 
betray Horizon... or the Traditions at least believe that they did. 
That would pit the Alliance (or certain segments of it, at least) 


against the combined fury of the Council of Nine - a group 
that fought the Technocracy to a draw for half a millennium. 
Or maybe the Technocracy really is run by the Nephandi, and 
the Disparates know that secret. You could arrange things so 
that both the Traditions and Technocracy want to stamp out 
Disparate survivors, in which case the battle for survival becomes 
more intense than ever. If the Union had wiped out every Craft 
mage it could find, then the Alliance would want revenge, even 
if that meant pulling the entire world apart to get it. 


Maybe the entire Ascension War is one big Nephandic 
endgame, with the Alliance as the only uncorrupted faction. 
Or the Alliance itself is a patsy for some group or other - the 
Hollow Ones, the Wu Lung, the Nephandi, perhaps even the 
Mad - and the characters realize this ugly secret at a critical time 
for everyone concerned. Divided loyalties and secretagendas and 
the very real need to keep the Alliance under wraps could make 
a Technocracy chronicle seem safe and open by comparison! 


Mage 20 assumes that the Alliance is a secret, at least for 
the present time. Every Ally has a compelling reason to play its 
cards very close to the chest, especially if the Hollow treachery 
or Nephandic infiltration metaplots are part of your chronicle. 
Therefore, a Disparate chronicle would feature themes like 
Secrecy, Survival, Endurance, Betrayal, Manipulation, Revenge, 
Restoration, Pride, Protection, Suspicion, Uneasy Allies, Religious 
Zeal, and other prickly ideas. The mood can veer between heady 
novelty and oppressive fear, with undercurrents of fanaticism 
and distrust never far from the surface of the tale. 


As the Storyteller, it's your job to make it hurt each time the 
Alliance is exposed. Send in enemies, or hold ugly things over your 
players’ heads, ifand when the secretslips out. Make other Alliance 
mages defend that secrecy... or risk it by being idiots, forcing the 
players to cover things up. Given the agendas of various Allies 
(especially the Wu Lung, Templars, and - if that metaplot’s in play 
- the Hollow Ones), discovery would be catastrophic. Disparate 
mages might get along on the surface, but their common ground 
is extremely fragile. One misstep could fracture the Alliance. 


Because the Alliance is a new concept within Mage 20, 
no previous sourcebooks address its details. The Book of 
Crafts and Mage Storytellers Companion detail most of the 
groups within the Alliance, though, and Mage: The Sorcerers 
Crusade, The Sorcerers Crusade Companion, The Orphans 
Survival Guide, Tradition Book: Hollow Ones, Dragons of 
the East, Lost Paths: AhLi-Batin & Taftani, and the various 
Dead Magic books provide material for the others. Future 
sourcebooks about the Alliance are planned as of this writing, 
butwith regards to those books and to the future of the Alliance 
as a whole, only time will tell... 


The Orphan Chronicle 


And then you've got the mages who belong to no group 
beyond perhaps their own private circles. These orphaned 
mages either know nothing aboutthe other sects, or else refuse 


Chapter Seven: Telling the Story 377 


~~ eo 


TN E 


"rtr. 


to become part of the larger wars. Although the stereotype of 
gutter mages isn't always true - some orphans are well off, 
even rich - the majority of these people live on the fringes of 
normative culture, either by choice or through bitter necessity. 
Anorphan chronicle, then, would deal with Awakened misfits. 
Despite power and awareness, they have no place other than 
the places they make for themselves. 


Features, Elements, and Themes 

If the Ascension War doesn't appeal to you, you might 
choose to run an orphan chronicle that ignores the entire 
existence of that shadowy conspiracy. In that case, the orphans 
aren't actually orphaned at all - they're simply mages in a 
World of Darkness. You might make up your own sects and 
metaplot... or you could do so and then leave elements of the 
greater Mage milieu as distant, awful secrets. The orphan option 
also lets you run mages who know about the bigger War but 
still prefer to follow their own Paths. Such options are ideal 
for crossover tales that incorporate other World of Darkness 
games (see Crossovers), or for one- or two-character chronicles 
that focus on Awakened folks dealing with life on a smaller 
scale. Films like 1, Lucy, The Craft, and The Sorcerer's Apprentice 
show what such a game might look like. You could ignore the 
vast tapestry of metaplots and factions in favor of a simpler 
tale - one whose drama comes not from ancient grudges or 
the War for Reality but from godlike power and human needs. 


378 . Mage: The Ascension 20" Anniversary Edition 


T ^ 


Freedom might be the primary theme within orphan 
chronicles, with related themes of Independence, Survival, 
Precariousness, Realization, Mystery, Discovery, Ancient Secrets, 
and Self-definition. An ominous mood tends to hang over 
such adventures, if only because an Awakened orphan, by 
definition, knows very little about the world at large and 
is figuring it out by trial and error. The Orphans Survival 
Guide deals specifically with independent mages and features a 
Storytelling chapter dedicated to such chronicles. Both editions 
of World of Darkness: Sorcerer offer plenty of information 
for independent chronicles, and Destiny’s Price examines 
the nastier sides of street life. Beyond those sources, you can 
be as creative as you want to be, incorporating all sorts of 
technomagick or classical spellcraft if they appeal to your ideas. 


The Mixed-Faction Chronicle 


Especially in the 21* century, orthodoxy takes a back seat to 
survival. Thanks especially to the threats posed by Marauders, 
Night-Folk, the Fallen, and even the Masses, mages from hostile 
factions might find themselves sharing a very odd bed. We've 
covered that possibility earlier in this chapter (and in the 
Prelude, for that matter), and though the image of cyborgs and 
shamans getting along mightseem like anathema to old-school 
mages (and certain Mage players, too), common ground may 
unite such rivals... if only for a short time. 


Crossovers 


Although mages often stand alone or among their own kind, the Awakened occasionally rub shoulders with vampires, 
werebeasts, the fae, and other denizens of impossible nights. Chapter Ten features information about such relationships 
(on p.546), but from a Storytelling perspective a few things still need to be said. 


First off, the various mages and Night-Folk do not - and SHOULD not — know details about one another's powers, 
customs, and fellowships. Even in the Internet age, where such details can probably be found scattered among various 
websites and exchanges, the average Akashic isn't going to meet a vampire and go, "Oh, look - a 12^ Generation True 
Brujah Antitribul" The secrets within the various World of Darkness games are guarded carefully, and for good reasons. 
Rivalries turn bloody in the night, and no one wants to be handing out weapons to potential enemies. 


Secondly, certain groups would never work together willingly. No crisis, for example, could convince a Black Fury 
werewolf to suffer the presence of a Nephandus for any longer than the time it would take to clean him off her claws. 
Though some mages get along fine with "cousins" from like-minded groups (satyr kith, for example, partying with Cultists 
of Ecstasy), the majority of these secretive creatures have no reason to trust one another beyond simple courtesy... and 
often not even that far. 


Thirdly, mages are rightly considered to be treacherous, greedy assholes by other creatures of the night. Those creatures 
aren't wrong: mages use vampire blood, werewolf claws, and faerie glamour as Quintessence. They claim Nodes, 
which to the werewolves are sacred ground. They order spirits around, treating ghosts like servants and Bygones like 
cannon fodder. Even if your mages don’t act that way, the behavior of other Awakened folk has tainted the reputation 
of all willworkers. A crossover chronicle, therefore, will be drenched in suspicion and hostility, if only out of fear for what 
a mage, or vampire, or other entity might do when everyone else’s back is turned... For details, see Gods, Monsters, 


and Familiar Strangers. 


Features, Elements, and Themes 

Depending upon the mages and factions involved, a mixed- 
faction chronicle could be tense but fair, strained yet courteous, 
tentatively friendly, or edge-of-the-blade hostile. Cordial alliances 
might be struck to pursue mysteries or treasures, and great 
threats could unite people who'd gladly kill each other next 
week. Wars, plagues, disasters, incursions... such situations have 
brought Tradition and Technocracy mages to the table before, 
especially when innocent lives depend on their cooperation. 
Those allies may quarrel, even fight, but if the motivation’s 
strong enough, they'll bury their respective hatchets until the 
crisis ends... and might possibly even become friendly despite 
their traditional rivalries. 


Love, too, has a way of building bridges in strange places. 
A Romeo-andJuliet bond could produce an unlikely alliance... 
possibly even children and other sorts of families if that bond 
is strong enough. The uneasy friendship between Lee Ann and 
John Courage is based upon both parties deciding to skirt the 
party line in favor of individual trust and mutual respect. Such 
allies, obviously, must see something in one another that the 
greater factions refuse to recognize. And perhaps that recognition 
could lead, in time, to a greater reconciliation. 


Then again, these rivals might hate one another’s guts, 
stopping just short of vaporizing their tentative allies... for 
the moment, anyway. The tension between them invests these 
chronicles with urgent suspense. Such chronicles can be a lot 
of fun, with squabbling mages providing endless opportunities 
for insulting banter. 


Obviously, a mixed-faction chronicle needs powerful 
motivation. Perhaps the Friends of Courage have discovered 
treachery within the Council as well. Maybe the Disparate 
Alliance recruits the Butcher Street Regulars to combat the 
Technocracy. The Technocracy and Traditions might realize 
that the Alliance exists and could have compelling reasons to 
stamp it out. Or the Fallen might have called in their final strike, 
and mages of all types must unite against it or die. Whatever 
the bond may be, it'll feature a ticking clock, high stakes, and 
a compelling reason to set old grudges aside. 


Alliance, obviously, is the dominant theme of mixed-faction 
chronicles, with the other themes depending upon the situation 
that brought the rivals together. Desperation, Survival, Catastrophe, 
Apocalypse, Inversion, Treachery, perhaps even Hope all wind 
together when the Awakened face mutual destruction. And 
maybe, just maybe, that essence of hope will lead to a lasting 
peace... an end, perhaps, to a long Ascension War. 


Chapter Seven: Telling the Story — 379 


i E~ ^ 


"s 


- .. BOOK Ill 
SES uU 


qi 


Power is merely polish on blunted blades. 


Porthos Fitz-Empress, 
The Fragile Path 


Chapter Eight: 


The Book 
of Rules 


How dreadful... to be caught up in a game and have no idea of the rules. 


— Caroline Stevermer, Sorcery & Cecelia: or The Enchanted Chocolate Pot 


Eight of Swords 


Associations: Order or the lack of it; use of energy; feeling 
fenced in; paranoia; vulnerability; isolation... 


It didn’t take much. A few words in the right ears, a little 
push here and there, the right perfume and a dress to kill for. 
Glances just significant enough to mean something and yet 
mean nothing. Plausible deniability. Layers of it. 

I'm good at what I do. Very good. 


By the time Patel enters the room, the rumor’s made its 
rounds. You can see it in the frozen smiles and the little hush 
that dips into the crowd when he walks in. The sidelong looks 
and whispered questions that pass between folks who don’t 
think they're being watched. The sense of weight that comes 
from scrutiny. 

Patel can feel it too. 


The welcoming smile on his face loses some of its 
sincerity. The average person wouldn't note that, but I do. 
His cautious scan of the room, practiced enough to be almost 
undetectable, hides behind a veneer of cheerful celebration. It's 
a tough crowd now, though, and he knows it. The flicker in 
his eyes just might be the start of panic. 


It was a lovely party, but it'll soon be time to go. My 
work here is through. 


Chapter Eight: The Book ores 


383 


Zi 


Imagination’s fun, but sometimes you need 
rules to keep things straight. Ideally, those rules 
assure consistency, fairness, and a relatively 
reliable way to sort out tricky questions like 
Can I grab that fire escape as I jump out the 8^ 
story window? In a world where magick can 
disassemble a police car, rules help us figure 
out how quickly you disassemble it, whether 
or not you know enough to disassemble it 
to begin with, and whether or not Paradox 
sledgehammers you into the pavement for 
mystically dismantling a cop car in front of the Channel 5 
news team. (Answer #3: probably, yeah.) 


Roll a dlO 


Despite the size of the book in your hands, the core of 
Mage’s Storyteller System is really simple: Roll one 10-sided 
die for every dot you have in a Trait or combination of Traits, 
compare the numbers on those dice to a target number called 
a difficulty, and then count all the dice that equal or exceed 
that number. This basic system has a few permutations, but 
most situations in your Mage chronicle - from wrecking cop 
cars to cooking a great meal - can be resolved quickly, easily, 
and fairly with the following rules. 


The Golden Rule 


Chances are good that you already know the most important 
rule in the Storyteller System. Even so, we'll kick off the rules 
chapter by reiterating it: 


The rules are what you want them to be. 


Seriously, it’s easy to stall a game by rolling dice for every 
action or leaning too heavily on the wording of a sentence on 
page 384. Yes, the rules are important, especially if you want to 
avoid having hour-long arguments about the results of a vulgar 
Forces 4/ Prime 2 Effect. Even so, you'll want to keep the story 
moving, with dice rolls thatenhance, not derail, the action. Long 
after the game is over, folks talk about the drama of a memorable 
session, not about the systems involved. And while there's a sort 
of drama that comes with a really great or awful roll at a critical 
time (“I can’t BELIEVE I botched that shot...”), it’s the deeds of our 
characters, and the fun we had while playing them, that linger on. 

Consequently, the rules exist to serve your story, not the 
other way around. Use them when you need to, fudge them if 
you must (just be fair about it...), let them guide consistency 
and play, and abandon them if and when your group feels 
confident enough to let the action speak for itself. 


Turns, Scenes, and Stories 


When seconds count, or when hours pass, it’s a good idea 
to know how quickly or slowly things transpire. In most cases, 


384 Mage: The Ascension 20" Anniversary Edition 


The Comfort of Rules 


the flow of time in Mage is pretty fluid... especially if you’re 
using Time magick to screw around with it. Our perceptions 
of time, in real life, often depend upon what's going on at that 
moment - an hour with your best friend and an hour in the 
dentist's chair don't feel the same at all! And so, in Mage, time 
gets measured by the activity involved. 


* Turn: In game terms, a turn is the amount of time it 
takes to perform a fairly simple action. The exact length 
of a turn depends a lot on the action in question. An 
action turn - that is, a turn in combat, or under other 
every-moment-counts circumstances - lasts about three 
seconds, whereas a turn of heated conversation or other 
social interactions could last two or three minutes. 
Punching that creepy dude who grabbed at you takes 
a turn, and staring him down for a long moment until 
he feels like crawling off to go hide under a rock takes 
a turn. 


For more details about action turns, see Chapter Nine 
(p. 399). 


* Scene: Like a dramatic moment within a TV show or 
play, a scene covers a single, self-contained sequence of 
events. This sequence could range from a few minutes to 
a few hours, depending on what's going on throughout 
that scene. If you come home, grab a snack, turn on the 
TV and see your Chantry House in flames, grab your 
phone, find out that it's dead, and then snatch up your 
katana and dash off out the door, that's a scene. 


* Chapter: A series of related but separate scenes is 
called a chapter. Generally, chapters feature a distinct 
trajectory of beginning, middle, and conclusion - often with 
a cliffhanger tossed in at the end for good measure. In 
gameplay, a chapter usually covers one gaming session, 
includes a bit of downtime, and can represent hours, 
days, or even weeks in story terms. The tale that begins 
with a grabby dude on the subway, explodes with the 
Chantry House fire, and ends with your mage cradling 
her dying sister's body and swearing revenge... that's a 
chapter. Tune in next week! 


* Story: A connected series of related chapters comprises a 
story. Here, thatsequence of beginning, middle, and end 
follows several rises and falls, leading up to a climactic 
chapter that revolves the story... forthe moment, atleast. 
Some stories last a single session, whereas others stretch 
across a series of chapters until the climax resolves the 
tale. An adventure that begins with the Day From Hell 
and winds up with a battle in Hell itself becomes a story... 
one that might become part of the next category. 


— IN A 


* Story Arc: A collection of related stories focusing on a 
common theme, object, character, or situation often gets 
referred to as a story avc. These stories are self-contained 
and yet united by their shared focus. The Day From 
Hell and Battle in Hell are, in the overall arc, parts of a 
larger saga. Like a story, this arc follows a series of rises 
and falls, reaches a climactic resolution, and leads into 
a new arc, based upon a new theme, with both of them 
being parts of the larger chronicle. 


* Chronicle: When a series of stories or story arcs features 
the same overall cast of characters, you've got a chronicle. 
Within that chronicle, you can trade off lead characters, 
switch locations, move certain cast members and gamers 
in and out of the group, so long as the core ofthe group 
and its story remain consistent. The flaming Chantry 
House, dying sister, and battle in Hell were just one 
story in the ongoing saga of your cabal... and that saga 
becomes the chronicle of your group's adventures. 


* Downtime: The “time between events,” downtime 
reflects those long periods where nothing important 
happens. Driving across the country tends to involve 
downtime; a month of digging through the local library 
for research, the recovery involved in a broken leg, the 
endless days spent writing a book... unless your group 


Rolling Dice 


As mentioned earlier, the Mage rules revolve 
around the rolling of 10-sided dice. You've 
probably got a collection of them already. 
If not, they're easy to find at any gaming 
store or website. You'll probably want at 
least 10 of them. Many gamers have dozens, 
with special favorites for certain games or 
situations. It's up to you. 


Dice Pools and 
Trait Ratings 


In the character creation chapter, we covered the many 
Traits and the dots associated with each of them. For every dot, 
you roll one 10-sided die. The collection of dice involved with 
a given task is called your dice pool, and it changes depending 
on the Traits involved. If your mage has four dots in Dexterity 
and three dots in Stealth, his dice pool uses seven dice when 
he’s trying to sneak past some guards. If he wants to climb a 
wall, that's a different dice pool - let's say those four dots in 
Dexterity, plus his two dots in Athletics, for a total dice pool 
of six. 


What constitutes a decent dice pool? Generally, you'll 
want at least four dice in a given roll. As we saw in the Trait 
Ratings section of Chapter Six, low numbers of dots reflect 


wants to play out an important event within that span 
of time, those hours, days, or months between crises 
become downtime in your chronicle. If your mage goes 
ona series of unremarkable dates while recovering from 
heartbreak, these meet-ups probably occur “offstage” in 
downtime. 


What Do You Do During Downtime? 71 


Extended periods of downtime offer great opportunities 
for your characters to rest, recuperate from injuries, learn new 
skills or Spheres, move to a new neighborhood, train a puppy, — 
or do other things that don'tlend themselves to dramatic tales. | 

| 
| 


Game-wise, downtime gives everyone a chance to spend 
experience points, raise Traits, make minor changes to their 
lives, and do other stuff that impacts the later sessions of 
that chronicle. Generally, the Storyteller asks his players, "So 
what'd you guys do during the downtime?" Creative players 
can write up short stories about their characters’ activities (a — . 
practice that legendary game designer Aaron Allston called — 
blue-booking), and others can simply go, "Spider's gonna practice — 


on her fire-spinning" or "Malcolm wants to drive up to Canada for — — K 
a few weeks.” Unless something critical happens during that 
interlude, the characters reunite when downtime ends and 

events bring them together again. 


a low aptitude for the task at hand. The more dots - and 
thus, dice - you have to work with, the greater your chance 
of great success becomes. 


The typical human scale for Traits runs from zero to five 
dots. Think of each dot as a die in your hand when you've got 
to roll for a task, and you'll see why the number of dots can be 
pretty important - especially for heroic tasks or magick, where 
a single success doesn't do you that much good. (See Degrees 
of Success, below.) 


As mentioned earlier, Trait ratings work out this way, with 
rising odds for success: 


X Abysmal/ No Chance 

° Poor/ Miniscule Chance 
eo Average/ Middling Chance 
ecc Good/ Decent Chance 
ecce Exceptional/ Good Chance 


Superb/ Rather Good Chance 
Legendary/ Really Good Chance 


Paradoxically, a large number of dice gives you both the 
opportunity to do something heroic and the ability to screw 
up catastrophically - see Botching, below. That's the risk that 
heroes take: the chance to shine, and the chance to fall. 


Chapter Eight: The Book of Rules — 385 


386 


Mage: The Ascension 20^ Anniversary Edition 


Difficulties 


That chance to fail involves difficulties - those target numbers 
that determine whether or not you succeed with a task. Put 
simply, a difficulty number shows how hard it is to accomplish 
that task. Easy tasks have low difficulty numbers, and hard ones 
have higher numbers. 


When you roll the dice, you want to equal or exceed the 
difficulty number. If that number’s 7, you want to score a 7, 
8, 9, or 10 on each die. Each number that equals or exceeds 
the difficulty is called a success; the more successes you roll, the 
better you do. If you don’t roll any dice that exceed the difficulty 
number, then you fail. (We'll go more into that subject under 
Success and Failure,below.) 


For most tasks, the default difficulty number is 6. If there's 
nota specific difficulty number mentioned for a given task, then 
assume that difficulty is 6. The Storyteller always has the final 
word on the difficulty for a given situation. 


Really simple tasks - those rated at difficulty 3 or 4 - 
don't usually require a roll unless the consequences of failure 
are particularly severe (like getting caught using your boss's 
computer) or the character in question has very little chance of 
succeeding at even the simplest task (that is, he has a dice pool 
lower than four). In most cases otherwise, simply consider the 
task an automatic success (again, see below). 


A roll of 10 is always a success unless there was no way you 
could have performed that task to begin with. Not even a 10 will 
help you shoot the moon out of the sky! 


For examples of potential tasks and their associated 
difficulties, see the chart nearby. 


Modified Difficulties and Dice Pools 


Under certain circumstances - say, in high winds or driving 
rain - a task might be more challenging than usual. In such cases, 
the Storyteller might raise the difficulty one to three steps above 
its usual level (+1 to +3 difficulty). In the opposite case - say, 
really favorable circumstances - the difficulty might fall a step 
or two (-1 or -2 difficulty). 


On arelated note, a character might find a given task harder 
than usual because of internal circumstances - injuries, fears, 
disorientation, etc. In that case, the Storyteller might tell her 
to take some dice out of the pool she would normally use. On 
the other hand, favorable internal circumstances might boost 
her usual chances, adding to her dice pool. 


Examples: Malcolm’s trying to make a business deal. Let's say 
that his would-be client doesn't trust an African businessman. Normally, 
Malcolm's difficulty would be 6 — he does this stuff all the time. Thanks 
to his potential client's resistance, however, that difficulty is 8 in this 
situation. 

Now let's say that Malcolm has a migraine. Normally, he's got 
a dice pool of seven for this sort of deal. Now, though, the headache's 


Difficulties and 


Successes 


Typicaldifficulties range from 3 to 9. For nigh-impossible 
challenges, see Thresholds. 


Difficulty Examples 
Trivial (hopping a creek) 
Easy (cooking a meal) 


Straightforward (changing the oil in 
your car) 


Standard (punching someone in the face) 


Challenging (comprehending a book 
by Crowley) 


Difficult (playing all of “2112” on your 
guitar) 


Extreme (sealing a multimillion-dollar 
business deal with reluctant partners) 


DEGREES OF SUCCESS 


The more successes you roll, the better your character 
performs. For details, see Extended Actions and 
Success. 


Marginal (finding a helpful 
TV Tropes entry) 


One success 


Moderate (gettingsomeone's 
cell-phone number) 


Two Successes 


Complete (delighting your 
new playmate with a fresh- 
cooked breakfast) 


Three Successes 


Four Successes Exceptional (selling five 
books to someone who'd 


come looking for one) 


Five or More Successes Phenomenal (writing 


the 500,000-word 
anniversary edition of a 
series you helped create 
20 years ago) 


throwing off his game; instead of those seven dice, he’s presently 
working with five. 

Wound penalties (see Health and Injury in Chapter Eight, 
pp. 406-409) provide one instance of reduced dice pools. Many 
Merits, Flaws, and modifiers can move difficulty numbers up 
and down, making certain tasks easier and other tasks harder 
under given sets of circumstances. 


Optional Rule: Thresholds 


Certain tasks are so challenging that, even when given steep 
odds, they demand a lot more success than usual. Thus, we 
have the optional rule of thresholds: when your character faces 
an almost impossible challenge, the Storyteller sets a certain 


number of successes that you must roll in order to meet that 
challenge. That number of successes becomes a threshold: the 
minimum number of successes you have to roll before you 
succeed. This way, instead of rolling against difficulty 10, you roll 
against difficulty 9, with a threshold of perhaps one additional 
success... which means you must now roll two successes, rather 
than just one, in order to succeed at all. 


For every level of a threshold, that threshold removes 
one success rolled. A threshold of one removes one success, 
a threshold of two removes two successes, and so on. Where 
one success normally means you succeeded at your task, the 
threshold rule means that you have to roll several successes 
before your task succeeds. 


The threshold rule can also reflect an easier task that 
involves a lot of work. You might face a task with a difficulty 
of 6, but with a threshold of four... and in that case, you'd 
need to roll at least five successes in order to complete that 
task successfully. 


Threshold Minimum Successes Rolled 

One Two successes rolled in order to succeed 
at all 

Two Three successes rolled in order to succeed 
at all 

Three Four successes rolled in order to succeed 
at all 

Four Five successes rolled in order to succeed 
at all 

Five Six successes rolled in order to succeed at 
all 


As explained under the section called Botching, every 
1 you roll on your dice takes away one success that you did 
roll; if you roll one success and one 1 on the dice, then that 
] removes your one success and you get nothing. In the case 
of the threshold rule, successes taken away by the threshold 
get removed before the successes removed by a 1. If all of your 
successes get negated by the threshold, you fail. Nice try, but 
the task was just too difficult for your character to accomplish. 
And if you didn't roll any successes at all, then you're in real 
trouble... (Again, see Botching, below.) 


Example: Jennifer Rollins wants to break into the mansion 
of a TV network honcho. He's got an elaborate infrared security 
camera system, so Jennifer’s player has to be really good in order to get 
past it. Given the challenges involved, the Storyteller gives that roll a 
threshold of three successes at difficulty 7. Holy crap. 


The mage tries to sneak past the security cameras. Jennifer’s 
player rolls eight dice for Jennifer’s Dexterity + Stealth attempt. If she 
rolls four successes, Jennifer manages to get past the cameras; if she 
rolls only three successes, though, she'll fail. 


Now let’s say that Jennifer’s player rolls NO successes and a 1; 
she botched that roll. Jennifer steps in the wrong place at the wrong 
time, the security camera catches her in the act, guards notice the 
would-be intruder, and the chase is on... 


Chapter Eight: The Book of Rules 387 


Dv 7T 
f 


Actions: The Various Types 


Simply put, an action is whatever you choose to 
have your character do. She soothes a barking 
dog? An action. Calls her boss? An action. 
Takes out a knife and cuts runes into her skin 
to summon a murder of crows? An action. 
Most actions take a turn or two, though some 
especially complex ones - like, say, car repair 
or a long ritual - can last quite a while. 


Generally, you won't have to roll when 
performing an action. Calling your boss, for 
instance, doesn't demand a roll unless something critical is at 
stake. That's when the dice come out. If there's a chance that 
success or failure will make a dramatic difference in the story, 
then yourStoryteller will probably tell you to *Make a [whatever] 
* [whatever] roll, difficulty [whatever]." The success or failure 
of your roll determines where the story goes from there. 


In general, it's a good idea to save the rolls for situations 
in which failure could have drastic effects. Otherwise, dice rolls 
slow the action down. If the action in question simply moves 
the plot forward, then bypass the rolls. That way, the dice come 
out only when the future of your next action depends on your 
success with this one. 


For examples of various actions and their associated rolls, 
see Dramatic Feats in Chapter Nine, pp. 403-405. 


Example: Jennifer Rollins needs to get past a pit bull in order 
to break into that network honcho's house. Chained up in the 
front yard, that dog begins to growl as Jennifer approaches. “I’m 
gonna whisper softly to the pup,” says Jennifer’s player, “and use my 
affinity with animals to let me pass.” 


The Storyteller nods. “Roll Charisma + Animal Kinship, 
difficulty 8.” 

“Difficulty EIGHT?” The player cocks an eyebrow. “That’s 
pretty high.” 


The Storyteller shrugs. “It’s a guard dog. You're a stranger. 
Roll.” 


Between Jennifer’s Charisma 4 and her Animal Kinship 3, 
the player has seven dice in her dice pool. She rolls. The dice come 
up 2, 4, 8, 9, 3, 6, and 6. Given a difficulty of 8, her roll scores 
two successes — the 8 and the 9. Jennifer calms the dog and proceeds 
onward. If she hadn’t rolled that 8 and 9, things would have gone 
very differently. 


Simple Action 

In game terms, a simple action is a straightforward task that 
requires a single success. Firing a gun or shooting someone a 
nasty look - those are simple actions. 

Asimple action typically takes one turn, although the turn 
in question could reflect a fair length of time. You might need 
a single success in order to fix a broken fuel pump, but the 


388 — Mage: The Ascension 20" Anniversary Edition 


repair job itself takes an hour or two as far as the characters 
are concerned. 


An activity that involves a number of die rolls before it's 
completed, with chances for failure coming up several times 
within that span of time, would be an extended action - the 
details of which are explained below. 


Reflexive Action 


An action that takes no real time or deliberate effort 
to perform is called a reflexive action. Spending Willpower is 
reflexive. Noticing something that’s going on right in front of 
you (as opposed to searching around to find it) is reflexive, and 
so isa brief shout or exchange of words. If Malcolm wants to tell 
Jennifer, “Look behind you,” that’s reflexive - it takes no time. 
If he wants to hold a lengthy conversation with her, though, 
that would involve a full action, not a reflexive one. 


Essentially, a reflexive action takes no measurable gametime - 
it’s more or less automatic, or requires little conscious effort. In 
game terms, you probably don’t have to roll dice at all unless 
the reflex itself (like soaking damage with your Stamina, as 
described in Chapter Nine, pp. 412-413) involves rolling dice 
on the player’s part. 


Action Complications 


For the most part, that’s how the system works: when you 
need to determine the success or failure of a given task, roll 
your dice pool against the difficulty, count the successes, and 
see how well you did. 


In certain circumstances, though, you may want to reflect 
more complicated actions - a long ritual, a contest between 
opposing parties, an “action” that involves a series of several 
different related actions. And for those situations, the rules 
offer the following action complications: 


Multiple Actions 

When your mage tries to do several things at once, you 
need to divide your dice pool between those actions. Under 
the older World of Darkness rules, this was called splitting your 
dice pool. The 20“ Anniversary Edition rules, however, simplify 
the previous system. 


In story terms, your character divides his concentration 
between several simultaneous tasks, and so he performs each 
of them with less focus than he would normally employ. In 
game terms, the player divides the dice between those tasks, 
using fewer dice than usual in order to get the desired results. 


To perform several actions within a single turn, first figure 
out the dice pools you would normally use for those actions, 
and then use the lowest dice pool among them. If one task gives 
you a pool of six dice and the other gives you a pool of four 
dice, you would then have four dice to work with. You can 


divide those four dice between the tasks in whichever way you 
wish - three dice to the first action, one to the second, two 
dice to each action, and so forth. 


Certain magicks (Time 3) or Traits allow you to do several 
things at once without subtracting the usual penalties. Under 
normal circumstances, though, a character attempting several 
actions within the same turn requires the player to divide up 
her dice pools as described above. 


Example: Spider Chase tries to spin fire while observing 
several people on the fringes of her performance. Spinning the fire 
involves her Dexterity + Athletics dice pool, and observing uses her 
Perception * Alertness dice pool. 


Spider's Dexterity 3 and Athletics 4 give her a dice pool of 
seven dice. Spider's Perception 3 and Alertness 2 give her five dice. 
Spider's player has five dice to divide up between the two tasks. 


Extended Actions 


When your character embarks upon a long and complex 
process, you employ an extended action: a series of dice rolls 
that reflects a time-consuming activity. Research, repair, 
memorization, performance, rituals - these tasks, and others 
like them, involve extended actions. 


Atthe beginning of the task, the Storyteller picks a certain 
number of successes that you need to reach before the task is 
completed. If you need 15 successes to repair an engine, for 
instance, then you roll until you get 15 successes. Each roll of 
the dice represents a passage of time - 10 minutes, an hour, 
six hours, whatever seems appropriate. Quick tasks would use 
shorter intervals - say, 10 minutes or so - whereas complicated 
ones would use longer intervals, like an hour or more. 


How many rolls do you get? That depends on the 
circumstances. Generally, a task with a limited amount of 
time (like a concert, a ritual, a one-hour class, etc.) has between 


three and five rolls. Under relaxed circumstances, you could 
take however long you need, with each roll reflecting one 
hour, six hours, a day, or some other fitting interval. Because 
adventures typically involve a race against time, however, you'll 
usually have a set number of rolls with which to succeed or fail. 
Within three 10-minute rolls, for example, your fate is sealed. 


Extended rolls come into play when mages performs 
Rituals, as described in the section of that name in Chapter Ten 
(pp. 538-542). That section details the specific rules involved 
in rituals. For now, though, just remember that those extended 
tasks use extended rolls. 


Failing or Botching an Extended Roll 

The longer you spend on an activity, the more chance you 
have of screwing it up. And so, any extended action includes the 
possibilities of failure and disaster. A failed roll simply means that 
you make no progress that time around. A botch, however, means 
that the entire effort fails - probably in spectacular fashion. You 
might be able to pick up the pieces and start over from scratch, 
losingallofyour previously rolled successes. In most cases, though, 
a botch rolled during an extended action reflects a catastrophic 
failure, after which no further attempts are possible. 


It’s often a good idea, then, to spend Willpower (see below) 
during an extended roll in which the stakes are fairly high. That 
way, you reflect the character’s intense concentration and give 
yourself a higher chance of success. 


Example: Painted Horse gets ready to perform a hoop dance 
— a complex storytelling ritual dance involving almost a dozen 
brightly painted. hoops. To perform it correctly, Painted Horse's 
player needs to roll three times, get at least four successes, and avoid 
blowing any of those rolls. 


The drummers start playing. Singers begin chanting. "Okay," 
says the Storyteller — “three rolls, Dexterity + Art, difficulty 7, four 
successes or more. GO!” 


Optional Rule: Complementary Rolls 


Knowing one thing can often help you accomplish something else. To reflect this, the complementary roll option — referred 
to in the Mage Storyteller's Handbook as synchronous Abilities - allows a player to use success in one task to aid 
success in another. 


Under this optional rule, the player can make a roll with one task to assist the performance of a related task. A successful 
Perception + Etiquette roll, for example, could help a visiting mage make a good impression. Each success on that roll 
reduces the difficulty of the other roll by -1 for each success over the first (-1 difficulty for two successes, -2 for three, 
and so forth), up to a maximum of -3. 


Example: Lee Ann doesn’t understand Greek social customs when she meets the Pen & Paper cabal in Athens. Having 
picked up a few dots in Alertness and Etiquette during her adventures, however, she tries to use one to help the other. 
Observing other people around her, she tries:to pick vp- appropriate phrases and body language. At the table, Lynn 
rolls Lee Ann’s Perception + Alertness, and scores three successes. 


Slightly later, as Lee Ann meets Antonios, the leader of the cabal, she incorporates the things she’s learned into her greeting. 
Because she'd been making an effort to pick up cues, Lynn's Storyteller lowers the difficulty on Lee Ann's Etiquette roll 
from 6 to 4. As a result, Lynn rolls four successes — an exceptional victory. Even though she doesn't know the language, 
lee Ann greets Antonios in perfect Greek style, with enough social cues to make a wonderful impression. Giving her a 
massive hug, Antonios ushers the visitor in to meet his friends. 


Chapter Eight: The Book of Rules 


389 


Jackie — who's playing Painted Horse — tosses the first roll. Two Example: Malcolm makes a presentation in favor of a corporate 


successes. In the story, Painted Horse whirls around, spinning his hoops merger. His would-be client remains skeptical. "So, Steve,” says the 
in intricate patterns. The audience watches, enthralled. Storyteller to Malcolm’s player, “make your pitch for Malcolm. 
Charisma + Finance, resisted action, difficulty 8.” They both roll. 


Second roll. No successes. Painted Horse missteps, going slightly 
off-beat. It’s not a bad mistake, but it throws off his concentration. Steve scores two successes. Malcolm’s pitch is solid but 


If Jackie scores at least two more successes, then Painted Horse "Ot Inspiring. The Storyteller scores one success. That deducts 


$ B . 
ends the hoop dance amidst cheers and appreciation. If Jackie blows 0€ Success from Steve's two, leaving Steve (and, by extension, 
the last roll, he remains offbeat and concludes with a polite but Malcolm) with a single success. 


disappointed smattering of applause. And if Jackie botches that final In the story, the client takes a long moment to consider the 
roll, then Painted Horse's hoops tangle, he slips, and the entire dance proposal. “All right,” he says at last. “You’ve changed my mind." 
ends in a cascade of bright hoops and crushing humiliation. It's a narrow victory but an accomplishment nonetheless. 

Jackie scowls and prepares the final throw... Extended arid 
Resisted Actions Resisted Actions 

Certain actions take place over the potential When two characters struggle for victory, you might 


objections of other people. Arguments, seduction employ an extended and resisted action. In this case, 


attempts, hide-and-seek contests - these activities, the initiating player has to score a certain number of 
andothers, involve characters who find themselves successes while the resisting player tries to keep him from 
at cross-purposes, each of them trying to get the succeeding. As with an extended roll, you need to gather 
better of the other. In game terms, we're talking about acertain amount of successes within a certain number of 
a resisted action: an attempt to overcome another rolls... and, as with a resisted roll, the other player tries 


character’s resistance. to take those successes away from you. 


In a resisted action, both players roll dice Extended actions involve a sustained and 


and the one with the most successes wins. The limited contest - a race, a chess game, a wrestling 
dice pools depend upon the actions involved. If match, and so forth. The initiating character and 
asecurity guard (to return to the earlier example) player share an objective that the opposing 
were scanning his employer’s yard for intruders, character (and player) opposes. The 
the Storyteller and Jennifer’s player would share first player makes a series of rolls 
a resisted roll - Dexterity + Stealth for Jennifer, 


Perception + Alertness for the guard. The player 


to complete that objective, and the 
second player makes a series of rolls to 
stop him. At the end of the final roll, 
the one with the most successes wins. 


with the most successes wins the contest. 


More often than not, both players 


roll against the same difficulty number... Subtracting Successes 


in a Resisted Roll 


It’s worth noting that your opponent’s successes 


typically the standard target number, 
6. If one character has a particular 
advantage or disadvantage, however, 
that difficulty might go up 
or down. Jennifer’s sneaking 


take away successes from your own roll. If you roll 
five successes and your opponent rolls three, 


' A then you score only two successes. 
in at night? She's got a lower y y 


difficulty to hide, whereas the guard 
has a higher difficulty to spot her. He's got 
infrared goggles? Then it's the other way 


Under most circumstances, that's not 
really important - success is success. In 
certain situations, however, the number 
around. of successes you score becomes incredibly 
important. When a mage casts an 
Effect (as detailed in Chapter Ten), 


the amount of damage or other 


In a resisted action, the opposing player's 
successes subtract from the first player's roll. If 
Jennifer's player scores three successes and the . 
repercussions depends upon 
Storyteller scores two successes for the guard, 


then those two successes get deducted from Me 
S 


the original three. Jenniferstill getsasingle \_' 


the number of successes rolled 
by the mage’s player. As a 
- result, if another character 
success, but it's a really close contest. If , uM 
is resisting that roll, 
then the mage's Effect 


is significantly less 


the guard had gotten three successes, Jennifer 
would have lost all of her successes and been 
spotted by the guard. 


390 . Ma$e: The Ascension 20" Anniversary Edition 


Action Summaries 


Action Description 


Reflexive No roll 


Simple 


Multiple 
actions 


Extended 
number of successes 


Resisted 
each other 


Extended and Resisted 


“effective.” For details, see Dodging and Resistance in Chapter 
Ten (pp. 544-545). 


Example: Spider noticed that one of the guys she’d been spying 
on during her performance has been talking with a Laughing Rose 
cultist. The guy she’s been spying on has noticed Spider spying. Taking 
the cultist by the arm, he hustles off into the crowd. Spider follows. 

Spider’s kind of obvious in a crowd, so her player's difficulty 
is higher than usual — difficulty 7. “All right,” says the Storyteller, 
“roll at least five successes if you want to catch them before they 
leave the party. They’re trying to ditch you, though. You’ve got just 
three rolls to catch up with them, or they’re gone.” 

Comparing Spider’s dice pool of Dexterity + Stealth (using 
the crowd so that she doesn’t get noticed) to the guy’s Perception + 
Stealth (to notice her anyway), the resisted action begins... 


Spider’s player rolls the first roll: three successes. The Storyteller 
rolls for the cultist and the guy: two successes. Spider manages to 
tail her quarry, but they figure out that she’s on to them. 


Second roll: Spider gets one success. The Storyteller rolls two 
successes. Now Spider has no successes — she's spotted! Good luck 
on that final voll... 


Trying Again 


Difficulty Previous Attempts 
+] One failed attempt. 


+2 Two failed attempts. 


Sd) Three failed attempts. 
*4 Why bother? 
+5 Go home. 


One roll, one success needed 
Divide lowest dice pool between 
Several rolls, with anvassigned 
Opposing players roll against 


Several rolls against each other 


Examples 


Spending Willpower, soaking damage, saying 
something brief. 


Throwing.a punch, looking up to spot someone, 
making a clever remark designed to impress someone. 


Pulling out a wrench and hitting someone with it, 
running to a door and then yanking it shut. 


Fixing a computer, conducting a ritual. 


Grabbing an angry cat, impressing a potential client. 


Bathing angry cat, arguing online to impress an 
audience. 


Making one final attempt to melt into the crowd while 
keeping her prey in sight, Spider’s player does a final roll. Four 
successes! Maybe this’ll work... The Storyteller smiles, picks up the 
dice, and rolls... 


Teamwork 


Cooperation makes certain actions easier. Thus, in cases 
in which several characters work together on a given task - say 
a performance, medical procedures, etc. - you can let each of 
those players roll for that task, combine their successes, and 
complete the task more easily. 


Such cooperation works best with extended actions - scoring 
five successes is simpler when three players combine their rolls. 
Each roll is separate, however. The results don’t get combined 
until everyone has made a roll. One player might roll a single 
success, another fails, and a third gets three successes; the first 
and third player merge their successes for a total of four successes. 


Generally, a botched roll on any player’s part ruins the 
whole attempt. A botch, after all, reflects a catastrophe, so it 
stands to reason that a botch for one is a failure for all. Even 
so, a cooperating character who manages to separate her efforts 
from the other character can “take the botch on” herself. 
That way, the entire effort may continue even if the botching — | 
character blows her effort. | 


Example: Spotting the Laughing Rose cultist and Spider's 
interest in the other guy, Jinx moves in to support Spider's observation. 
Inky (Spider's player) rolls two successes. Camille (Jinx's player) rolls 
one, for a total of three successes between them. Teamwork! 


On the next roll, though, Camille botches the roll. No successes, 
plus a 1. The crowd parts suddenly, and the cultist spots Jinx. “Shit,” 
says Camille. “I'll take that on myself, then.” Pointing at the cultist, 
Jinx distracts the prey from Spider, and the game continues... 


Chapter Eight: The Book of Rules 391 


as o 


Failure 


Mages aren’t perfect. If you score no successes at 
all, your character fails the task at hand. Spider 
loses her prey; Jennifer gets spotted; Painted 
Horse messes up his dance; Malcolm’s client 
refuses the deal. Whatever you were trying to 
do, it didn’t work. Damn. 


It Again 


In the case ofa simple failure, you might be able 


DNY Y 
As Tryin$ 
LW Y ote 

to try again. Maybe Malcolm or Painted Horse can convince 
the audience to give them another shot, or Jennifer manages 
to lose herself in the darkness again. Once again, the player 
picks up the dice to roll. 


This time, however, the difficulty rises. For each failed 
attempt, add +1 to the difficulty level of the next try. This 
reflects a combination of stress and frustration, often added to 
the challenge of impressing a skeptical audience who’s already 
seen you fall on your face. (See Trying Again on p. 391.) 


Example: Crap. Spider loses her prey in the crowd. She 
glances over at the street where the cars are parked. There they 
are! As the cultist and the guy glance around themselves, Spider 
tries once again to follow them. They’re wary now, though, so her 


difficulty goes up by +1 to difficulty 8. 


392 . Ma$e: The Ascension 20" Anniversary Edition 


New Tools or Tactics 

In certain cases, you might try again with a different set of 
tools or tactics. If, instead of trying to win his client over in the 
office, Malcolm offers to grab drinks with the would-be client and 
then approaches the deal from a different angle - making friends 
with the client and thus changing his attitude while disguising the 
pitch as a casual conversation - theStoryteller could give the player 
asecond chancewithoutpenalties. This timeout, Malcolm's player 
employs Charisma * Subterfuge - same difficulty, same successes 
needed, but a different approach to the problem. 


In such cases, you should define how your approach to the 
problem differs from the previous attempts. Is Jennifer using 
a concealment spell? Does Spider appear to give up the chase? 
Will Painted Horse try to pass his failure off as an intentional 
part of the act? If the player can come up with a new and clever 
approach to the problem, the Storyteller should let him treat 
that like a fresh attempt at the task. 


Example: Painted Horse laughs at himself, jokes, gets the 
audience back on his side. Juggling the hoops, he launches into an 
improvised monolog about being a sacred fool. As he speaks, he 
starts spinning the hoops in a dazzling new configuration. 

“Charisma + Expression,” says the Storyteller. “Difficulty 7.” 


“Painted Horse,” says Jackie, “has a total dice pool of seven for that.” 


Botches and Magick 


Botches get especially critical when yov're casting magick: 


* A botch on a coincidental magick Effect inflicts one automatic Paradox point for every dot in the highest Sphere 
involved. (A botched Sphere 4 Effect = four Paradox points.) 


e Botching a vulgar Effect without witnesses inflicts one Paradox point, plus another point for every dot in the highest 
Sphere involved. (That Sphere 4 Effect = five Paradox points.) 


* Botching a vulgar Effect with witnesses inflicts two Paradox points plus two more Paradox points per dot in the highest 
Sphere involved. (Now that Sphere 4 Effect = 10 Paradox points.) 


Under the Reckoning metaplot, the amount of Paradox can be even higher. For more details and explanations, see 


Paradox in Mage Revised p. 550. 


Magick and the “Free-Botch’ Option 


Some World of Darkness rulebooks suggest a “free-botch” option; this way, the Storyteller can ignore one botch per 
game session. 


But because botches are so critical to the magick rules in Mage, we do not recommend ignoring any botches rolled 
when a player casts a magickal Effect. Magick’s supposed to be dangerous and unpredictable, especially when it’s 
vulgar magick cast by mages whose Arts violate the laws of scientific reality. A lot of that danger gets lost if botches are 
ignored, so although your group might employ the free-botch option with regard to non-magickal tasks, we suggest that 


every botched magick roll counts. 


“TIl give it to you as an automatic action, then,” replies the 
Storyteller. “You’re on. They’re with you. Try that Dexterity + Art 
roll again, difficulty 7, same as before.” 


“Thanks,” says Jackie. “Let’s do this.” 
The audience watches as Jackie picks up the dice and prepares 
to roll again... 


Botching and the Rule of One 


And then there are the failures you can't recover from - the 
scattered hoops; the angry client; the trespasser caught by the guard, 
dog, and cameras. That's a botch: a catastrophic failure that leaves the 
character ina worsesituation than he'd been in before things started. 


Story-wise, a botch reflects spectacular bad luck: the sirens 
go off, the parkour expert slips, the computer fizzles in a puff of 
smoke. In short, you’re done. It’s time to dust yourself off and 
try again... if that’s even possible. Although a botch shouldn’t 
flat-out kill your character, it ought to leave him at a distinct 
disadvantage. That's the risk you take when you try to be a hero. 


Game-wise, every 1 you roll takes away one success from 
your roll. Think of this as "the rule of one." If your 1s cancel 
out your successes, you fail; roll three successes, roll three 1s, 
and you're left right where you were before. 


Assuming that you rolled even one success before the 1s 
cancel out all your successes, then your character simply fails. 


But if you don't roll any successes and you roll a 1, then 
you botch. 


That's where things get ugly. A high difficulty makes it 
harder for you to score a success, so the odds of a spectacular 
catastrophe go up as you attempt more challenging feats. If 
Jennifer tries to sneak through the yard in broad daylight 


(difficulty 9), her chances of getting caught right out in the open 
(a botch) go way up because she’s not likely to roll any 9s or 10s. 


If you roll several 1s and no successes, then you botch 
in a big way. A single botch might prove embarrassing, but a 
botch with three 1s - a triple botch - could prove fatal. The 
Storyteller gets the final say, but impressive botches should 
have impressively terrible results. 

Example: Spider's prey knows she's out there. Her difficulty 
to track them through the crowd is 8. Inky rolls her dice and gets the 
following results: 1, 3, 5, 7, 1, 6. A double botch! Spider’s bulky boots 
catch on the edge of the pavement, tripping her into three girls she'd been 
trying to use as cover. Drinks spill. Curses fly. Spider glances up, but the 
Laughing Rose cultist and the guy she’d been following are both long gone. 


Botches and Thresholds 


Because a high difficulty number makes it hard to score 
even a single success, the player and Storyteller can decide to 
handle the task with a threshold (see p.387) rather than with a 
single roll. In story terms, the character decides to take a longer, 
more careful approach; in game terms, the Storyteller lowers 
the difficulty in exchange for an extended roll. This way, the 
task takes longer but might have a lower chance of botching. 


Example: Malcolm works carefully this time. Rather than pressing 
the business deal, he takes the client out for drinks... then to a strip club... 
then for more drinks at another strip club. "I'll work this guy all night,” 
says Steve. “No hurry here.” The Storyteller agrees to an extended action 
at a lower difficulty — three rolls, four successes, difficulty 6. 


Steve piles on the charm with Malcolm’s Charisma + 
Subterfuge. By the end of the evening (three rolls later), Steve has 
accumulated six successes and Malcolm has the client eating out of 


his hand. 


Chapter Eight: The Book of Rules 393 


mr" 222 


394 


Success, obviously, is success. You made the 
roll, gathered enough successes, didn’t botch. 
You're golden. 


Some successes, though, mean more than 
others. You can leap across a gap between roofs, 
flail awkwardly, grab the lip of one rooftop and 
barely pull yourself across... or you can sail 
through the air like a champion gymnast, nail 
the landing, and roll to your feet with a grace 
that leaves folks ready to applaud. Especially 


Ma$e: The Ascension 20^ Anniversary Edition 


Success 


with regards to tasks like performances and athletic feats, the 
difference between a marginal success and a phenomenal one 
can mean the difference between a half-decent concert and 
Jimi Hendrix burning his Strat at the Monterey Pop festival. 


Automatic Success 

In many cases, there's no point in rolling dice. Your 
character excels at what he does, and the dice would simply 
slow the story down. In situations where your mage is "just that 
good,” your Storyteller can simply say, “You did it - let's move 
on." That's an automatic success. 


As a guideline, assume that if you've got a dice pool that 
equals or exceeds the difficulty of a task and the story's not 
hinging on your success or failure at the time, then you've got 


an automatic success. Malcolm's great at making deals; Spider 
spins fire like a champ; Jennifer's good at sneaking around and 
gets on well with animals; Painted Horse can spin hoops and 
charm an audience.These characters do these things so well 
that under most circumstances we don't even bother to roll 
and see how well they do in their respective fields. 


Butwhen the heatison, orwhen the player and his character 
want to really blow folks away, then the dice come out. The 
automatic success rule doesn't apply to combatsituations (unless 
perhaps it's an Akashic Master and two drunk morons in a bar), 
and it's not good for extended actions - much less resisted ones 
- unless the character is just so damned skillful that success is 
still pretty much assured. (Malcolm, for instance, excels at sealing 
deals; that's why he's That Guy at his corporation.) If a single 
success is all you need, the automatic success rule works just fine. 


Spending Willpower 

Focus makes a huge difference, especially when you're 
the heroic type. In game terms, you can spend a point of 
Willpower (see Using Willpower in Chapter Six, p. 330) to 
get one automatic success even under stressful conditions. By 
putting serious focus behind the task at hand, your character 
pushes past his usual limits. Though you can spend only one 
point of Willpower per turn - but several during an extended 
action - you can avoid botching and give your character a 
better chance at success. 

Example: “I’m spending a point of Willpower,” Jackie says, 
casting the dice. That's one success, no matter how they roll. Even 
if they fall badly, Painted Horse won't botch this performance... and 
if they fall WELL, he could score a serious coup. 


Multiple Successes 
and Degrees of Success 


A single success means you succeeded decently: you 
found what you were looking for, your concert went okay, 
you got that cute guy's number even though he didn’t seem 
too interested, whatever. However, as the Degrees of Success 
chart shows (see p. 387), there are different levels of success. 
By exceeding the minimum degree of success, your character 
can be truly memorable... not simply getting by, but nailing 
the game with style. 


Examples: Six successes later, Malcolm has an eager new 
associate and friend. Jennifer, despite all odds, sneaks in and out of 
the network honcho’s house with enough dirt to destroy his career. 
Painted Horse pleases the spirits, his audience, and most of all 
himself when he turns that hoop dance into a five-success gig. As for 
Spider and Jinx, better luck next time — and there WILL, of course, 
be a next time... 


A great roll, with several successes, makes a huge difference 
in story terms. Whereas that one success means an acceptable 
win, four successes mean serious victory. That’s the flipside of 
a botch: just as you can screw up miserably, you can also rock 
the world with triumph. 


And really... isn’t that what magick’s all about? 


Chapter Eight: The Book of Rules — 395 


ZI b 7T 
NR 


JO) 


CU 


I 


Chapter Nine: 


Dramatic 
Systems 


The evidence all points to the fact that we occupy not a well-mannered clockwork universe 
but a destructive, violent, and hostile zoo... the universe wants to kill us all. 


— Neil deGrasse Tyson, Death by Black Hole 


Six of Swords 


Associations: Passage; journey; travel; objectivity; blockage; 
obstacles; consideration of the whole... 


Near nightfall, Tanith stumbled onto the settlement, more by accident 
than by navigation. One minute, it seemed as though she was moving along 
the stream; the next, her canoe was caught in some kind of barrier of branches 
and there were women armed with everything from butcher knives to a 
baseball bat standing on the banks on either side of her. 


Tanith raised her empty hands in greeting. One of the women came 
forward and asked her in Portuguese what she wanted. Thankful for the many 
language lessons she had endured, Tanith assured them she was not their 
enemy. “Eu sou medico,” she told them: I’m a doctor. Carefully, she held 
up her medical kit and the herbal medicine bag she carried everywhere. One 
suspicious woman — scarred and burly, with eyes that had seen firsthand how 
awful men could be — set aside her baseball bat and took the bags from Tanith. 
Examined them. Nodded to the others, finally. 

Weapons lowered, the women offered wary welcomes to their visitor. 

Their caution, Tanith realized, was warranted. Survivors of massacres 
at Comdoro, Santarém, and elsewhere, they had no reason to welcome 
strangers. Murder-gangs and cartel enforcers had taken everything they'd 
possessed except for this hidden sanctuary. She hoped they had a few guns 
among them. If the killers found this place as well, the women would need 
more than knives and clubs. 


And now? If nothing else, they looked as though they could use a 
doctor. 


Chapfer Nine: Dramatic Syste 397 


The raw scream from beyond the trees ran shivers up 
Tanith's sweaty back. The other women looked in the direction of 
that cry. "Ela está em trabalho de parto, certo?" asked Tanith: She 
is in labor, yes? 

Burly-scar nodded, their apparent leader. 


Tanith pointed to her medicine gear. "Eu sou uma obstetriz. Eu 
posso ajuda-la:” I'm a midwife. I can help her. Tanith’s instincts, as 
usual, had been correct. She'd been needed here. 


A few minutes later, after soft but pointed arguments 
in Portuguese, she stepped into the blood-thickened air of a 
handmade hut. Eyes adjusting from the sunlight to the dim, 
Tanith noted the young woman swollen with ripe pregnancy, the 


slick sweat; the tired faces of her friends as they held her down 
and tried to soothe her pain. "Aqui — por favor, me deixe entrar. 
Eu sou médica," she said, uncapping her canteen and washing her 
hands, then dousing them with antiseptic. Here — please let me in. 
I'm a doctor. 


Inside the birth canal, the child had twisted and lodged. Thank 
you, Mother, Tanith prayed silently. A few more minutes longer, 
and... best not to think of that. She laid her hands on the young 
mother's belly, closed her eyes, and focused herself. Massaged. Began 
to chant. To sing. To work the baby free... 


In the name of all mothers, Tanith prayed. And in the name of 
them all, the Mother answered... 


Selling the Drama 


When seconds count and success or disaster 
hangs upon the roll of 10-sided dice, rules provide 
foundations for your tale. As we saw in the 
previous chapter, the core of those rules is very 
simple: roll one d10 for every dot in your dice 
pool, to equal or beat the difficulty of your task. 


Certain tasks, however, are more complex than 
others. In such situations - stepping sideways 
into the Otherworlds, facing off with spirit 
entities, ducking bursts of machine gun fire, 
and so on - simplicity gives way to detail. 
And so, this chapter provides a framework for such dramatic 
situations - for those times when a simple die roll doesn't tell 
the whole story. 


In all cases, the following dramatic systems employ the basic 
dieroll foundation. And yes - the Golden Rule still applies 
here as well. This chapter's rules exist to help keep your story 
moving. If they bog things down, the Storyteller should feel free 
to simply say, "Never mind - you succeed” or “Go ahead — roll, but 
your chances of doing that are practically nonexistent.” Yes, rules are 
important, especially when your character’s life is on the line. 
When using those rules, though, favor description over dice. Play 
out the seduction; describe the firefight; imagine the sweat and 
gunsmoke - the pain of injury and the relief of a job well done. 


Here, as before, drama is more important than systems. Sell 
that drama and make your story sing. 


Where the Rules Are 


Given the vast number of rules and options in this chapter, 
we've broken these Dramatic Systems into the following sections: 


* Part I: Initiative and Movement (pp. 399-401) shows 
you the differentways in which time, space, and activities 
break down within the game setting. 


* Part II: Dramatic Feats (pp. 401-405) covers the wide 
range of things a character can do without magick. 


* Part III: Health and Injury (pp. 406-409) deals with 
the systems for injury and healing. 


398 Mage: The Ascension 20" Anniversary Edition 


* Part IV: Combat (pp. 409-457) features the many ways 
in which characters can hurt one another, including 
magickal combat, spirit combat, close combat, dirty 
fighting, martial arts, Do, mage duels, and the many 
environmental hazards associated with combatand other 
forms of dangerous living. This section also features an 
extensive array of associated charts, beginningon (p. 445). 


Metric Conversions 


Because Mage is international - and Mage fans 
are even more so! — the following conversions. can 
help players translate the between American system 
of measurements and the metric system. 


Distance 
1 foot = .3 meters/ 30 centimeters 
1 yard = .91 meters 
meter = 3.28 feet/ 1.1 yards 
kilometer = .6 miles 
mile = 1.6 kilometers 
Mass 
ounce = 28 grams 
pound = .45 kilograms 
kilogram = 28 ounces/ 2.2 pounds 
ton = .9 megagrams (metric tons) 
metric ton = 1.1 tons 
Liquid Volume 
ounce = 30 milliliters 
pint = .47 liters 
1 quart = .95 liters 
1 liter = 1.06 quarts/ .26 gallons 
1 gallon = 3.8 liters 


* Part V: The Technological World (pp. 458-464) deals 


with vehicles, machines, and invention and repairs. 


* Part VI: The Digital Web (pp. 465-473) reveals the 
basic systems involved in tackling the living aspect of 
the Internet. 


* Part VII: The Otherworlds (pp.474-485) revisits the 
many strange environments described in Chapter Four, 
including the optional systems for the Avatar Storm. 


Part I: Initiative 


Mages have a way of turning time and space 
into enigmatic pretzels. Even so, it's a good 
idea to go over the basic rules of timing and 
activity before exploring the various methods 
for breaking heads, hearts, and the laws of 
physics. The intervals of game time and story 
time can be found under Turns, Scenes, and 
Stories in Chapter Eight (pp. 384-385), and 
this chapter shows you what you can do within 
those times. 


Action Turns 


When action erupts, each activity becomes a distinct and 
concentrated moment, and its importance becomes obvious 
only after the action ends. In The Matrix, that sense of bullet 
time captures the strange sense of calm-amidst-chaos... a sense 
mages understand all too well, especially those familiar with 
the Sphere of Time. 


In game terms, dramatic moments become action turns 
- those short units of time described in Chapter Eight that 
reflect between three and 10 seconds in your character's life. 
Although extended tasks - hacking, seductions, rituals, and 
so on - may use turns that last for minutes or even hours, 
situations in which the "clock is ticking" employ action turns. 


During those action turns - especially the ones that cover 
combat situations - the Storyteller can break things down into 
three stages: 


¢ Part VIII: Umbrood Spirit Entities (pp. 485-495) wraps 
up the chapter with a look at the weird creatures on the 
other side of the Gauntlet. 


As mentioned in previous chapters, the following rules 
should be considered the officially definitive systems for Mage. 
Although your Storyteller may feel free to use older versions 
of the rules (or house rules, of course), a combination of old 
rules and new ones might be confusing and unbalancing to 
your game. 


and Movement 


* Stage One: Initiative, in which the various players 
determine who acts in which order. (See below.) 


* Stage Two: Action, during which everyone rolls dice 
and figures out what's happening; and... 


* Stage Three: Resolution, in which the results of those 
die rolls make themselves known. Damage gets figured. 
Success or failure plays out through character activities. 
And then the stage gets set for the next turn, where it 
all begins again. 


For combat-based situations, see the section of that name. 
For non-combat situations, check Dramatic Feats, below. And 
for details about time, see the previous chapter. 


Initiative and Initiative Ratings 

In real life, such moments feel chaotic; games, though, 
demand a bit more order. And so, when the action starts, each 
player (including the Storyteller) rolls initiative for his or her 
character. Those with high initiatives act first, while the others 
scramble to catch up. 


To find your initiative, roll one die and then add it to 
your character’s initiative rating: his Dexterity + Wits. The 
character with the highest initiative acts first, the second 
highest goes next, and so on down the line. The Storyteller 
handles initiative for each of her characters too, and she 
might decide - for simplicity's sake - to have them all act on 
the same initiative. 


Roll Once, or Once Per Turn? 


You can go one of two ways with initiative: either rolling a new initiative every turn, or else rolling a single initiative at the 
beginning of an action scene and then sticking with that order until that scene ends. The first approach allows characters 
to catch up with one another or fall behind thanks to circumstances; the second option keeps the action quick and simple. 


Either option works, and both have advantages and disadvantages. Option one reflects the unpredictable nature of 
action scenes, but it slows gameplay down. Option two keeps things moving, but one bad initiative roll can put you at 


a disadvantage for the entire scene. 


Ultimately, your troupe should decide which options works best... and do so before the action starts. Don't switch between 
those options in the middle of a scene. Pick one and stick with it. 


Chapter Nine: Dramatic Systems 399 


Ties on the die roll go to the player with the highest 
initiative rating; if the initiative ratings are also tied, then favor 
the character with the highest Wits. If the Wits ratings are also 
tied, favor the character with the highest Dexterity. In story 
terms, both characters act simultaneously, and the effects of 
their actions hit home at the same time. 


Automatic Feats 

Once you've figured outwho's doing what and when they re 
doing it, you'll generally want to figure out whether or not they 
succeed at doing it. Most of this chapter covers the manysituations 
in which you'll probably roll for success or failure. Certain 
automatic feats, though, require no rolls. Although you'll generally 
have to spend an action to perform such activities, you won't 
need to roll for them unless there's some sort of complication 
involved, like trying to run across ice or grab a key ring that has 


slipped deep into your pocket... just when you need to get into 
your car or apartment RIGHT THIS SECOND. 


When there's nothing vital on the line, most activities are 
essentially automatic actions. Malcolm doesn't need to make 
a roll every time he fills out a form or makes a deal - that's 
just what he does. But when the difference between success 
and failure impacts the story, the die rolls matter. Under calm 
circumstances, you can just use the automatic success rule 
referred to in the previous chapter. Save the rolls and rules for 
tasks with potentially dramatic consequences. 


Automatic or not, each of the following tasks takes an 
action. A player who wants to have his character take more 
than one action at time needs to divide his attention between 
them - see Doing Several Things at Once, below. 


Common automatic feats include: 


* Getting to Your Feet: Under normal circumstances, you 
don't need to roll dice in order to get up from a chair or 
the floor. Such actions require rolls only if someone's 
trying to stop your character from getting up or when 
he's struggling with hazards like ice, oil, or some similar 
impediment. 


* Normal Movement: Under most circumstances, your 
character can get around without needing to make a 
roll. As with the other situations, those rolls come in 
only when there's some hazard or ticking clock involved. 
For movement rates, see below. 


* Normal Speech, Writing, or Texting: Unless you're 
trying to accomplish something vital with your words, 
it doesn't take much time, or a roll, to make a short 
statement or share a brief exchange. Long speeches or 
debates, of course, do take time - you can't deliver a 
stirring address about the wonders of Taoist alchemy in a 
few seconds - and typing or texting take more time than 
speaking. Under certain circumstances, you may need to 
make a roll to speak, text, or type something complicated 
while under stress... especially if you’re trying to deal 
with autocorrect while texting a banishment ritual to a 
friend who’s under attack. 


Mage: The Ascension 20" Anniversary Edition 


e Grabbing Tools or Weapons: Mages tend to keep the 
tools of their Arts within easy reach, especially if they 
know they’re going into hostile situations. Thus, certain 
instruments - guns, knives, mummified pigeon feet on 
a chain, and so forth - can usually be grabbed within a 
turn and without a roll. 


Certain tools and weapons, though, are more difficult and 
clumsy to employ: cauldrons, laptops, a set of dice in a bag that's 
buried at the bottom of your backpack... stuff like that. In that 
case, the action used to dig them out or put them to use might 
take more than three to 10 seconds. A pistol, for example, is 
quick to draw and easy to employ, whereas a .30 caliber machine 
gun is not. Certain instruments take time to use. Sure, you can 
drink a potion or point a wand within seconds, but typing out a 
custom virus scriptor inscribing the Seventh and Last Pentacle of 
the Sun will take quite a bit longer, and it will probably require 
a roll to assure that you don't screw up the process. 


To pull outan instrument or weapon and use it within the 
same turn, you ve got to split your dice pool between actions. 
Again, see Doing Several Things at Once. 


* Starting a Vehicle: It doesn't take a roll, or much 
time, to start up the average car. Starting a tank or 
airplane, of course, is another matter - it might take 
several minutes to get all the essential systems online. 
Traveling, likewise, doesn't usually require rolling dice 
unless there's some complication involved - driving on 
icy roads, having an aerial dogfight, trying to outrun a 
pack of Road Warrior rejects, that sort of thing. For such 
situations, see Dramatic Feats, Environmental Hazards, 
and Vehicle Systems, all later in this chapter. 


* Delaying Your Action: If you want your character to 
hold off on an action until other characters have acted, 
simply declare, “I yield this action until later.” By yielding, 
or delaying, an action, you save your character's activity 
up until the end of the turn. If you don't use a delayed 
action within that turn, however, then your character 
doesn't act that turn. And if everyone yields his or her 
action that turn, then no one goes at all. 


Doing Several Things at Once 


In the heat of the moment, characters often try to perform 
several tasks at the same time. Doing so, however, means that 
they have to divide their attention between them. In game terms, 
this requires either Multiple Actions (described in Chapter 
Eight, p. 388-389), or else the use of a Time 3 Effect that lets 
you move faster than usual. 


Movement 


Mages get around - on foot, in cars, on wings and 
jetpacks and motorcycles and whatever other methods they 
manage to employ. The higher-level Correspondence Sphere 
magicks even let them step from place to place without 
passing through the intervening distance; that's pretty 
unusual, though, and it's covered in the following chapter. 


Movement Rates 


Under most circumstances, an average human being can walk, jog, or run at the rate below. More information about 
Climbing can be found in the Dramatic Feats section. 


Move 
Walk 
Jog 12 + Dexterity yards 


Distance per Turn 


7 yards 


Run 20 + (3 x Dexterity) yards 
Swim 
Fly 10 to 20 yards 
Climb 


Most times, the Awakened move around more or less the 
way we all do: on foot or in vehicles that cover the space 
between Point A and Point B. 


When your character walks, runs, swims, or flies, the 
Movement Rates chart tells you more or less how far she'll move 
within a single turn. She can move up to half of her normal 
running speed in a single turn and still act without taking a 

; 
penalty; ifshe moves more than that, she'll have to reduce her dice 
pool for that second action by one die for every yard she moves. 


Generally, a character can move at full speed for a minute or 
two (roughly 10 turns) for every point of Stamina she possesses. 


8 + Dexterity (unskilled)/ 12 + Dexterity (skilled) yards 


10 feet (3.3 yards) per success normally; 15-20 feet under ideal conditions; 5 feet per success under poor conditions. 


Characters who have reached the Injured Health Level or 
lower move at half their normal rate. High-intensity movement 
(jumping, swimming, flatout running) can cut the normal 
movement duration by half or even more than that if she’s also 
dodging gunfire, swimming through heavy waves, or outrunning 
the hounds of hell. To push beyond such limits, you'll often have 
to roll either your character’s Stamina or Willpower - whichever 
one is greater. Botch that roll, and your mage's body immediately 
gives up, trips, or otherwise comes to a screeching halt. 


For rules dealing with vehicles, see Vehicle Systems (pp. 
458-462). 


Part Il: Dramatic Feats 


Drama means “to perform.” Thus, whenever 
possible, your character’s actions can become 
opportunities for roleplaying performances. At 
those times, though, when youcan’tact outyour 
character's deeds - when he’s more eloquent 
than you, when she’s much stronger than you, 
when someone pulls steel or hops on a wyvern's 
back - then it’s time for dice to help tell the tale. 


The following dramatic feats reflect tasks that 
demand physical, social, or mental acumen. As 
you describe what your character’s doing in the story, check 
the Dramatic Feats chart below, add the appropriate Traits 
together, and then roll against the listed difficulty. In certain 
cases, that roll might be extended or resisted, as per the previous 
chapter; for such situations, several rolls depict the ongoing 
effort and its eventual failure or success. 


As the Degrees of Success chart in Chapter Eight (p. 387) 
reveals, you can succeed by a bare margin, do well, or knock the 
ball out of the park, depending on the number of successes you 
roll for a given feat. Especially with regards to physical feats, acts 
of art and science, or social occasions, the difference between a 
marginal success and extreme victory can have huge effects on 
thestory'sdirection and the characters involved. A single success 
during a facedown, for example, could result in a scowl and a 


grudging step aside, but a five-success victory could scare your 
rival so badly that he cowers, bolts, and avoids you afterward. 


The Dramatic Feats chart features several columns: 


* Action tells you what the character's doing. 
e Traits show you which game Traits to use in your dice pool. 


* Difficulty providesa base difficulty for the task. Depending 
on circumstances, this number could go up or down. 


* Description tells you which type of roll to use. If the 
task involves some additional Traits or elements, you'll 
find them in this column too. 


* Many tasks also feature Notes, indicated by a number, 
that show options or exceptions to the listed roll. Those 
notes can be found on the page following that chart. 


The Dramatic Feats chart doesn't cover every potential 
action, of course, but it'll give you something to work with as 
your heroes move through the tale. If you need to puzzle out 
some task that’s not listed on the chart, just find a similar feat on 
the chart and then use that as a guide to your roll and difficulty. 


Divided into several sections, the chart reveals different 
sorts of feats and their associated rolls... 


Chapter Nine: Dramatic Systems 40l 


=a - 


Dv 7T 
f 


Physical Feats 


When you can'tclimb a wall, the dice can climb it for you. This 
section covers feats of strength, endurance, and agility. Mostofthem 
are obvious; Demolition, however, reflects smashing things with 
raw strength (see also Bustin’ Stuff, p. 439-440). Flow-Arts involves 
using some sort of graceful skill-toy (hoops, juggling, poispinning, 
staffspinning, etc.), and a Resisting character tries to push through 
physical, mental, or emotional trauma (torture, ordeals, depression, 
illness, and so forth) without giving in to pain or fatigue. 


Art and Science 


The Art and Science section helps your character design 
and perform works of skilled creativity. In many cases, you 
can simply narrate or roleplay such creations; in high-stakes 
situations, though - say, trying to impress a tough audience, 
repair a broken time machine, or cast a spell through a ritual 
dance - then a successful roll or two can resolve the task at hand. 


On the chart, Design reflects the research and brainstorming 
stage, Computer represents typical information technology tasks, 
and Craftwork represents the physical act of making something 
new (sculpting, coding, wiring, painting, forging, etc.); depending 
on what you're trying to accomplish, this could take minutes, 
hours, days or more. Evaluation comes into play when you're 
trying to judge someone else's work, Hacking involves breaking 
intoacomputerized system, and Gamesmanship reflects contests 
of strategy and skill - chess, cars, riddle contests, and so on. In- 
vention represents the trial-and-error process involved in creative 
technology; Jury-Rigging involves quick fixes when technology 
fails. Performance reflects artistic activity (dancing, singing, telling 
jokes, and so forth), Programming deals with setting or changing 
commands in a data-based system, and Surfing represents general 
computer-based Internetactivity. Repair covers maintenance and 
fix-it work, and Research covers the time and effort involved in 
finding essential data for the project you're working on at the 
time. Understanding, meanwhile, represents the comprehension 
of mysteries, riddles, or Things Man Was Not Meant to Know; 
in such situations, it may be better to score a moderate degree 
of success than to, perhaps, understand the full implications of 
what you're examining. Especially in the Awakened world, such 
understanding could drive a sane man mad... See Things Man 
Was Not Meant to Know, under Health and Injury, (p. 407). 


Foradditionalsystems details abouttechnology, craftwork, 


and other related subjects, see the various sections under Part 
V: The Technological World. 


Social Occasions 
and Intrigue 


Crafty mages know their way around the social jungle. In 
the shadows of that jungle, folks pass around codes and gossip 
and circulate physical and emotional poisons. So when your 
mage wants to intimidate a rival, impress a client, or score some 
company for the night, the following tasks and rolls come into play. 


In game terms, Cryptography refers to making or cracking 
codes - an activity that usually demands specialized knowledge 


402 Mage: The Ascension 20" Anniversary Edition 


before you can even consider doing it. Deception reveals how 
well you tell or spot a lie, and Eloquence represents impressive 
speeches and verbal dexterity. A Facedown determines contests 
of social dominance, whereas a Fake-Out determines the success 
or failure of attempted misdirection. Gossip plants rumors 
and spreads slander; Impressing wins another person’s favor. 
Interpreting helps you puzzle out language or behavior you don’t 
easily understand, and Interrogation helps you obtain info from 
parties who'd rather not share it with you. Poisoning lets you 
slip dangerous substances into drinks, food, or other vectors. 
Seduction reflects emotional manipulation (sexual or otherwise); 
Spotting (a) Sneak helps catch people in the act of trying to get 
past you. Spotting (the) Supernatural helps you notice mystic 
and paranormal phenomena like auras or Resonance. Finally, 
the brutal art of Torture reflects the effective implementation 
of enhanced interrogation and artistic excruciation - loathsome 
but unfortunately popular activities in the age of terror wars. 


Social activities work best when you combine roleplaying and 
imaginative descriptions with a die roll or two to reflect the things 
you can’t play out in person. In many cases, these rolls represent 
minutes’ or hours’ worth of effort - even among the Awakened, the 
ability to hash out a code off the cuff or make someone look bad 
within seconds is rare. Many social-based rolls involve resisted actions 
(again, see the previous chapter) in order to overcome the target’s 
objections. In certain cases, though, the automatic success rule (once 
again, see Chapter Eight) ought to eliminate the die roll altogether; 
after all, a mage with eight dots in his combined Appearance + 
Seduction pool can seduce most people simply by looking their way. 


Transportation 


Especially in the 21* century, folks ride things in order to 
get from place to place. If you happen to be driving, piloting, 
flying a broom, or riding a beast, the following rolls might 
come into play. 


Driving represents motorized vehicle handling, though 
certain vehicles (trucks, motorcycles, etc.) may require at least 
two or three dots in Drive. Evasion allows a person to shake 
pursuit while on foot or in a vehicle. Flight represents object- 
assisted flying (carpets, jetpacks, etc.), wings, or levitation. 
Piloting is essentially driving, but with tricky and specialized 
aircraft controls. Pursuit lets you chase someone, Riding reflects 
your ability to manage a live mount, and Sailing represents 
your ability to handle a water-going vehicle. 


Especially large or complex vehicles, of course, are beyond 
a single person’s ability. One guy can’t run a starship or 
aircraft carrier by himself! In this case, the related Ability Trait 
combined with a Mental Attribute lets you know how that 
vehicle is controlled, and may help you tell other people how 
to manage such a craft. In many cases, however, a character 
needs a specific Trait or specialty before she has the slightest 
idea how to operate a given type of vehicle. Your ability to 
handle a motorboat won't tell you either Jack or Shit when 
you reach an ocean liner's bridge! 


For the rules connected to the vehicles themselves, see 
Vehicles Systems (pp. 458-462). 


Es s. 


Action 


Climbing 


Flow-Arts 
Hunting 


Lifting 

Sneaking 
Computer 
Design 
Gamesmanship 


Invention 


ry a 
Performance 
Minna 


Repair 


Surfing 


Traits 


Dexterity + Athletics 
Dexterity + Athletics 


Perception + Survival *? 


Strength or Willpower 


Dexterity + Stealth 


AIT 1d + ATT 


Intelligence + 
Computers 


xterity + Crafts #4 


Intelligence + Crafts #4 


Perception + Subterfuge 
#5 


Intelligence + Craft or 
Technology 


Manipulation + Art #7 
gence + 


Intelligence + 
Technology 


nye | Igence - 


Perception + Computer 


Difficulty 


DPR MS 


(varies) *' 
5-9 


7-9 


(varies) see Feats 


of Strength chart 


#3 


(varies) 


(varies) 


'aries 


(varies) 


(varies) 


(varies) 


(varies) 


Pn NERA ^ 
— 
Description 


Extended; 1 success = 5 feet 


Standard; 1 roll per each performance 
Extended; 1 roll = 1-3 hours 


Standard; see Spotting Sneak 
Standard or Extended 

Extended 

Resisted 


Extended 


Standard 


Extended 


Extended 


Chapter Nine: Dramatic Systems 403 


Cryptography 


Eloquence *" 
= J EAN 


Fake-Out #" 


Impressing *" 


Merrogation Pu 
Sedul un 

— ecl 
M. 

Piloting 


Riding 


Salling 


Dexterity or Wits + Pilot *'4 


Intelligence + 
Knowledge *'? 


Charisma + Expression 
harisma - | 


Manipulation + 
Streetwise 


Charisma + Etiquette 


Manipulation + 6 
Intimidation 
Manipulation + 


Subterfuge or 
Seduction 


Perception + Awareness (varies) 


VIANIPUIATIO 


Dexterity + transport 
method 


#14 


Dexterity + Riding 


(varies) 


rigue 


Extended #!° 


Standard 
1, target's 


Standard 


Standard 
Standard 


Resisted, target's Willpower 


otandard 
Ttanaara 


Resisted, target's Willpower 


Standard 


Resisted *'? 
Standard 


Standard 


#1 = A variable difficulty is typically 6, but it may go up or down depending on circumstances. 


#3 = Watcher's Perception + Awareness; could also be set by conditions — higher for light or open space, lower for 
darkness or cover. 

#5 = Or a Knowledge Trait related to the game. Could also be Manipulation + Intimidation (to bluff); Perception + 
Intuition (to read opponent); or Intelligence + Enigmas (to work out puzzle). 


compute 


404 Mage: The Ascension 20" Anniversary Edition 


#7 = Manipulation could be replaced by Dexterity, Stamina, Charisma, or Appearance, depending on the type of 
performance. Expression, Intimidation, or Seduction could be used to compensate for lack of skill. 


#9 = Depends on how accessible the information is: 4 = widely available, 6 = normally accessible, 8 = hard to find, 9 
+ threshold = secret, classified, or assumed lost. 


#11 = Any Social Trait works; Charisma reflects force of personality, Manipulation is obvious, and Appearance lets 
you use beauty to your advantage. 


Jbterri 


#13 = Torturer makes one roll per turn. Each scene of mental torture costs the victim one point of temporary Willpower. 
Each scene of physical torture costs the victim one.health level.of.bashing or lethal damage (depends upon method; 
intense torment inflicts two health levels per scene). Intense or lethal torture reduces tormenter's difficulty by -2. 
Botched roll gets false information, breaks target's mind, or possibly kills target. 


#15 = Target may use Dexterity + Stealth on foot (Wits + Stealth to duck behind cover). Pursuer's roll is resisted with 
Perception * Subterfuge, and the pursuers must win roll in order to find target. 


Dice Pool Feat Lift 
Break a chair 100 Ibs. 
Break a 2 x 4 400 lbs. 
Throw a motorcycle 800 lbs. 
Flip a small car 900 lbs 
Snap a lead pipe 1000 Ibs. 
Tear open a steel drum 1500 Ibs. 


Snap a streetlight post 3000 lbs. 


Toss an SUV 5000 lbs. 


Chapfer Nine: Dramatic Systems 


405 


Po. or 


p" o 


N 


Nm. 


D ZT 


Sey ay o 


ps -- 


Part Ill: Health and Injur 


Mages face a dangerous world. Beyond the 
common violence of the mortal streets, their 
internecine politics, realitybending madness, 
and occasional bouts of pure brutality, it’s easy to 
get hurt and damn near as easy to die. In a world 
apparently defined by monsters, a mage must keep 
her head, be clever, and avoid bloodshed as often 
as possible. But because that's often not possible, 
we have the Health Trait, which reflects the space 
between perfectly healthyand going Into The Light. 


As noted under the Health Trait entry in 
Chapter Six, this Trait reflects your character's condition. As 
injuries wear it down, you pencil certain marks along the Health 
Chart to track its current state. Slash marks (/) designate bashing 
damage, Xs designate lethal damage, and asterisks (*) designate 
aggravated damage. Each type reflects a different type of harm. As 
your Trait goes down, your dice pools go down as well. Magick 
and medicine, fortunately, can repair such injuries. Even so, 
mages are fragile when compared to the rest of the Night-Folk. 
Things a werewolf could laugh off can easily kill a mage. 


M 
Types of Injury 
Again as noted under Health (and, for clarity, as reiterated 
in the entry for Combat, different attacks and hazards cause 
different sorts of injuries. Detailed below, the three types of 
damage reflect both the initial trauma and the time and effort 
required to heal it. 


Bashing Damage 

A consequence of painful but survivable trauma, bashing 
damage represents the effects of blunt impact, short falls, psychic 
attacks, fistfight injuries, knockout gas, minor illness, most types 
of drugs, and other pains that the average person might walk 
away from. Story-wise, bashing damage comes across as bloody 
noses, bruises, aching joints, blurry vision, and so forth. It’s 
possible to die from bashing damage, but it’s not likely. 


Most characters can at least try to soak bashing damage - that 
is, absorb itwith the Stamina Trait. The combatsection covers the 
rules for soaking damage; for now, just remember that a person 
with a high Stamina can take a lot of bashing-level punishment. 


Still, there are limits. When bashing damage takes a 
character to the Incapacitated level on the Health chart, that 
character’s in trouble. Although she can still try to soak incoming 
bashing damage with her Stamina, the next level of bashing 
damage - typically marked with a slash - gets noted at the top 
of the Health chart with an X. As the character takes even 
more bashing damage, those Xs go further down the chart. If 
her chart gets filled with Xs from top to bottom, then the next 
level of any kind of damage kills her. So yes - although it's not 
easy, you can punch and kick a character to death. 


Healing Damage 
Health Level Recovery Time * 


Bashing Damage 


Bruised to Wounded One hour 
Mauled Three hours 
Crippled Six hours 
Incapacitated 12 hours 
Lethal and Aggravated Damage 
Bruised One day 
Hurt Three days 
Injured One week 
Wounded One month 
Mauled Two months 
Crippled Three months 


Incapacitated Five months 


* Recovery times cumulative; see Recovery, below. 


The Health Chart 


Health Levels Dice Pool Penalty * 


Movement Penalty 

Minor pain and swelling; he’s banged up but otherwise fine. 

Cuts, bruises, aches, perhaps bleeding but no major impairment. 

Minor, painful injuries limit the character to half his normal movement. 
Notable injuries handicap him; the character can’t run but may still walk. 


Significant internal and external damage; character can hobble around (three 


yards/ turn) but not move normally. 


Catastrophic injuries; character can only crawl (one yard/ turn). 
Character is unconscious from pain and trauma; no movement possible. 


Another soul greets the Great Mystery. 


* Does not affect Avatar, soak, or Arete rolls. 


Bruised 0 
Hurt -] 
Injured -1 
Wounded -2 
Mauled -2 
Crippled -5 
Incapacitated N/A 
Dead N/A 
Ma$e: The Ascension 20^ Anniversary Edition 


406 


z f 
Ko 


Characters heal more quickly from bashing damage than 
they do from other types. For details, see Healing Damage (pp. 
408-409) and the Healing Damage chart nearby. 


Lethal Damage 


Folks can walk away from a punch in the face; a knife in the gut, 
though, is another story. Lethal damage depicts the harm dealt out 
byguns, blades, long falls, sharp impacts, electrical burns, puncture 
wounds, deadly poisons, fatal diseases, and other harbingers of 
mortality. With potential exceptions for the Cinematic Damage 
option (see p. 412), the average character cannot soak lethal damage. 


This type is likely to be the death of him. 


Again, note each level of lethal damage with an X on the 
Health chart. Every level reflects a greater degree of harm. Such 
injuries take longer to heal as well, and the character's condition 
may deteriorate unless she receives medical care - a successful 
Intelligence + Medicine roll - in order to stabilize that trauma. 


Atall levels below Hurt, untreated lethal wounds grow one 
level worse each day. A character at Wounded, for example, 
drops to Mauled the next day, Crippled the day after that, and 
Incapacitated the day after that until her injuries are stabilized. If 
and when lethal damage drops a character below Incapacitated, 
she should start picking out a harp or a pitchfork - she’s done. 


When treated with anything less than Life Sphere magick, 
lethal damage takes a while to heal. The Healing Damage chart 
above reveals just how much longer it takes to snap back from 
lethal harm than it does to recover from bashing damage. At 
the Storyteller's option, lethal injuries that bring a character to 
Mauled, Crippled, or Incapacitated may leave lasting scars even 
after the Health chart has recovered those lost health levels. 


Aggravated Damage 


"Agg damage" represents the most horrific injuries a person 
can sustain: fire, acid, virulent toxins, vampire fangs, radiation, 
explosions, and similar physical atrocities. On a metaphysical 
level, such damage tears apart the Pattern that binds a living 
thing together... and so, it follows that Life 3 and Entropy 4 
Effects inflict aggravated damage by unweaving that Pattern. 
Thankfully, Life 3 can also reweave a damaged Pattern; such 
treatment demands vulgar magick and a point of Quintessence 
per health level healed, but it’s an improvement over dying. 


Like lethal damage, aggravated damage cannot be soaked 
by most physical beings. Certain types of protection - armor 
plating, substances that have been hardened with Matter 
and Prime magick, or incredibly dense materials like lead 
vaults or steel bulkheads - can resist aggravated damage, but 
normal flesh cannot. Only time and magick can heal such 
harm; medical care provides long-term treatment but can’t 
patch it up with short-term First Aid. (See the Patch ‘Em 
Up option sidebar.) 

In all other regards, treat aggravated damage as lethal 
damage. Marked with an asterisk, it deteriorates like lethal 
damage, takes a long time to heal, and must be stabilized if the 
injured character plans to survive major injury. 


Psychic Trauma 


In a mage’s world, you can suffer torment without 
sustaining a scratch. Such psychic trauma comes from mental 
attacks, torture, abominable tomes, and emotional shocks that 
cause psychosomatic pain. If normal injury represents assaults 
upon the flesh, then psychic trauma reflects assaults upon the 


Optional Rule: Things Man Was Not Meant to Know 


Mages are a tough-headed lot. It’s theirtrade, afterall, to unlock'doors that few folk even recognize. Still, certain mysteries 
are best left undiscovered. As an optional rule, the Storyteller may declare that a character has seen or understood too 


much. 


Faced with situations or enigmas too horrible or strange to contemplate, a Storyteller can call for a Willpower roll on 
the part of the characters involved. Again, mages are used to such things, so while a normal mortal might have to roll 
against difficulty 8 or 9 when he confronts cosmic abominations, a mage would roll against difficulty 6 or 7, maybe less. 
Some mysteries or acts remain so catastrophic to one’s sanity that even the mage needs at least one success at difficulty 
8 or 9, while the mortal must score three successes or more against that higher difficulty. Such situations should be quite 
rare. If they didn't exist, however, then Marauders and Nephandi would be far less frightening... and far less numerous. 


A failed Willpower roll in such confrontations might force a character to pass out (regardless of gender), freeze in horrified 
fascination, or flee. Afterward, that character suffers nightmares, shakes, or creeping obsessions. If the Willpower roll 
was simply failed, the effects will soon fade. If a mage’s player botched that roll, however, those effects might later lead 
to a Psychological Flaw, a horrific Seeking, or perhaps even Quiet once the mage has had time to fully process the 
implications of his experience. (For Seekings, see Chapter Seven; for Quiet, see Chapter Ten; and for Flaws, again, 
see Appendix II.) A mortal, meanwhile, would certainly remain haunted by that experience and might go wildly or 
silently mad. (See Sanity Sinks in the Marauders entry of Chapter Five, p. 242.) 


(It’s worth noting that mages and their hardy companions remain immune to lycanthropic Delirium. Although a werewolf 
should scare the hell out of any intelligent mage, the greater effects of panic and delusion described in Werewolf: the 
Apocalypse don't count as Things Man Was Not Meant to Know.) 


Again, this sort of thing shouldn't happen often. Given the influence of the Void, the Fallen, and the Mad, however, the 
threat of potential dementia can add sharpness to an Awakened Poth. 


Chapter Nine: Dramatic Systems 407 


consciousness or soul. Although it's uncommon in the mortal 
world, the Awakened face it with awful regularity. 


In game terms, psychic trauma is bashing damage 
inflicted by the Mind Sphere. In this case, Willpower, not 
Stamina, offers a soak roll. Given the powerful will of most 
Awakened folks, psychic attacks tend to be extended and 
resisted rolls (see Dramatic Systems: Torture) rather than 
immediate strikes like the ones that inflict physical harm. An 
unAwakened person, however, can suffer intense pain from 
psychic attacks; such assaults might knock out a character 
whose tormentor isn't even in sight. The Nephandi, Bata'a, 
and New World Order specialize in such attacks, and the 
Akashayana can use Do to apply pressure to a person's mind 
as well as to his limbs. 


At the Storyteller's discretion, certain heavy-duty 
shocks might inflict a few dice of psychic trauma when 
characters face Things Man Was Not Meant to Know. (See 
that option's sidebar.) Although shock probably won't kill 
a character, the usual bashing damage rules apply to such 
situations, so it may be possible for a weak-willed person to 
die of horror or heartbreak. Alternately, an Incapacitated 
character might wind up mentally ill, tortured by Flaws that 
reflect his wounded mind. (See Flaws and Derangementsin 
Appendix II, pp. 646-650.) Such things are rare, of course, 
but worth noting in the crazy world of magick. 


Mage: The Ascension 20" Anniversary Edition 


— - E = =- ga Fa 


\ 


Healing Damage 


As the Healing Damage charts show, different types of 
damage heal differently. Those recovery times assume that an 
injured character has rest and basic medical attention; under 
especially good conditions - like state-of-the-art facilities, skilled 
medical therapy, and uninterrupted healing space - the listed 
healing times can be one or even (under the best circumstances) 
two categories better than the ones given on that chart. 


Even so, medical treatment (that is, help from a character 
with Medicine 2 or better) is essential for bashing injuries of 
Wounded or worse, and for lethal or aggravated injuries of 
Injured or worse. Withoutsuch treatment, an injured character 
suffers more-orless permanent impairment until someone 
with Life 3 or better has an opportunity to fix that damage 
with magick. Infections, deep-tissue trauma, torn ligaments, 
and other such problems require either Life magick or medical 
assistance. Time alone cannot heal severe injuries completely. 


Recovery Time 

The more injured you are, the longer it takes to recover 
from those injuries. Game-wise, the Recovery Times listed on 
the Healing Damage chart add up. If, for example, Jennifer 
Rollins takes three levels of lethal damage from that pit bull in 
Chapter Eight, she needs 11 days to recover from those bites 
and scratches. (One day + three days + one week = 11 days.) 


Optional Rule: Patch ‘Em Op 


In high-intensity combat tales, your group might need to be patched up.and sent back into action long before their injuries 
have truly healed. Under this optional rule, a character with Medicine 3 or higher, plus the appropriate medical gear, 
can heal a certain degree of lethal damage long enough for his patients to get back in the fight. 


Rolling his Wits + Medicine against difficulty 8, the medic can patch up one level of lethal damage per success. Once the 
adventure ends, however, the injured character will need at least two months to recover from her injuries — double that 
for each time she gets patched up within a single story. (Two months the first time, four months the second, eight months 
the third, etc.) A patched-up character still operates at a minimum penalty of -1 to all rolls except Arete and soak — she's 
hurting bad. Characters with Staminas of 1 or 2 cannot be patched up this way, and a character who reaches Crippled 
or Incapacitated cannot be patched up at all. Patch-up attempts can be made once for every dot of Stamina that the 
injured character has; a Stamina 3 mage, for instance, can be patched up a maximum of three times before her injuries 
overwhelm the healer’s skill. 


A botched patch-up roll actually drops the patient’s condition by one level. Also, each time a character gets patched up 
this way, the Storyteller may have the player make a Stamina roll at difficulty 8, with failure incurring a lasting Flaw as 
a result of her trauma. (See Appendix II for potential Flaws.) The character will, in any case, suffer long-term effects 
from such hasty measures unless Life magick gets used to fix the problem later. 


As in real life, the patch ‘em up option presents a quick fix with long-term consequences; still, it offers hope for desperate 
cabals who face deadly challenges yet lack access to Life 3 magick or healing items while also reflecting the utility of 
battlefield medicine when a long recuperation is not an option. 


If she took two additional levels of bashing damage escaping 
the situation, then she’d need four hours to recover from the 
bashing damage, plus 11 days to heal from the dog’s assault. 


Magickal Healing 


Life Sphere magick, of course, can fix such things like... well, 
like magic. The Technocracy has advanced medical treatments that 
can regenerate damaged tissues in hours or even minutes, and Life- 
specialized witches and sacred healers can lay on hands to get an 
injured person from death’s door to full health in no time. Such 
feats are, of course, vulgar magick. Even in the most technological 
paradigm, people cannot immediately heal gunshot wounds. 


As mentioned earlier, certain injuries are harder to heal 
than others. Even with Life 3 magick, a healer must spend one 
Quintessence point per health level in order to repair aggravated 


Part IV: 


As Macklemore says, we live on the cusp 
of death, thinking it won’t be us. That’s 
especially true for the Awakened, whose 
intense insights and godlike powers bring 
them closer than most of us to the mysteries 
of their mortality. Whether or not he ever 
faces down a cyborg in a dark alley - or is 
that cyborg in the alley, facing something 
worse - a mage has a keen sense of life and 
death. When violence erupts, as it all too 
often does, its effects can't be ignored. 


In games, combats have a tendency to devolve into die- 
rolling matches punctuated with rules checks and arguments. 
To keep the action moving and the drama high, emphasize 


damage. The injured person's Pattern must be restored, and 
that task demands energies above and beyond anything that 
the average doctor or mage can muster. 


Story-wise, injuries batter your character, often marking 
her with lasting scars. Magick can work wonders, true, but 
the pain of knife wounds, burns, and slashes from an enraged 
horror aren't simply forgotten once the Health Trait heals. 
Torn flesh, broken bones, twisted ligaments, and scarred 
organs hurt long after their initial injuries pass into memory. 
As a result, unlike the snarling creatures they so often face, the 
Awakened folk skirt the edges of a fight, all too aware of just 
how fragile they can be. 


For additional details about healing magick, see the 
Medicine Work entry in the Practices section of Chapter 
Ten (p. 581). 


Combat 


descriptions over mechanics. Play up the sweat in a hero's eyes, 
the whine of ricochets, and the flying chips of plaster thrown 
around the room by a hail of bullets. The many options detailed 
below give you something more to do than make yet another 
attack roll and hear either "You hit" or "You miss." Within the 
world of your chronicle, your mage can duck behind cars, throw 
ashes into someone's face, bust a bottle over some asshole's 
head, or reroute him into a wall without a single punch being 
thrown on your end of the fight. 


Ready to Rumble 


The following section breaks violence down into several 
categories: 


Chapter Nine: Dramatic Systems 409 


mr 222 - 


Magick and Violence addresses that eternal question: 
“What happens if you fire a plasma disrupter cannon that 
supposedly hasn't been invented yet or slash somebody’s throat 
to open a gate to Hell?" 


* Ranged Combat covers longrange assault techniques: 
guns, arrows, thrown objects, and so forth. To fight at a 
distance without magick, characters need to be able to see 
one another. You can't often hit what you can't really see. 


* Close Combat deals with the up close and personal 
world of kicks to the head and beer bottles smashed 
across faces. Several subsections of that category deal 
with dirty fighting, martial arts, and the mystic Art of 
Do - the Akashic Way of peace and carnage. 


* Magickal Duels presents some guidelines for resolving 
wizardly disputes, including the infamous art of 
certámen. 


* Environmental Hazards features many other ways to 
die: falls, fire, poison, and so on. 


* CombatSystem Charts, where the essential information 
for modifiers, weapons, and maneuvers can be found. 


Order of Battle 


Whatever mayhem your characters face, combat plays out 
in action turns, as described at the beginning of this chapter. 


All players roll their initiative to see who acts when, and 
then handle those actions on a turn-by-turn basis. From that 
point, each combat turn gets divided into three phases: 


* Attack, when you see whether or not attacks hit their 
targets; 


* Defense, when you see whether or not a defender has 
avoided an attack; and... 


* Damage, when you determine how badly the combatants 
get hurt. 


Combat turns typically last about three seconds in game- 
world time. For the Awakened, however, time is a toy in the 
hands of brawling gods. 


Initiative 

As hostilities begin, each player involved makes an initiative 
roll, as detailed under Initiative and Movementat the beginning 
of this chapter. The highest initiatives go first, with the lower 
ones following behind them. 


Phase One: Attack 


When guns fire and spells fly, the dice pool you employ 
depends upon what your character is doing that turn: 


e Forattacks using projectile guns, roll Dexterity + Firearms; 
for hypertech force guns, Dexterity + Energy Weapons. 


* For attacks with thrown weapons, use Dexterity * 
Athletics. 


e Forattacks using hand-held weapons, employ Dexterity 
+ Melee. 


* For most hand-to-hand attacks that use fists, claws, body 
weight, and so forth, roll Dexterity + Brawl. (A handful 
of attacks employ Dexterity + Athletics, Martial Arts, 
Do, and so forth instead, but we'll get into that later.) 


* For attacks based in magick, roll your Arete/ 
Enlightenment Trait. If those attacks involve a strike or 
weapon that needs to hit the target (like a punch, plasma 
cannon, and so forth), roll Dexterity * either Brawl, 
Firearms, or Energy Weapons, depending on the attack. 


For the specific difficulties and results involved, see the 
various combat maneuvers described below. Weapons, combat 
circumstances, hazards, and fighting maneuvers are summarized 
on the Combat System Charts, starting on (p. 445). 


bhase Two: Defense 


A character who doesn't want to get hit with an attack has 
several options, all detailed below. These defensive maneuvers use 
the successes you roll to take away from the successes rolled 
by your opponent. (See Resisted Actions in Chapter Eight.) 


Now, no selfrespecting person wants to get hit. That’s 
why you roll attack rolls to strike other characters. A defensive 
maneuver, however, represents a character who's making an extra 
effort to avoid injury. You can declare a defensive maneuver at any 
point in your turn, so longas your character has an action left to 
perform that turn. If you had already declared a different action 
for that turn, the Storyteller may have you make a Willpower 
roll (difficulty 6), or else spend a Willpower point in order to 
change your character’s mind in the blur of combat. 


You can perform a dodge, block, or parry as part of an 
attack - parrying a sword and then sliding your blade up your 
opponent's own, for example, or dodging around a corner 
and then taking a shot at your enemies from behind cover. In 
each case, you need to divide your dice pool, as mentioned in 
Chapter Eight. A desperate defense, on the other hand, reflects 
all-out escape. A character can't do anything else that turn. 


Dodging 

To have your character bob and weave herself out of harm’s 
way, make a successful Dexterity + Athletics roll. The difficulty 
depends upon the nature of the attack and the distance that the 
dodging character wants to cover during that dodge. Dodginga 
hand-to-hand strike is easy (difficulty 5), but dodging firearms 
at close range is far more challenging (difficulty 9 or 10). 


Each success on this roll subtracts one success from the 
attacker’s roll; thus, the dodging character needs to roll at least as 
many successes to avoid that blow as the attacker rolled to inflict 
it in the first place. Dodging requires a certain amount of room 
to move. If you’re in a tight doorway, it’s pretty hard to dodge. 


If your character has both the Acrobatics Trait and enough 
room to use such moves, you could use Acrobatics instead of 
Athletics for a dodge attempt. 


Many mystic attacks (fireballs, mind-crushes, etc.) can be 
dodged if the target sees them coming. For details, see Dodging 
and Resistance in Chapter Ten (pp. 544-545). 


Blocking 


To use a body part to deflect a blow, roll Dexterity + Brawl. 
The difficulty depends upon the attack but often ranges between 
6 (for a fist) and 8 (a table). Like dodging, each success scored by 
the defender removes one success from the attacker’s attempt. 


Normally, only hand-to-hand attacks can be blocked. A martial 
artist might try to block incoming spears, other thrown objects, or 
arrows with a Dexterity + Martial Arts roll (difficulty 8), but most 
folks are pretty much screwed in that department. Normal humans 
(like mages) cannot block lethal or aggravated damage attacks like 
swords, claws, and so on unless the character in question is wearing 
armor, using Life magick to harden his skin, or employing either 
Martial Arts or Do to reflect specialized combat training. Even 
then, certain attacks - like chainsaws - can't really be blocked 
without losing an arm in the process. For the results of trying 
to block a lethal damage weapon, see Rebound Attacks, below. 


Parrying and Rebound Attacks 


When using a weapon to block an incoming attack, roll 
Dexterity + Melee. In other regards, a parry works like a block. 


Rebound Attack: Ifthe attacker uses a brawl attack that gets 
blocked by a parry (like, say, a punch blocked by a knife), then 
the attacker probably hurts herself. To reflect that predicament, 
have the defender roll a rebound attack if the successes he rolled 
to block the attack outnumber the successes his opponent 
rolled while attacking him. 


A rebound attack uses a typical Dexterity + Melee roll. The 
character who was blocking gets to use his full dice pool, though, 
as he wasn’t actually attacking his opponent. If successful, this 
rebound attack scores the usual amount of damage... and then 
adds one more success for each success that outnumbered the 
attacker’s roll. (A parry that scores two successes more than 
necessary, for example, would add two more successes to that 
rebound attack.) The moral of this story: don’t try to kick someone 
who’s got a chainsaw in his hands. 


Desperate Defense 

If all you want is to get the hell outta Dodge, you can have 
your character perform a desperate defense. In this case, he’s 
putting everything he's got into getting away from harm - as 
noted earlier, he can't do anything else that turn. 

For a desperate defense, roll your character's Dexterity + 
Athletics; again, if he's got Acrobatics and enough room to 
employ them, you can use that Trait instead. Your character 
gets to use his full dice pool against the first attack, but he 
must subtract one die from each subsequent attack that turn 
because it's harder to escape several attacks than it is to duck 
a single assault. 


Chapter Nine: Dramatic Systems 


IA A4 


1 
i 
d 3 


Optional Rule: Cinematic Damage 


Mages can be unusually badass, especially if they’re martial artists, mercenaries, cops, Templars, Black Suits, and so 
on. And in the movies, badass people manage to shrug off gunshot wounds, burns, and other things that would, in real 
life, send them to the hospital or morgue. Therefore, the Cinematic Damage option makes an allowance for such people. 


Under this optional rule, human characters may soak lethal damage with a soak roll at difficulty 8. This doesn’t mean 
that bullets bounce off the character’s chest but that the damage comes across as the proverbial flesh wound, rather than 
as gaping cuts and shattered bones. 


Depending on the tone of your chronicle, the Storyteller may restrict this ability to characters with a Stamina Trait of 3 or 
higher; that way, you don't have grandmas soaking shotgun blasts, but tough sorcerers can stand up to a dude with a 
switchblade. Even so, what's good for the mage is good for the mortal. If your group chooses to employ the Cinematic 
Damage option, then all suitable human characters should get it — not just player characters. (For an additional 
option, see the Too Tough to Die Merit in Appendix II, p. 644.) 


Regardless of Stamina, this option does not allow mages to soak aggravated damage. Unless vulgar magick or certain 
types of armor are involved, mages cannot soak agg damage, period. That's why it's called aggravated — because it's 


as scarily fatal as an angry werewolf's claws. 


Countermagick 


Essentially a mystic dodge, countermagick uses Arete to undo 
a rival mage’s attacks. For more details, see Countermagick in 
Chapter Ten (p. 545-546). 


Phase Three: Damage 


If and when an attack hits the target, it’s time to figure 
out how badly that target gets hurt. The attacking player rolls 
her dice pool against difficulty 6, and each success inflicts one 
health level’s worth of damage. 


Especially successful attacks inflict more damage. For each 
success above the first one that the player scores on her attack 
roll, she adds one more die to the damage dice pool. (Three 
successes on the attack roll would add two more dice to the 
damage roll, and so on.) 


Remember, though, that dodges and blocks subtract successes; 
a character who rolls five successes on an attack roll but has 
three taken away by a dodge inflicts the damage from only two 
successes (one extra die), not from five, even though she still 
hits her opponent. 


Types of Damage 


As noted earlier under Health and Injury, attacks inflict 
one of three types of damage: 


¢ Bashing damage comes from blunt force trauma: fists, clubs, 
table legs, etc. A person can soak bashing damage (see below) 
with his Stamina Trait. On a character sheet, bashing damage 
gets marked with a single slash (/) rather than an X. 


* Lethal damage reflects deadly trauma. Unless they're 
wearing armor, people - mages included - cannot soak 
lethal damage... which is what makes it lethal. Indicate 
this form of damage on your character sheet with an X. 


* Aggravated damage represents the most awful ways to 
die. Mages cannot soak it without magick or certain 


Al2 Mage: The Ascension 20" Anniversary Edition 


types of armor. Indicate aggravated damage with an 
asterisk (*) on your character sheet. 


Again, for details about these three types of damage, and 
the process of recovering from their effects, see the Health and 
Injury section (pp. 406-409). 


Adding Damage Op 

Pain adds up. A character who takes severe damage on 
top of minor injuries winds up getting depleted quickly unless 
he manages to recover. So when you’re noting damage down 
on your character’s Health chart, the most dangerous types of 
damage go on top of that chart. 


When recording bashing damage, put a slash at the top 
of the Health chart; if you take lethal damage, then turn that 
/ into an X by writing another line through it. If you take 
aggravated damage after that, then put another line through 
the X, turning it into an asterisk. 


According to the rules presented in other World of Darkness 
books, those marks are cumulative; if you add that X or asterisk 
to the top of your Health chart, then you’d add another / to the 
empty square underneath the marked ones. Unlike vampires and 
werewolves, however, mages don’tusually regenerate their injuries, 
and so two or three blows can take a mage out of action unless 
he’s incredibly fortunate. Therefore, consider it a Storyteller’s 
judgment call. Your troupe may elect to simply keep the marks as 
they are - turning slashes into Xs or asterisks if need be but not also 
adding new slashes to the empty boxes on the track. Considering 
the wound penalties associated with injuries (again, see Health 
and Injury), that’s a reasonable option for mages in combat. 


Soaking Damage 

Life’s tough, but living things can be pretty tough too. 
In game terms, characters who take damage can try to soak it 
before subtracting health levels from those injuries. 

To soak damage, roll your character’s Stamina against a 
difficulty determined by the damage: 


* Bashing damage can be soaked by any character at 


difficulty 6. 


* Humans can't normally soak lethal damage, although 
exceptionally tough ones may try. (See the Cinematic 
Damage option in the sidebar nearby.) 


e Aggravated damage is too severe for humans (or most 
othercreatures) to soak atall. Standing up to such attacks 
requires paranormal protection or heavy-duty armor. 


Each success on a soak roll reduces the damage by one 
health level. If the soak roll eliminates all of the successes scored 
against a character, then that character takes the hit without 
getting hurt at all. 


Examples: Spider Chase gets in an argument with her soon- 
to-be ex-boy-toy. Striving to appear manly, he slaps her for two health 
levels’ worth of bashing damage. Spider’s player rolls three dice, based 
on Spider’s Stamina 3; she gets two successes, and Spider glares at the 
boy-toy as his blow has no effect. Grabbing up a big spiked boot, she 
proceeds to whale on said boy-toy. She, too, inflicts bashing damage, 
but he’s not nearly as lucky with his soak rolls... 


Later, in a far more serious brawl, Spider gets cut by a tough guy 
with a knife. Normally, she won't be able to soak that wound — coming 
from a knife blade, it’s lethal. The Storyteller, though, decides that 
Spider’s Stamina 3 makes her tough enough to use the Cinematic 
Damage option. The knife inflicts five health levels in damage — three 
from the attack, plus two more for the assailant's successes. Spider 
rolls three successes on her soak attempt, eliminating three of those five 
successes. Good thing for her, bad thing for the tough guy! 


Spider enjoys spinning fire; being SET ON fire, though, is a 
bit much. Facing off against some weirdo with a flaming sword, she 
ducks the blow but winds up falling into burning wreckage. The fire 
burns her for two health levels of aggravated damage. No soak roll 
for Spider this time. She takes both health levels as the fire shows 
that even fire-dancers have their limits. 


Magick and Violence 


Beyond the usual fisticuffs and fireworks, a mage can use 
her Arts to enhance her combat abilities. The obvious “toss a 
fireball and burn them up” avenue gets explored in the following 
chapter. On a more subtle level, though, the Awakened can plant 
coincidences that intensify the effects of a kick or gunshot; drop 
walls on top of their enemies; whip up storms of dust that cover 
an escape or blind an enemy; empty an attacker’s ammunition 
clip ("Gee, I guess you hadn't counted your shots, dude...”); or employ 
any other option a mage could imagine and perform. 


Beyond such tricks, there’s the simple fact that plenty of mages 
focus their Arts through weapons, gadgets, and martial techniques. 
A Bata'a mage could use capoeira as her instrument for Forces, Life, 
or Time attacks. Iteration X is notorious for channeling devastating 
Forces Sphere Effects through their hypertech. An Akashic Brother 
can put Entropy (spotting weak points), Forces (kinetic impact), 
Life (body knowledge), and other Spheres to work behind a single 
punch or kick. Combat and violence are intrinsic parts of many 


mystic practices - which explains everything from howling Norse 
berserkers to the implacable aura held by agents of authority. 


The Magickal Fighting Tactics section on p.417, features 
several possibilities for the Awakened warrior. In more general 
game terms, magick and violence can fit together in three 
different yet related ways: 


Violence as a Focus 

Weapons, force, or martial arts can provide a focus for 
mystic or technological Arts, as shown in the Focus and the 
Artssection of Chapter Ten. In this case, the weapon or activity 
provides the “gun and trigger” of the spell. The mage fires a 
gun, throws a punch, makes a dodge, or takes whatever action 
is necessary to employ the focus. 


To reflect this activity, the player makes two rolls: an Arete 
(or Enlightenment) roll to see if the magick succeeds, and an 
appropriate Attribute + Ability roll to see if the attack hits its 
target. If the magick is the attack and the attack provides the magick, 
then in game terms, this is a single action - the mage is firing 
a gun as the act that casts the Effect, and although there are 
two rolls, it counts as only one action. For many willworkers, 
especially Technocrats, that tool or action allows the character 
to do what she does. A Man in Black cannot snap his fingers 
and fire bullets - he needs his gun to focus that attack. No 
weapon, no Effect. 


* [fthe Arete roll fails, then there's no magickal Effect; a 
punch might land, but a gun will not fire. 


* [f the Arete roll botches, then the attack goes wrong, 
and Paradox results. (See Chapter Ten.) 


* [f the Arete roll succeeds, then the magick works as 
planned. 


Assuming the attack is successful, the Effect goes off within 
the same turn. Unlike in previous editions of Mage, there is 
no delay between turns if the Effect is focused through the 
attack in question. 


In most cases, however, that attack still needs to hit its 
target - the punch must land, the gunshot must nail the 
opponent, etc. Thus, the Attribute * Ability roll determines 
whether or not the attack hits its intended destination. If 
not, then the shot goes wild, the punch misses, and so on. 
The magick has worked, but the attack has not. Cyborg X344 
fires his plasma disruptor cannon, but the witch in his sights 
ducks aside. 


Dodged magickal Effects can still demolish the environment, 
however. That's why fights between mages tend to cause lots of 
collateral damage. For details about such damage, see Bustin’ 
Stuff (pp. 439-441) and the Environmental Hazards section. 


If a weapon is being used as a focus instrument, then the 
damage from that magickal Effect reflects the damage of that 
weapon. For attacks in which the magick enhances the damage 
of an attack - say, by making the sword burst into flames - see 
Magick Enhances Violence, below. 


Chapter Nine: Dramatic Systems 


INS ZA 


Optional Rule: General Action Rolls 


For times when an important character faces off against a mass of uninspiring mooks, the general action roll option 
allows you to blow through a series of actions that would otherwise take many turns of die rolling and chart checking 
to complete. Under this optional rule, one or two die rolls summarize the action and let the plot move forward quickly. 


In a general action roll situation, the Storyteller decides upon an appropriate dice pool - typically Dexterity + a combat 
or physical action Ability — and then determines a base difficulty (see the chart below). The player makes a single resisted 
roll. The Storyteller picks up a handful of dice to reflect the abilities of the opposing forces, the player and his Storyteller 
roll off, and the winner takes it all. 


Difficulty Task 

7 Easy (bashing through some mooks) 
Challenging (firefight in close quarters) 
Hard (fighting in a snowstorm) 


10 Damn Near Impossible (battling shadow imps in the dark) 


If the player loses a general action roll contest, then assume that he's knocked down and out in a non-fatal way. He'll 
probably wind up chained to a death trap or something equally genre-appropriate, but though he may suffer a few 
tevels of bashing damage (or a level or two of lethal damage], he won't get killed by a bad die roll. 


Example: Bruce Foster, Syndicate enforcer, is amused to find himself being mugged. Four kids in gang colors close in 
on the sharp-dressed man, thinking they've found Eo EE They're wrong, of course, and as Bruce's player Bill picks 


up seven dice (Dexterity 3 + Brawl 4) they're about to find out just HOW wrong they are. 


Because it s four to one in a dark alley, Bill's Storyteller sets the difficulty at 8. Figuring that the muggers are unskilled 
kids, she picks out four dice (Dexterity 2 + Brawl 2) to represent the muggers for the resisted roll. 


Bill rolls three successes; the Storyteller rolls one. In the game world, Bruce beats the living crap out of the four punks, 
straightens his tie, wipes the blood off his knuckles with one kid's Metallica T-shirt, and goes along his way after picking 
the would-be muggers’ pockets to compensate for the inconvenience. 


If Bill had rolled fewer successes than the Storyteller, then Bruce would have woken up in the alley, his good suit torn, 
his wallet gone, and his nose bloodied by a minor but failed altercation with a handful of punks. 


Mook-a-Palooza 


As an alternate to the general action roll, the mook option reduces any characters without actual names or identities — 
that is, cultists, gang members, zombies, etc. - to four health levels: Healthy, Hurt -1, Wounded -2, and Crippled -5. 
This way, the players can make grinder fodder of the mooks in question without betting the entire situation on the results 


of one or two die rolls. 


If an opponent successfully applies countermagick against 
an attack, then the magickal element of that attack lessens or 
disappears. Even so, the non-magickal element (the fist, the bullet, 
etc.) can still cause harm. For details, see Countermagick in 


Chapter Ten (pp. 545-546). 


Violence Enhances Magick 


In this case, the mage commits an act of violence that 
assists an act of magick: the Infernalist stabs the sacrifice, the 
mad scientist activates the Doomsday Device, the shapechanger 
slashes the throat of a wolf and bathes herself in its blood in 
order to transform into a wolf herself. The act still provides a 
focus, but the magick follows the act. 


In game terms, the player rolls her attack normally. Each 
success on that roll lowers the difficulty of the subsequent Arete 
roll by -1, up to a maximum modifier of -3. 

Unless the magick and the act involve a single activity (as 


in firing a gun or throwing a punch) an attack used to focus and 


44 Mage: The Ascension 20" Anniversary Edition 


enhance magick needs to be performed before that spell is cast. If 
the player wants to use both the attack and the magick in the same 
turn - say, an Infernalist who wants to open a gate at the moment of 
sacrifice - then she needs to either divide up her dice pool between 
them (as detailed under Multiple Actions in Chapter Eight, p. 
388), or else use Time 3 to get extra actions within the same turn. 


Magick Enhances Violence 

By throwing a little extra power (or a LOT of extra power) 
behind a normal gunshot, punch or dodge, the character can 
enhance its effectiveness. In this case, the player declares what 
she’s doing; takes an action to cast the Effect; notes the number 
of successes; and then reduces the difficulty of the attack itself 
by-1 for each success, up toa maximum modifier of -3 difficulty. 


So longas the enhancement looks like something you could 
dowithout magick, this sort of thingis almost always coincidental. 
If it looks impossible, then it’s vulgar. A gunshot that ignites the 
car’s gas tank? Sure. A sword that bursts into flame? No. 


In all three cases, the activity can provide the focus for the 
Effect. The option you choose depends on what your mage 
is doing and what you hope to accomplish by doing it. For 
more details, see Mundane Skills and Magickal Effects in the 
following chapter (pp. 532-535), plus Focus and the Arts and 
the various capabilities of Sphere-based magick. 


Fast-Casting in a Fight 

In many cases, a mage in the heat of combat is fast-casting - 
that is, making stuffup in the heat of that moment. Rules-wise, 
a fast-casting character adds +1 to her usual difficulty, including 
the difficulty of any Effect cast in a single turn during a fight. 
Rituals that involve preparation before a fight, however, do not 
suffer this fast-casting penalty. (See the Magickal Difficulty 
Modifiers chart, Chapter Ten, p. 503.) 

This rule does not apply to mages who use the martial arts practice 
(including Do) or employ weapons as an instrument of focus. Such 
mages are assumed to have both training and experience with 
integrating magick, combat, and the reflexes involved in both. 


Examples of Magickal Violence 
Secret Agent John Courage goes up against a vampire. His 


player, Brian, has several options: 


* Violence as a Focus: Employing the Stone-Shattering 
Fist Strike (a Life 3/ Matter 3/ Entropy 1 Effect that 


uses Entropy to spot weak spots), John Courage puts 
his Black Suit training to good use. Brian declares that 
he's using the martial arts practice as a focus, rolls his 
Enlightenment Trait, and scores four successes. Then he 
rolls his Dexterity * Martial Arts dice pool to reflect the 
punch itself. He scores two successes, so John Courage 
hits thevampire. The damage comes from the Effect - in 


this case, eight health levels of damage, made aggravated 
by the Life Sphere. Soak THAT, Count Chocula! 


Violence Enhances Magick: Realizing that his greatest 
weapon is fear, and thatvampires fear fire, John Courage 
coolly eyes the vampire, removes a vial of fluid from his 
coat pocket, douses his gloves with it, takes out a lighter, 
flicks itto life, and then sets his gloves on fire. His hands 
burning, he glares at the vampire - flames glinting off 
his mirrorshades - and invokes the dreaded Black Suit 
Aura of Authority. 


One successful Manipulation * Intimidation roll later, 
Brian has three successes to add to his coincidental 
Mind 2 Effect of "Surrender or die." The casting roll 
difficulty, normally 5, drops to 3 (casting rolls cannot 
drop below difficulty 3), Brian scores six successes, and 
the wealewilled vampire collapses into a quivering heap. 
Secret Agent John Courage has neither said a word nor 
struck a blow, but victory is his. 


Chapter Nine: Dramatic Systems AIS 


* Magick Enhancing Violence: Looking for a weakness in 
the vampire's defense, Brian casts a coincidental Entropy 1 
Effect through the Stability Integrity Matrix scanner built 
into John Courage's mirrorshades. It’s a coincidental Effect, 
so Brian rolls John Courage’s Enlightenment, gets three 
successes, and lowers the difficulty of John Courage’s next 
blow by -3. Taking no chances, he employs a Death Strike 
maneuver. Courage’s Dexterity + Martial Arts roll scores six 
successes, thanks to the lowered difficulty, meaning Strength 
+2 in lethal damage, plus five more dice from those extra 
successes. Weakness found, analyzed, and utilized. 


Combat Tactics 
and Circumstances 


Most fighters must get by without magick. Even then, 
though, various tactics and circumstances can change elements 
of combat - wearing armor, being knocked over, fighting blind, 
and so forth. For the magickal systems involved, see Chapter 
Ten; and for general applications of magick in combat, see 
Magick and Violence, above. 


In game terms, most circumstances can be handled by 
either by raising or lowering either difficulties or dice pools. 
(You'll rarely do both at the same time.) Some of the more 
common combat-oriented circumstances include: 


Aborting an Action 

As mentioned above under Phase Two: Defense, you can 
have your character abort his planned action in favor ofa defensive 
maneuver, so long as he has an action with which to act. Such 
abrupt changes of plan technically require either a temporary 
Willpower point ora Willpower roll, difficulty 6. (Your Storyteller 
has the final say about that requirement.) Ducking out of your 
original plans is considered a reflexive action, as described in 
Chapter Eight, and isn’t counted as an action in and of itself. 


Ambush 


Attacking from surprise, an assailant can get the upper hand 
on her opponent. In game terms, the attacker rolls Dexterity 
+ Stealth (+ the Arcane Background, if she has it) in a resisted 
roll against her target’s Perception + Alertness. 


If the attacker wins, then she gets one attack roll against 
her opponent before any initiative rolls are made; if she’s got 
successes left over after canceling his successes out, then she 
can add one die to her attack dice pool for each success. Let’s 
say that Lee Ann surprises a rogue Acharne Cultist; if her 
player rolls four successes to the Cultist’s two, then she adds 
two more dice to her attack pool. 


On a tie, the attacker goes first but the defender can take 
a defensive maneuver. And if the defender wins, then he spots 
the ambush before the trap springs, and both parties roll their 
normal initiative. 


Certain situations and characters make ambush impossible. 
Sneaking up on someone when you're wearing power armor isn’t 
feasible, and some people (especially Time Masters) seem impossible 


Ma$e: The Ascension 20^ Anniversary Edition 


to surprise. Ultimately, the Storyteller gets the final call regarding 
the potential of an ambush... which doesn't mean, of course, that 
the attacker knows in advance that her assault will fail. 


Armor and Shields 


Thick coats, flack suits, cybernetic armor, and other 
methods of protection absorb the damage of an attack. In game 
terms, armor adds dice to a character's soak roll and allows 
a human being to soak lethal damage as well as certain types 
of aggravated damage - a vampire's fangs, most likely, but not 
fire, or Life Sphere magick. 


Light armor is easy enough to move around in, and Matter- 
based Effects can turn business suits or lingerie into cloth-weight 
armor too. Most forms of normaltech armor, though, get 
cumbersome. Certain types of armor inflict a penalty upon the 
wearer's Dexterity-based dice pool and demand time to put on or 
take off. Slipping on a biker jacket takes a single easy action, but 
acop donning riot gear needs several minutes to suit up properly. 


Shields: Shields, meanwhile, act as protective gear that can 
be brought to bear when facing an enemy. An opponent who’s 
facing your shield in hand-to-hand combat adds +1 or +2 to 
his difficulty to hit you, depending on the size of the shield in 
question. If it's being used to ward off projectile weapons (bottles, 
rocks, bullets, etc.), then a shield also acts as armor, reducing a 
blow by one success for every level in the shield’s Rating. 


Thatsaid, a shield occupies one hand, restricting the user's 
movements and potential activities. Blockinga specific incoming 
attack (say a volley of bullets or a swung fire axe) may demand a 
Dexterity * Melee roll and a dedicated shield blocking action. 
Shields are heavy, too, and they suggest that you're looking for 
trouble. Outside of riottrained police (who often use them in 
formation) and medieval reenactment enthusiasts, you won't 
find many people in the 21* century using shields. 


For various types of protective gear, see the Armor and 


Shields chart, under Combat System Charts (p. 447). 


Blinded, Knocked Down, Immobilized, 
or Stunned 


Normal combat rules assume that everyone’s able to move 
more or less freely. Certain handicaps, however, change those rules: 


¢ Blinding: A character who's been blinded by injury 
or darkness cannot dodge, parry, or block incoming 
attacks. He also adds +2 to the difficulty of all visually 
dependent actions until he’s able to see again. 


* Knockdown: Someone who's been knocked off his feet 
must take one action to scramble back up. If he can't 
do so, consider him temporarily immobilized until he 
regains his feet. 


* Immobilization: When a character gets held down, 
paralyzed, or otherwise rendered unable to move, any 
other character who attacks him reduces her difficulty by 
-2 if the target can still move around a bit, and the attacker 
may hit him automatically if he cannot move at all. 


* Stunning: If - after the soak roll - a character suffers 
health-level damage that equals or exceeds her Stamina 
rating, she's stunned until the end of the following 
turn. The stunned character can't do anything except 
perhaps stumble around in a daze. Attack rolls against 
her during that time reduce their difficulty by 2. 


Magickal Fighting Tactics 

Given the power they command, why should mages stake 
their survival on mere human weapons and tactics? Everything, 
from lightning bolts and disintegration beams to one-inch 
punches that shatter a person’s ribcage, is possible for fighters 
who have the Spheres to use such tactics and the Will to employ 
them with deadly effect. 


* Focused Magick: If that attack uses a normal attack - like 
a punch or death-ray cannon - as a focus instrument,, 
the attacker needs to make a successful Dexterity + 
appropriate combat Ability roll. An Arete roll decides 
the success or failure of the magick, and the attack roll 
determines whether or not it hit the target. Such attacks, 
as mentioned earlier, can be dodged. 


e Openly Magickal: If the attack is itself magickal - like a 
lightning bolt, incendiary gesture, transformation blast, 
or flesh-shredding curse of pure hate - then the assailant 
rolls her Arete as an attack roll instead. Such attacks are 
almost always vulgar and can be as dangerous to their 
originators as to their victims. 


* Indirect Assault: If the attack is indirect - an earthquake, 
poison, an Entropy-weakened scaffolding, and so on - 
then the attacker rolls her Arete as above, but the attack 
is often coincidental rather than vulgar. This might be the 
most common tactic in the Awakened arsenal, especially 
since it’s rarely obvious enough to note until later. 


* Tactical Adjustments: All manner of tricks become possible 
when you've got a little bit of magick. First-Rank sensory 
Effects can be especially effective in a combatzone, especially 
when you're using the Arts to scope out weak spots, see 
across distances, or analyze opponents and substances. 
With clever perceptions and a nudge here and there, you 
can employ many subtle yet effective tactics. 


* Summoned Creatures: Certain mages also summon 
other entities to fight for them. That tactic typically 
requires Spirit Sphere magick plus an Arete roll, and it’s 
vulgar in most places. Still, for powerful shamans and 
witches, it can be pretty damned effective - see Spirit 
Combatants, below. 


For more details, see Magick and Violence, above. 


Multiple Opponents 

A character who's fighting several opponents at close range 
suffers a penalty of *1 difficulty per attacker to both her attack 
and defense rolls, up to a maximum penalty of *4. Fighting 


two opponents, for instance, would add *2 to those difficulties, 
and fighting five opponents would add *4 difficulty. 


A mage who has Correspondence 1, Mind 1, or Time 2 
and has an active sensory Effect in one of those Spheres going at the 
time of combat can ignore this penalty. Essentially, such Effects 
give him an enhanced view of who's doing what to whom. 


Rough Weather or Terrain 


For some odd reason, folks often wind up fighting on ice, 
in rainstorms, through the middle of burning factories, and so 
on. When throwing down in ugly circumstances, the combatants 
might add between +1 and +3 to the difficulties of their various 
rolls. The specifics depend on the situation, but the terrain 
may be more dangerous than the warriors themselves - see the 
Environmental Hazards section for details. 


Spirit Combatants 


Avatar Storm or no Avatar Storm, mages can cross spells 
and blades with spirit entities. Such beings often lack physical 
substance unless they materialize, so the process of fighting them 
can be rather strange... certainly different from the tactics and 
experiences involved in fighting mortal adversaries. 


Story-wise, spirits are ideas and essence embodied in often 
flexibleforms. Dependingon the nature ofthe individual spirit, 
such a being might appear as an ephemeral tempest, a bizarre 
monstrosity, a ghostly mist creature, an apparently normal 
person or animal, a chattering tangle of incarnate geometry, 
or anything you might imagine. In that form, the entity often 
attacks with not only its limbs but also its Willpower Trait and 
various mystic Charms: spiritual powers that resemble magic 
butsomehow fit into the way things are even when their effects 
are clearly impossible by scientific reckoning. 


The details regarding spirits and their powers can be found 
later in this chapter, under Umbrood Spirit Entities. For now, 
we'll simply mention these following combat-essential rules: 


* Spirits Attack and Soak With Willpower and Damage 
Opponents With Rage: Unless it has materialized (see 
below), a spirit entity uses its Willpower Trait for most 
tasks and inflicts damage with the seething fury of its 
essence - in game terms, the Rage Trait. 


* Rage-Based Spirit Attacks Inflict Deadly Damage: Most 
spiritual attacks come by way of Charms. If and when 
a spirit gets roused enough to turn its Rage against a 
target, however, that Rage Trait becomes the entity's 
dice pool, and the damage is either lethal or aggravated. 
For details, see the Blast Charm entry in the Umbrood 
Spirit Entities section, (pp. 485-495). 


* Mages Can Soak Spirit Rage Damage: A character with 
the Spirit Sphere (or Dimensional Science), at any level, 
can use countermagick to soak a spirit's Rage-based 
damage. A mage without the Spirit Sphere can try to 
soak it with his Avatar Trait, difficulty 8. Most other 
mortal characters cannot soak spirit Rage. 


Chapter Nine: Dramatic Systems 417 


. 


MeN 7^: 


4 
S 


7 


7/3 


"A 


eo 


P 
J 


T 
oa 
- En 
Ht 
k 


"rtr. 


* Spirits Are Usually Invisible: Without at least one dot 
in the Spirit Sphere, mortals, including mages, cannot 
see spirits unless a given spirit materializes or uses an 
Appear Charm to show itself to human eyes. Animals 
and humans with the Awareness Talent, however, can 
use it to perceive a nearby spirit's presence, even if they 
cannot actually see it. 


* Spirits Aren't Material: Composed of ephemera, such 
entities are not physical in the way most combatants are 
physical. Although some can use the Materialize Charm 
to take on physical form (and thus become as solid as 
any other Earthly creature), most of them retain their 
ephemeral essence, which means... 


* To Fight Spirits, You Need the Prime or Spirit Spheres: 
Mages who find themselves dealing with Umbrood 
entities need the Spirit Sphere (or, in Technocratic terms, 
Dimensional Science) at Rank 2 or higher in order to 
affect those entities. Spirit 2 allows a mage to touch an 
entity, and Spirit 3 acts against it the way Life 3 acts 
against organic beings. Life and Matter are completely 
useless against the Umbrood unless they take on a 
physical form, and other Spheres are essentially useless, 
too, unless the mage enters the Umbra to battle a spirit 
on its own ground. 


Physical attacks go right through a spirit unless the spirit 
has materialized or the weapon has been enchanted with 
the Prime Sphere or the Spirit/ Dimensional Science 
Sphere. Given the bizarre consciousness of most spirits, 
Mind attacks upon Umbral entities tend to affect the 
mage instead of the spirit. A combination of Spirit 2 
and Prime 2 acts like Life magick on an Umbral entity, 
with one exception... 


* Entropy Does Bad Things to Ghosts: The Restless 
Dead are more closely tied to Entropy than to Spirit. 
Although the Spirit Sphere affects them too, it’s the 
combination of Entropy 3 and Prime 2 that attacks 
their essence on a metaphysical level and acts like 
Life Sphere magick on them. Unfortunately, this also 
literally brings out a ghost’s worst qualities. Mages who 
attack ghosts with Entropy magick find themselves 
confrontinga spectre - everything vicious and forbidden 
about the ghost in question. 


Regardless of the state of the Gauntlet and Avatar Storm, 
mages don't wind up fighting spirits very often unless those 
mages pass into the Otherworlds themselves. When hostile 
spirits engage the Awakened folk, however, it's a good idea to 
remember that such antagonists are not human. They're made 
of different stuff than we are, and they work by rules that most 
mortals can't even comprehend. 


(For more details, see Spirit Combat on the Order of 
Battle chart, The Otherworlds, and the aforementioned Spirit 
Entities section, all later on in this chapter.) 


Ma$e: The Ascension 20^ Anniversary Edition 


Targeting a Location 

Aiming an attack at a certain location - the gun hand, 
eyes, the back of a knee - is more difficult than a simple strike 
but can have marvelous rewards. In game terms, a character 
targeting a specific location adds to his normal difficulty but 
adds to his damage dice as well. A targeted strike may bypass 
armor, knock an object out of the opponent's hand, or have 
other effects based on the attack and location involved. 


Damage 
Target Size Difficulty Modifier 
Medium (arm, briefcase) +] + one die 
Small (head, hand, gun) +2 + two dice 
Precise (eye, heart, kneecap) +3 + three dice 


Ranged Attacks 


Like most people, mages prefer to keep a distance between 
their enemies and their own fragile shells. So, when Technocratic 
shock troops or joyriding gangbangers make your character’s 
life difficult (or when you are the shock troops or gangbangers!), 
the following systems handle flying lead and other projectiles. 


Aiming 

Most folks, in a firefight, place more importance on cover 
than on accuracy. For those characters who take the time and 
effort to aim correctly, though, the results are more effective. 


In game terms, an aiming character must remain more or 
less still... perhaps striding forward with Terminator menace 
but otherwise motionless. For each turn spent aiming, add one 
die to your appropriate attack dice pool, up to a maximum of 
your character’s Perception rating. 


Ascope adds two dice to that attack roll as well; this bonus, 
however, applies only to a single shot. Each new shot must be 
aimed again using the scope in order to get the full bonus and 
effect. (Certain scopes reduce attack roll difficulty too - see 
Special Gun Sights, p. 454.) 


In order to aim properly, a character must have at least 
one dot in either Firearms (to aim guns), Energy Weapons (to 
employ energy weapons), or Archery (in order to use bows). 


Automatic Gunfire and Strafing 

Storms of gunfire mark many battles between the Awakened 
folk. And thanks to the Technocratic nightmare called automatic 
weapons, a character can empty her entire ammunition clip 
in a single wild burst. 


Firing a gun at fullauto speed adds 10 dice to the attack 
roll, but it also raises the difficulty of the shot by +2, courtesy 
of the gun’s recoil. In order to empty a clip, your character 
needs at least a half-clip of ammo to begin with; once those 
shots are fired, the clip is useless. 


Full-Auto Strafing: When strafing an area, the attacker 
hoses down that area with bullets. Game-wise, this tactic works 


the same way as fullauto fire, except that the successes are 
distributed evenly between each target involved. If the number 
ofsuccesses rolled winds up smaller than the number oftargets, 
then the Storyteller decides who's been hit and who's been 
missed by that spray of bullets. 


Bows 


Longbeforeguns became man’s weapon of choice, long-range 
fighters employed the muscular precision of bows. These days, 
such weapons seem cumbersome and odd. Still, in the hands of a 
skilled archer, bows have several advantages over firearms. They’re 
quiet, accurate, and powerful - you can shoot a stake through a 
vampire's heart at 100 paces if you're a would-be Katniss Everdeen. 


These weapons, though, demand more expertise than guns. To 
use a bow correctly, a character needs the secondary Skill Archery. 
The player rolls Dexterity + Archery in order to shoot that weapon. 
Different bows have different difficulty ratings, as listed on the 
Ranged Weapons chart. A character without the appropriate 
Ability can try to use a bow, but he suffers a +2 difficulty penalty. 


Sadly, bows are more breakable than guns. So are bowstrings. 
If the would-be archer botches a roll, che bowstring snaps and 
must be replaced before the weapon can be used again. (Wits * 
Crafts or Archery, at *1 difficulty - assuming you have an extra 
bowstring... if not, thou art fuck'ed.) Bows also take longer to 
sendofftheir projectiles than guns do. In game terms, an amateur 
archer must nock and draw the arrow (an automatic action) 
before he can loose it. A character with three dots or more in 
Archery, however, can nock, draw, and loose as a single action. 
A crossbow, meanwhile, takes two turns to ready and shoot. Skill 
doesn't matter here, though, because the mechanisms involved 
move only so fast. A Time 3 Effect, of course, can speed the 
whole process up by giving extra actions to the character - see 
the Time Sphere entry in Chapter Ten, (pp. 522-523). 


We weren’t kidding about that staking a vampire from 
a distance trick. Saying it, however, is easier than doing it. To 
accomplish that feat, the archer needs to score at least five 
successes and must also inflict at least three health levels (after 
soaking) in order to pierce the monster’s chest and bring his 
undead dominion to a splintery halt. 


Cover and Movement 


Magick or no magick, gunfights are no place for carelessness. 
Folks who can’t shrug off bullets or energy blasts use cover as often 
as possible. Such protection often comes into play during car chases, 
drive-bys, firefights, and other attacks on people who aren't crazy 
enough to stand up and get shot at. The problem, of course, is that 
you can't shoot what you can't see. In order to aim and fire, you've 
got to expose a bit of yourself to your enemy's gunshots as well. 


Cover adds to the difficulty of hitting a target; the more 
cover a character has, the harder it is to hit her. Conversely, 
it’s also harder to shoot from certain positions or to fire 
accurately while you're moving as well. In either case, the 
shooting character suffers a penalty to her shots, even as she 
gets the benefits of cover. 


Difficulty to — Shooter's 
Cover Hit Target Difficulty 
Lying Flat +] 0 
Moving +] +] 
Behind Wall +2 +] 
Only Head Exposed +3 +2 


With or without cover, a character can move up to one half 
of his maximum running distance and still act without taking 
a penalty or dividing up his dice pool. (See Movement at the 
beginning of this chapter.) Ducking behind walls and dodging 
behind cars are time-honored tactics for the modern gunfighter, 
andaperson who wants to avoid a one-way trip to the Shadowlands 
will use cover and movement to her best advantage. 


Range 

Every weapon on the Ranged Weapons chart has a certain 
listed Range as part of its entry. That Trait shows the weapon’s 
medium effective range; within this distance, the difficulty is 
considered to be 6. A given weapon can be fired up to twice that 
listed Range at difficulty 8 (possibly higher at the Storyteller’s 
call). Within two yards or less, however, the characters are within 
pointblank range and the difficulty drops to 4. 


Reloading 


Guns run out of ammo... sometimes, when dealing with 
mages, more unexpectedly than usual. Smart gunfighters carry 
extra ammunition for such occasions. Assuming that your 
character has a spare clip handy, an automatic weapon can be 
reloaded during combat by taking a single action to do so. That 
gun can still be fired within the same turn - the player simply 
loses two dice from his usual attack dice pool. 


Revolvers are another matter. Because they don’t use clips, 
such guns usually have to be loaded bullet by bullet unless you’ve 
got a speed-loader already primed with bullets. A character 
with a speed-loader can slap a new clip into her gun, as above. 
If she doesn’t have a speed-loader ready, she needs to take a 
full turn to reload that pistol manually. No other actions are 
possible that turn, though a Time 3 Effect can slow a temporal 
pool around the mage, during which time she can load her 
gun normally and then shoot. 


A character with a Firearms rating of 1 or better can reload 
without making a roll under normal circumstances, though 
certain complications (badly hurt, reloading in a moving car, 
andsoon) mightdemand a Dexterity * Firearms roll. Reloading 
aspent clip or speed-loader with fresh bullets, however, requires 
a Dexterity + Firearms roll (difficulty 6) and an entire turn. 


Three-P. ound Burst 


Many automatic weapons can fire off three-round bursts. 
As with the full-auto fire circumstance above, these bursts add 
extra dice to your attack roll - three extra dice for a three-round 
burst - at the cost of a higher difficulty (in this case, *1 to the 
normal difficulty). The listed damage is based upon asingle bullet 


Chapter Nine: Dramatic Systems 


IA 7 


PW 


When you bring a knife to a katana fight, you're at a distinct disadvantage. To reflect the inherent dangers of battling 
an opponent with a longer weapon, this optional rule subtracts one die from the attack dice pool of the character who's 
got the shorter weapon. This option applies only to hand-to-hand situations. If you find yourself facing off against a HIT 
Mark with nothing but your athame at hand, it's time to be anywhere but there. 


from the gun in question. Obviously, this tactic expends three 
bullets each time a burst is fired. Check the Ranged Weapons 
chart to see which weapons can fire three-round bursts. 


Thrown Weapons 

Whenagun'stoo much anda fist doesn'treach far enough, 
a hurled beer mug or knife can be remarkably effective... 
especially when enhanced with a bit of magick. 


Throwing objects is easy enough; actually hitting someone 
with one requires a successful Dexterity * Athletics roll. That 
roll's difficulty is typically 6, though close targets might be 
difficulty 5 instead. Distant targets, or clumsy objects being 
thrown (tables, streetsigns, weapons that haven'tbeen designed 
to be thrown), may raise that difficulty by *1 or *2. 


If the attacker knows the Sphere of Forces, he could add 
a push of Forces 2 to a thrown weapon, adding velocity and 
momentum to the hurled object. Each success scored with this 
coincidental trick lowers the difficulty of the attack by -1, to a 
maximum reduction of -3. This, in turn, makes it more likely 
that the attack will score additional damage - see Phase Three: 
Damage and Magick Enhancing Violence, above. 


Difficulties, damage, and other details associated with 
different weapons can be found on the Ranged Weapons chart, 
under Thrown Weapons. The range ofa hurled weapon usually 
depends upon the strength ofthe thrower and both the bulk and 
aerodynamic qualities of the object. The Storyteller should feel free 
to adjust the difficulties and ranges according to circumstances. 
Sure, a strong cyborg can throw a car... but really, how far can he 
throw it, especially when the Masses are watching him? 


Two Weapons 

Ifyou wanna get your John Woo on (and really - who doesn’t?), 
the two-fisted gunslinger stuntisan old favorite. Outside the movies, 
though, it’s far more difficult than it looks. A shooter who employs 
two guns at once needs to divide her Dexterity + Firearms dice 
pool between both weapons and also add a +1 difficulty penalty 
to the gun in her off hand. That said, a skillful combatant can 
lay down some serious damage with a pair of large pistols and the 
will to use them. 


Close Combat 


Because mages are normal humans, and because normal 
humans aren’t particularly strong when stacked up against 
other Night-Folk, mages and their human allies must bring 
imaginative fighting techniques to the arena. Thankfully (for 
the mages, at least), humankind has spent millennia refining 
methods of effective force. 


Mage: The Ascension 20" Anniversary Edition 


The following systems cover the many techniques an Awakened 
character might use to take her enemies down. Each section features 
notes about the necessary elements of each maneuver: damage, 
roll, and so forth. If a maneuver requires two actions instead of 
one, the attacker must either divide her dice pool between them 
or employ a Time 3 Effect in order to finish the job. Either way, 
the attack takes place within one turn unless specified otherwise. 


General Hand-to-hand Maneuvers 

Any character with the right physique can perform the 
following maneuvers. Some moves, however, are limited to 
certain shapes - you can't claw someone if you don’t have 
claws! For the most part, these attacks inflict bashing damage. 
Exceptions are noted in each entry. 


* Bite: Creatures with teeth can bite. Human jaws normally 
inflict Strength in bashing damage, but a shapechanged mage's 
teeth can deal out lethal harm instead. Certain Night-Folk inflict 
aggravated damage with their bites, buta mage - even in a more 
dangerous form - inflicts lethal damage only. Typically, a bite 
attack causes Strength * 1 damage; an especially large mouth or 
teeth, however, may add +2 or even +3 to that attack. 


Difficulty: 5 


Actions: 1 


Roll: Dexterity * Brawl 
Damage: Strength +1/ B or L 


* Claw: Cyborgs, beasts, shapechanged mages, and folks 
wearing surgically implanted claws can slash their enemies. 
Again, this inflicts lethal, not aggravated, damage unless the 
attacker has some sort of special advantage like Primium 
claws or Quintessence enhancement. (See the entry for the 
Prime Sphere, Chapter Ten). Normal claws inflict Strength 
+1; Wolverinestyle claws dish out Strength +2, and holy-shit- 
lemmie-outta-here claws may deal out Strength +3. 


Roll: Dexterity + Brawl Difficulty: 6 
Damage: Strength *1-3/ Lor A Actions: 1 


* Disarm: With a clever strike and twist, the fighter 
removes her opponent's weapon from his hand. To succeed, 
the attacker rolls Dexterity * Melee at * 1 to her usual difficulty; 
if her successes exceed her opponent’s Strength score, then he 
drops that weapon. If she doesn't score enough successes to 
disarm the opponent, she still inflicts her usual damage. If she 
botches that roll, she loses her own weapon instead. 


Abrave orskillful attacker can try to disarm an armed opponent 
with her bare hands. In this case, the roll is Dexterity + Brawl, the 
difficulty is 8, and she subtracts one die from her usual attack dice 
pool. A character with at least three dots in the Martial Arts Skill 
can perform this bare-handed disarm maneuver at difficulty 7 
instead; in this case, the roll is Dexterity * Martial Arts, not Brawl. 


Roll: Dexterity * Melee Difficulty: +1 / 8/ 7 
Damage: Special Actions: 1 


* Flank or Rear Attacks: By attacking an opponent’s 
flank, an attacker reduces his difficulty by-1; by attacking from 
the rear, he reduces it by -2. 


Roll: Normal Difficulty: -1 / -2 
Damage: Normal Actions: 1 


* Grapple: Grabbing hold of her antagonist, the attacker 
tries to either immobilize him (a hold) or crush him (a clinch). 
The latter option requires a bit of strength, but Life Sphere 
magick makes many things possible. 


To grapple another character, the attacker needs to make 
a successful Strength * Brawl, Martial Arts, or Do roll. If she 
wants to bring the pain with her attack, the player can roll her 
Strength to inflict damage, beginning on the next turn and 
continuing until her opponent breaks free. That foe may try to 
soak that damage as usual. If, instead, the attacker wants to hold 
her opponent still, he's stuck in her grip until his next action. 


To escape a grapple, the opponent has two options: he 
can break free by successfully beating his attacker in a resisted 
Strength * Brawl roll, or he can reverse the hold by doing 
the same thing and then scoring two successes more than 
his attacker has scored. At the Storyteller's option, an agile 
character can use Dexterity instead of Strength to escape; if 
he's got Acrobatics, Martial Arts, or Do, he can use either of 
those Traits instead of Brawl. 


Grappling attacks normally inflict bashing damage. A 
character who's got barbs, spikes, or claws - and who tears 
into her victim with them while he's held - inflicts lethal 
damage instead. 


Roll: Strength * Brawl Difficulty: 6 
Damage: Strength or none/B Actions: 1 


* Kick: Lashing out with a leg or two, the character hits 
an opponent where it hurts. This attack reflects a pretty basic 
strike; for elaborate martial arts kicks, see below. Kicks normally 
inflict bashing damage. A cyborg, HIT Mark, or other massive 
attacker, though, may deal outlethal damage from sheer density. 


Roll: Dexterity * Brawl Difficulty: 7 
Damage: Strength +1/B Actions: 1 


* Punch: One fist, one face, one very basic attack. Certain 
punches - like uppercuts or shots to the kidneys - may deal 
out extra damage with a higher difficulty rating. (See Dirty 
Fightingand Martial Artsfor several examples.) Most punches 
inflict bashing damage, but punches by metal-handed cyborgs 
can do lethal harm instead. 


Roll: Dexterity * Brawl Difficulty: 6 
Damage: Strength/B Actions: 1 


* Readingan Opponent: Mages specialize in outthinking 
their opponents. With the Storyteller's permission, a hand- 
to-hand combatant may try to read an opponent’s intentions 
with a roll of Perception * either Brawling, Do, or Martial Arts. 
This becomes a resisted roll, pitting the observer's Perception 
* combat Trait against her opponent's Wits * combat Trait. 


B 


Y got el if 


j 
f 


i 


N 1 M T 


Chapter Nine: Dramatic Systems 


If the observer succeeds, she adds one die per success to the 
dice pool to perform her next action. 


Reading an opponent demands one action. The character 
may attempt to do this only once per combat scene for each dot 
she has in Wits. (A Wits 3 character, then, could try this trick 
up to a maximum of three times in a scene.) The Storyteller 
might choose to limit this trick to characters who have at least 
two dots in both Wits and the appropriate combat Trait; slow- 
witted people who don’t understand fighting aren’t good at 
this sort of thing. At ranges beyond 20 feet or so, this trick 
does not work unless the observer has at least one dot in the 
Correspondence or Mind Spheres and uses a perceptual Effect 
to read his opponent at a distance. 


Roll: Perception + Combat Trait Difficulty: 6 
Damage: N/A 


* Sweep: With a weapon (Melee) or leg (Brawl, Martial 
Arts, or Do), our fighter knocks his enemy’s own legs out 
from under him. Martial artists and Do-trained fighters with 
a specialty in Weapon Forms can use their Martial Arts or Do 
(rather than Melee) to sweep an opponent's legs out from under 
him while using a weapon... and may get extra successes when 
the player rolls a 10. If the blow succeeds, the antagonist winds 
up on the ground that turn and, although the fall won’t hurt 
him, it’ll place him at a disadvantage. (See Blinding, Knocked 
Down, Immobilized, or Stunned, above.) 


Roll: Dexterity + Brawl or Melee Difficulty: 8 
Damage: None/B 

* Tackle: Employing a mix of weight and momentum, 
the attacker throws herself into her opponent. This sort of 


thing can hurt both parties, but it’s an effective way to stop a 
fleeing enemy. 


Actions: 1 


Actions: 1 


A tackle requires at least two yards of distance to achieve 
effective momentum. Each combatant must make a successful 
Dexterity * Athletics roll (difficulty 6 for the attacker, difficulty 
6 * the attacker's successes for the target), or else wind up 
sprawled on the ground afterward. 


A would-be tackler who botches either trips and falls 
(inflicting one die of damage upon herself for every yard she 
ran); slams into something else (inflicting that damage plus her 
Strength damage upon herself); or crashes into her target and 
bounces off (suffering the opponent's Stamina in damage and 
leaving the target himself unharmed). 


For the most part, tackle damage is bashing, not lethal. A 
person crushed beneath the weight of a flying cyborg, however 
- or hit by someone who's suddenly amped her mass with Life 
or her momentum with Forces - is liable to need a hospital, 
stat; in game terms, this tactic inflicts lethal damage instead. 
Do we really need to point out that a fragile human mage who 
flings herself into a cyborg or mass-enhanced body is liable to 
suffer that kind of damage herself...? 


Difficulty: 7 


Actions: 1 


Roll: Dexterity * Brawl 
Damage: Strength/B or L 


Dirty Fighting 

Folks raised on the streets have nasty ways oftakinga person 
down. It's sheer survival in such environments. The following 
collection of brutal blows demands at least three dots in the 
Brawl Ability, plus a background that includes such dirty tricks 
(gang membership, violent neighborhood, rape-prevention 
classes, and so on). Street-honed mages might also use such 
tactics as tools to focus ugly "coincidences," especially ones 
using Entropy, Life, Mind, and (when the Sphere increases 
kinetic momentum) Forces. 


Mage Trick: The Thunder Punch 


Throwing Enlightened force behind a punch, kick, or other hand-to-hand attack, a fighting mage delivers an unexpectedly 
powerful blow. Story-wise, the trick looks like a perfectly executed strike. In game terms, the mage employs either 
Correspondence 1 (to judge the perfect spot to hit), Entropy 1 or 2 (to either find a weak spot or adjust probability to the 
perfect place and time], Forces 2 (to increase velocity), Life 3 (to boost Strength orto damage the enemy internally), Mind 
2 (to send an impulse to surrender), Matter 2 (to break inert materials), Prime 2 (to directly attack the target's Pattern), 
or Time 2 (to note the perfect opening). As with most other tricks, each success reduces the difficulty of the attack roll by 
-] per success, to a maximum adjustment of -3. 


In most cases, this "thunder punch" — which can also be performed with hand-to-hand weapons - is coincidental and 
inflicts bashing damage. A Life 3 or Prime 3 Pattern assault, however, inflicts aggravated damage instead, using the 
blow to focus an all-out metaphysical attack. Truly powerful blows may slip into vulgar magick if the mage appears to 
be too weak to have inflicted such a powerful strike... like, say, the proverbial skinny geek smashing every bone in the 
body of a towering muscle-thug. Oh, yeah - the thunder punch can kill people if you're not careful, so it's best to save 
this trick for Night-Folk and other such opponents unless your mage wants to face charges for manslaughter or murder. 


Another flipside to the blow is obvious: you can hurt yourself while doing it. If the target manages to soak every level of 
damage inflicted by a thunder punch, then the attacker hurts himself; the damage he would have inflicted on the target 
gets inflicted on the mage instead (yes, he can try to soak it too). In the case of the Pattern attacks, the mage simply suffers 
bashing damage, not aggravated harm. If, however, the mage tries to thunder punch a wall, steel armor, solid stone, 
and so forth, he might take lethal damage instead, possibly shattering his hand or foot... or, if he's using a weapon to 
strike, breaking his weapon against that unyielding surface. 


422 


Mage: The Ascension 20" Anniversary Edition 


* Blinding: Scratching an enemy's eyes, throwing dirt in 
his face, spraying him with chemicals or using some similar 
attack, the brawler tries to render her opponent sightless. If 
she succeeds, the enemy gets blinded for one turn per success 
and loses two dice from his dice pools until he recovers. 


This attack doesn't normally inflict lasting damage. At the 
Storyteller's option, however, a truly vicious strike (gouging with 
Life-grown claws, showering him with acid, etc.) might inflict a 
health level or two of lethal damage in addition to the blindness. 
Five successes or more might destroy the eyes completely... 
and although Life magick can heal such injuries, there's vulgar 
spellcasting involved unless the healer uses a First Aid pack, cool 
water, or some other method of coincidentally fixing blindness. 


Difficulty: 9 


Actions: 1 


Roll: Dexterity * Subterfuge 
Damage: Special 
* Body Slam: Lifting his opponent up over his head, a 


strong fighter can use brute strength and momentum to burst 
various important innards. 


This maneuver requires a successful grappling attack. If 
the enemy can't break free within that turn, the brawler can 
use his next action to slam his foe into the nearest and most 
painful surface. The impact typically inflicts bashing damage; 
if the surface happens to be sharp, spiked, or incredibly hot, 
however, such injuries might be lethal instead. 


Roll: Dexterity + Brawl/B orL Difficulty: 6 
Damage: Strength *2 Actions: 2 


* Curbstomp: An ugly way of rearranging someone's face 
involves propping said face against a curb or other hard surface 
(sometimes with the mouth open, for extra effect) and then 
kicking or stomping down on the back of his head. This sort 
of thing is a great way to score an Attempted Murder rap... or 
a Murder One charge that's likely to stick! 


A curbstomp attack requires a stunned or immobilized 
target, plus one turn to place his face into position. After that, 
the brawler stomps and physics does the rest. The attacker rolls 
his Strength for the attack. This assault inflicts lethal damage 
and may inflict lasting and horrific injuries (broken teeth, 
shattered jaw, ruined face, etc.) at the Storyteller's discretion. 


Difficulty: 6 
Actions: 2 


Roll: Strength * Brawl 
Damage: Strength *2/L 

* Haymaker: Making like a real-life Popeye the Sailor, 
the brawler winds up, spots an opening, and hurls everything 
she has into a jaw-cracking punch. If she’s successful, this blow 
typically knocks the opponent back a yard or so unless he makes 
a Strength roll (difficulty 8) to resist its effects; if he botches 
that roll, he hits the ground. 
Roll: Dexterity + Brawl 


Damage: Strength +2/B 


Difficulty: 7 
Actions: 1 


* Head Butt: In a closeclinch situation, the attacker 
can smash her head into the face or stomach of an opponent. 
Obviously, this move works only when both antagonists are within 
head's reach of one another - the attack's main benefit comes 
from surprise, backed up by a sudden thick skull in the teeth. 


Unless the attacker has a horned head, spiked helmet, steel 
skull, or other lethal implement, the head butt inflicts bashing 
damage. If the target soaks all of that damage, however, then 
the attacker is stunned for one turn. Anyone stupid enough to 
head butt a cyborg or other unyielding opponent suffers the 
damage she would have inflicted and gets stunned for a turn 
as well. (For rules about being stunned, see Blinded, Knocked 
Down, Immobilized, or Stunned, above.) 


Difficulty: 6 
Actions: 1 


Roll: Dexterity * Brawl 
Damage: Strength +1/B 

* Jab Pistol: Jamminga firearm directly into his opponent's 
body, the attacker blasts a rather large hole in her. Risky and 
messy, this move forces the attacker to get as up close and 
personal as it's possible to get. A successful roll gets inside the 
opponent’s reach. Because the gun's being used hand-to-hand, 
the maneuver employs Brawl instead of Firearms. Only pistols 
can be used this way, and the results are... disgusting. 


Difficulty: 6 


Actions: 1 


Roll: Dexterity * Brawl 
Damage: As per firearm *2 


* Low Blow: Going for the takedown, a brawler aims a 
shot at some location - kidneys, septum, genitals, etc. - that's 
sure to hurt a lot. 


If our brawler assailant makes a successful attack roll, 
her target winds up stunned for one turn for each health 
level inflicted after the soak roll. He can try to shrug it off 
with a Stamina roll (difficulty 8), but unless he manages to 
do so, he's down for the count in agonizing pain. Normally, 
this trauma involves bashing damage. Low blows struck with 
claws, teeth, blades, or enhanced crushing force, however, 
are lethal. 


Roll: Dexterity * Brawl Difficulty: 7 


Damage: Strength + Stun/B or L Actions: 1 


* Pistol Whip: Adding emphasis to injury, the brawler 
cracks his opponent across the head or face with a gun or other 
small, hard, heavy object - a crowbar, brew mug, laptop, etc. 
This blow inflicts lethal damage and may stun the opponent 
for one turn if she fails a Stamina roll (difficulty 8)... and for 
two turns if she botches that roll. In real life, this sort of thing 
can bust a person's skull; with magick, it can cover for a Life- 
based Effect that puts the enemy down for the count... maybe 
to sleep, perhaps forever. 


Roll: Dexterity * Melee 
Damage: Strength *2/L 


Martial Arts 


People have been beating each other senseless since the 
dawn of time. These last few decades, though, have witnessed the 
refinementand popularity of hundreds of martial art disciplines. 
Skills that had been, until recently, the secret arts of elite warriors 
have since become sports, pastimes, and self-defense techniques 
for almost everyone. And though the average person is merely 
brawling when he opens up the Whup-Ass canister, a skilled 
martial artist fights far more effectively than that. 


Difficulty: 7 


Actions: 1 


Chapter Nine: Dramatic Systems 423 


EEA 


a 


Optional Rule: 
Drunken Style 


Aping the effects of intoxication on monkeys and 
other primates (like people), watchful martial artists 
recognized the unpredictable nature of a blurry- 
reflexed fighter. By learning to enter semi-trance drunken 
mind states, or by training to attack off-beat, these 
martial artists formulated a style that’s incredibly hard 
to read... and thus, incredibly hard to defend against. 


The following optional rule allows a practitionerofa drunken 
style (or, in Akashic circles, the Broken Rhythm School) to 
adoptthis unpredictable form. Assuming the lolling drunken 
stance (see Jackie Chan's Drunken Master films), he bobs, 
weaves, and rolls. In any turn in which he wins initiative, 
that martial artist adds +2 to the difficulty of any attack he 
makes, buthe also adds+3 to the difficulty of any character 
whotriesto block, dodge, disarm or otherwise counterthose 
attacks. These advantages, however, do not apply in turns 
during which he loses initiative. 


A defender who's using Time Sphere perceptions during 
the fight can counter this advantage, dodging and 
defending normally; a Mind reader, however, cannot 
do so because not even the martial artist himself knows 
exactly what he's going to do next. 


The fighter doesn't have to be drunk when using 
drunken style martial arts. In order to employ this 
option, however, the martial artist must have at least 
three dots in either Martial Arts or Do, and must take 
a specialty in either Drunken Style or Broken Rhythm 
School. Normal fighters — drunk or sober -cannot use 
such techniques effectively. 


Lacking the claws and teeth of vampires and other Night- 
Folk, mages mustrely upon weapons and martialarts in a serious 
fight. And given their disciplined and inquisitive natures, the 
Awakened often make excellent pupils for the fighting arts... 
arts that are, on many levels, physical reflections of the mental 
disciplines involved in magick. Certain mages - especially 
Black Suits, Thanatoic killers, crafty wizards, and street-savvy 
witches - even focus their mystic Arts through martial skills, 
utilizing chi energy and physical conditioning as tools for their 
arcane practices. Although the Akashic Art of Do is far more 
refined and potent than typical martial arts - and is therefore 
detailed below - the Akashayana aren't the only mages who 
focus magick through a wellaimed punch. (See the Martial 
Arts practice described in Chapter Ten, pp. 580-581). 


Soft and Hard Techniques 

Some practitioners describe "soft" and "hard" approaches 
to the martial arts: hard styles emphasize direct actions, aggressive 
stances, thrusting attacks, and sharp defenses, whereas soft 
styles focus on avoidance, fluid movements, misdirection, and 
momentum-based techniques that use an attacker's energy 
against him. One approach strikes; the other flows. 


424 Mage: The Ascension 20" Anniversary Edition 


Many practices feature both elements, especially within mixed 
martial arts that take elements from various practices. Certain 
practices, however, have distinctly hard components (karate, 
savate, tiger-style, etc.), and others focus on a soft approach in 
terms of both philosophy and practice (aikido, wing chun, judo, 
and so forth). As some of the entries below point out, certain 
techniques work better with one style than they do with another. 


Most disciplines go far beyond combat maneuvers. Additional 
Abilities like Athletics, Acrobatics, Meditation, and Esoterica(with 
specialties like Herbalism, Yoga, Body Control, Chinese or Ayurvedic 
Medicine, and various philosophies) are part of the essential training 
for many martial arts. Game-wise, a character should have several 
dots in such Abilities, reflecting both the physical training and 
the spiritual and philosophical basis of the art. For suggestions, 
see the Eight Limbs of Expertise sidebar in the Do section below. 


The following maneuvers can be used by any character with 
a few dots in the Martial Arts Skill. For each dot in Martial Arts, 
you can choose two martial arts maneuvers. Certain advanced 
maneuvers demand a Minimum Ability; only characters with 
the appropriate dots in the appropriate Abilities may employ 
this maneuver. 


Martial Arts as a Magickal Focus 

This section represents the effects of normal martial arts. 
To employ such arts as a focus, again see the Martial Arts entry 
under Practice: The Shape of Focus in Chapter Ten and the 
Magick and Violence entry earlier in the combat rules section. 


As noted in the Chapter Six entry Optional Rule: 
Minimum Abilities (see p. 276), a martial artist mage should 
have at least one dot in Martial Arts (or Do, if she uses Do) for 
every dot in the highest Sphere she uses through her martial 
arts techniques. Mage or no mage, a budding karateka should 
not be able to channel devastating magickal Effects through 
an art she barely understands. 


* Counter Throw: Directing an attacker's momentum 
against him, the martial artist sends him flying into the nearest 
wall... or the ground... or worse. A basic soft-style maneuver, 
this remains an effective technique. When the martial artist 
is attacked, make a resisted roll of Dexterity + Martial Arts 
against the attacker’s Dexterity + Brawl, Melee, or Martial Arts 
(depending on the Ability that the opponent is using to attack). 
If you score more successes than your attacker does, then you 
deflect the attack and may - immediately and without having 
to divide up your dice pool - try to throw him (as below). If 
you fail the throw, you still sidestep his attack. 


Minimum Ability: Martial Arts 1, Athletics 1 (soft style) 
Difficulty: 6 


Actions: 1 


Roll: Dexterity * Martial Arts 
Damage: As Throw 


* Death Strike: Aiming a rigid hand at an organ, joint, or 
other incapacitating location, the attacker directs devastating 
force at that target. This strike inflicts lethal damage. 


Minimum Ability: Martial Arts 3 (hard style) 
Difficulty: 5 


Actions: 1 


Roll: Dexterity * Martial Arts 
Damage: Strength *2/L 


* Deflecting Block: Evading an attacker's blow, the martial 
artist redirects the attacker's force against her. In game terms, the 
defender rolls Dexterity * Martial Arts in Phase Two: Defense. 
Each success subtracts one success from the attacker's roll. If the 
defender scores more successes than his attacker, then the attacker 
mustroll Dexterity (difficulty 8) or else fall to the ground (or smash 
intoa nearbysurface), taking her own Strength in bashing damage. 

Minimum Ability: Martial Arts 2 (soft style), Athletics 
or Acrobatics 2 


Roll: Dexterity + Martial Arts Difficulty: 6 
Damage: Attacker's Strength/B Actions: 1 

* Dragon Tail Sweep: A spinning leg sweep that knocks an 
opponentsprawling. In game terms, the effects work like a throw, 
but the martial artist doesn’t need to grab her opponent first. 


Minimum Ability: Martial Arts 1 (hard style), Athletics 
or Acrobatics 1 
Roll: Dexterity + Martial Arts Difficulty: 8 
Damage: Opponent’s Strength/B Actions: 1 


* Elbow/ Knee Strike: A quick, brutal blow with an elbow 
or kneecap, usually directed at a vulnerable spot at close range. 


Minimum Ability: Martial Arts 1 (any style) 
Difficulty: 5 


Actions: 1 


Roll: Dexterity * Martial Arts 
Damage: Strength +1/B 
* Flying Kick: Leaping through the air, the martial artist 
combines her body weightand momentum into a powerful blow. 
Minimum Ability: Martial Arts 1 (hard style), Athletics 
or Acrobatics 1 
Roll: Dexterity * Martial Arts Difficulty: 7 
Damage: Strength +2/B Actions: 1 
* Hard Strike/ Soft Strike: Here's a basic combat blow, 
focused with more skill than a wild punch. The hard variant 
involves a clenched fist or rigid fingers (the Tiger Claw 
technique), whereas a soft blow typically involves tripping 
theopponentor otherwise using his own force to hurt him. 
Minimum Ability: Martial Arts 1 (any style) 
Difficulty: hard 5/ soft 6 


Actions: 1 


Roll: Dexterity * Martial Arts 
Damage: Strength +1/B 


* Joint Lock: Having already grappled his opponent, the 
martial artist applies pressure to joints and pressure points. If 
he chooses to exert force against that spot, he can dislocate or 
break limbs, joints, or possibly even the neck. 


The player rolls Dexterity * Martial Arts to grapple his 
opponent(see Grapple, above), then may immediately (without 
dividing his dice pool between attacks) roll Dexterity * Martial 
Arts to inflict damage. Each success rolled inflicts one health 
level's worth of lethal injury. 


Minimum Ability: Martial Arts 2 (any style), Athletics 


or Acrobatics 2 
Roll: Dexterity * Martial Arts Difficulty: 5 


Damage: Successes/L Actions: 1 


z- addi 


e Nerve/ Pressure Point Strike: Targeting a vital location, 
the martial artist directs precision force against it. If the attacker 
scores at least three successes to hit his opponent, then the 
opponent must make a Stamina roll (difficulty 8) or else be 
stunned on the next turn. A botch on that roll stuns her for 
three turns instead. 

Minimum Ability: Martial Arts 3 (any style) 

Roll: Dexterity + Martial Arts Difficulty: 7 
Damage: Strength +3/B Actions: 1 


* Snake Step: Shifting away from the blow, our martial 
artist deftly sidesteps a close or ranged attack. Naturally, he 
must be able to see it coming first. This maneuver acts as a 
dodge, with a thee-dice bonus and Dexterity * Martial Arts as 
the dice pool involved. 


Minimum Ability: Martial Arts 1 (any style), Athletics 
or Acrobatics 1 


Roll: Dexterity + Martial Arts 
Damage: N/A 


Difficulty: hard 6/soft 5 


Actions: 1 


IN A 


" RA e eg ^ 


N 


to 
"uo fF 


€ S rur 


J 
e 
' 


* Snap Kick: Focusing her energy on a simple yet effective 
kick, the martial artist directs her lower bodystrength into the blow. 


Minimum Ability: Martial Arts 1 (hard style) 
Roll: Dexterity + Martial Arts Difficulty: 5 
Damage: Strength +1/B Actions: | 


¢ Spinning Kick: Our martial artist spins around and 
plants a solid kick into the object of his attention. 


Minimum Ability: Martial Arts 2 (hard style), Athletics 
or Acrobatics 2 


Roll: Dexterity + Martial Arts 
Damage: Strength +3/B 


Difficulty: 6 
Actions: 1 


* Throw: Having grappled her opponent (or used a 
counter throw, above), the martial artist slams him into 
a convenient surface. In game terms, the attacker needs a 
Dexterity * Martial Arts dice pool equal to, or higher than, 
her opponent's Dexterity. With a successful roll, the martial 
artist can throw her opponent up to one yard for each success 
she scores on her attack roll. 


So long as she's got a straight shot at the location, she can 
choosewhere heropponentlands. When he lands, he takes damage 
based on her strength. If he'd been charging her at the time he was 
thrown, the impact also inflicts an additional *1 die for every 10 
feet he'd been traveling at the time (* 10 dice maximum). 


If the impact inflicts more than three health levels in 
damage (after soaking), the opponent must make a Stamina 
roll (difficulty 8) or else be stunned for one turn. 


Should the martialartistthrow one opponentinto another 
one, the flying enemy inflicts one die bashing damage for 
each point of Stamina he has, plus one additional die for the 
momentum and impact if one or both of the opponents were 
moving at the time. (A Stamina 3 bad guy, for example, who'd 
just run 20 feet before being thrown would inflict five dice of 
bashing damage on his buddy.) Throwing one opponent into 
another one adds *2 to the roll's difficulty for that throw, but 
it does indeed smash two birds with one throw. 

Minimum Ability: Martial Arts (any style) 2 
Roll: Dexterity * Martial Arts Difficulty: hard 7/ soft 6 
Damage: Strength * movement/B Actions: 1 

* Thunder Kick: A devastating flying kick. Hurling himself 
through the air, the martial artist focuses his chi and mass into 
a strike potent enough to end most fights immediately. In 
game terms, each success adds one additional die to the kick’s 
damage. A character cannot use the Thunder Kick more than 
once every five turns, however, as it demands intense focus and 
commitment to the blow. 


Minimum Ability: Martial Arts (hard style) 3, Athletics 
or Acrobatics 2 
Roll: Dexterity + Martial Arts Difficulty: 7 
Damage: Strength +3 + successes/B Actions: | 


* Vital Strike: A sharp-handed blow to an organ or joint 
inflicts lethal injury. 


Minimum Ability: Martial Arts (hard style) 2 


Mage: The Ascension 20" Anniversary Edition 


Roll: Dexterity + Martial Arts Difficulty: 7 


Damage: Strength/L Actions: 1 


* Withering Grasp: Grabbing his foe in a painful hold, 
the martial artist inflicts damage and may disarm her as well. 
To get the weapon from an enemy’s hand, the martial artist 
must score at least three successes; with five successes, he can 
take it away from her and use it himself in a following turn. 


Minimum Ability: Martial Arts (soft style) 3 
Roll: Dexterity + Martial Arts Difficulty: 7 


Damage: Strength/B Actions: 1 


Do 


The quintessential martial art from which all other 
disciplines supposedly descend, Do is far more than a mere 
collection of fighting techniques. As shown by its Trait listing 
in Chapter Six, Do is a way of life... or, more literally, the 
Way of life. When directed toward peaceful ends, Do allows a 
person to refine enormous potential. And when directed, by 
sad necessity, toward the ends of violence, Do is legendary in 
its martial applications. 


Commitment, Training, 
and Fighting Prowess 

As revealed in Chapter Six, a starting character cannot 
begin play with more than two dots in Do. Further expertise 
must be earned over the course of the game. Only Akashics 
and their closest, most trusted allies may learn it, and that 
discipline is a lifetime commitment. A Tao-shih (Way-scholar/ 
warrior) must spend at least one hour every day practicing Do; 
otherwise, his skills diminish. In game terms, he loses dots 
temporarily until regular training resumes - roughly one dot 
for every two weeks without practice. 


Game system-wise, Do confers the following advantages 
and limitations to its practitioners: 


* Secret Teachings: Only the most skilled Akashayana 
may teach the secrets of Do. In game terms, a character 
must have no fewer than three dots in Do, and must be 
a member (or at least a former member) of the Akashic 
Tradition, in order to train a student in this Art. A 
teacher can pass on one fighting maneuver for each 
dot of Do she possesses, plus one more for each dot in 
her Intelligence Trait. Also, a student cannot learn Do 
without also studying the eight limbs of Do. (See below.) 
The Way involves more than simply punching rocks. 


* Flexibility: A Do-using character may employ any of the 
general or martial arts combat maneuvers, assuming that 
he has at least one dot in Do for every dot in Martial 
Arts he would need for that maneuver. He cannot employ 
dirty fighting techniques, however - they’re brutal, 
undisciplined, and inharmonious. 


e Precision: When employing general combat maneuvers, 
aDo-using character subtracts-1 from the usual difficulty; 
apunch, for instance, would be difficulty 5, not 6. When 


Kuei Lung Chuan: Dragon Spirit Kung Fu 


The secret discipline of the Wu Lung Tiger School, Dragon Spirit Kung Fu features broad, powerful movements that combine 
the fury of a tiger with the grace of a dragon. In game terms, Kuei Lung Chuan is a hard style, flashy and grandiose, that 
encourages a passionate approach to life and war. 


To reflect Kuei Lung Chuan, a character from the Wu Lung — and only from the Wu Lung! - may take a Martial Arts 
specialty in this form. As usual, that character can learn up to two maneuvers for each dot in the Martial Arts Trait and 
will have several dots in Acrobatics and Melee as well. 


The Spirit Dragon style concentrates on several weapons: the jian sword, the spear, the staff, and the war fan. A Tiger 
School martial artist can take a Kuei Lung Chuan specialty in Melee to count every 10 rolled with that Ability as two 
successes, not just one. Taking the same specialty in Acrobatics allows the martial artist to get those extra successes while 
employing his Tiger School training in his acrobatic feats. Together, these advantages reflect the grand discipline of Spirit 
Dragon Kung Fu. (For details, see Specialties in Chapter Six, p. 274.) 


Kuei Lung Chuan emphasizes certain techniques. A character trained by the Tiger School will have at least two of the 
following maneuvers in addition to whichever other attacks he decides to learn, and upper-level devotees will have most, 
if not all, of these techniques: Death Strike, Dragon Tail Sweep, Hard Strike, Snake Step, Thunder Kick, and Withering 


Grasp. The Dragon Wizards, of course, often use their secret kung fu art as a mystic focus, too. 


using maneuvers from Do or the Martial Arts Ability, 
however, the normal difficulties apply. This benefit is 
also known as the well-trained advantage, as per the 
Revised edition Tradition Book: Akashic Brotherhood. 


Martial Mastery: The player may select two martial arts 
maneuvers for every dot the character has in Do, plus 
one special Do technique (below) for every dot above 
the first. A character with both Do and Martial Arts 
may add all of his maneuvers together, resulting in a 
veritable Bruce Lee. 


Differences in Mastery: If the character has both Do 
and. Martial Arts, however, the player uses Dexterity * 
Martial Arts for the maneuvers she acquired through 
the Martial Arts Ability, and Dexterity * Do for those 
she learned through Do. This reflects the difference 
between normal fightingarts and the refined path of Do. 
Being a black belt in tae kwon do will not automatically 
make you a Do master as soon as you begin learning 
that specialized Way! Once the Do Trait is higher than 
the Martial Arts Trait, though, simply use Do for all 
combat maneuver dice pools. 


Lethal Damage: Thanks to Do's intense focus and 
precision, unarmed attacks inflict lethal damage. The 
Akashic may choose to use bashing damage instead, 
however, if he'd rather not kill his opponent. Switching 
between bashing and lethal modes is a reflexive action 
that can be declared at any time before the player rolls 
to hit. 


Hardened Defense: An unarmed Do practitioner can 
block Brawl or Melee attacks that cause lethal damage. 
Either the devotee has hardened her limbs to deflect 
killing blows, or she's so adept at avoiding harm that she 
can simply deflect the strike or catch a weapon between 
her palms. This ability, however, cannot be used to stop 


projectiles or bullets, though special Do techniques allow 
practitioners to do that as well. (See below.) 


Note: The basic Do maneuvers presented in The Book of 
Shadows and Sorcerers Crusade have been replaced in Mage 
20 by all of the advantages above. A troupe that wishes to use 
the older Do maneuvers must choose either those maneuvers 
or the newer rules above. You can't use both, although the 
Typhoon Kick and Hurricane Throw, below, both allow old 
maneuvers under the new rules as special Do techniques. 


The Eight Limbs of Do 


Far more than mere super kung fu, Do also includes study 
in the eight limbs, or fields of study, that epitomize a well-focused 
life. The nearby sidebar reveals those eight limbs. To progress 
within Do, a devotee must study those limbs as well as the 
martial applications of that Art. 


In game terms, you must have at least two dots in limb- 
related Abilities other than Dharmamukti for every dot in Do. 
Before you can add another dot of Do, you must first add two 
other dots in limb-related fields. To go, for example, from Do 
2 to Do 3, your character would also have to learn at least 
two dots in one of the Abilities on the sidebar. Ideally, he'll 
eventually learn at least one dot in all eight limbs. 


Special Do Techniques 

Beyond the martial prowess and its associated skills, the 
Way also teaches its devotees an array of secret techniques. 
Some get integrated into the established Arts of what mages 
call magick - that is, Do becomes the focus for Sphere-based 
Effects. Other techniques, however, remain the special purview 
of the Akashayana. 


A devotee of Do may learn one of these techniques for each 
dot of Do he has beyond the first; if, for instance, Xiao Mengli 
achieves Do 4, she can choose up to three special techniques. 
Such disciplines are the work of devoted study and many years 
of practice. No one, obviously, can master them all! 


Chapter Nine: Dramatic Systems 427 


According to the Akashic Dharma Sutra, the Way is divided into eight fields of expertise. And although Do is often 
regarded as a martial art, its devotees recognize that a truly harmonious human being understands at least a little bit 
about all of them. 


These eight limbs are known as: 


Dhyana: The Limb of Meditation, focused upon calming an excitable mind. Refined as a way to escape the clutches 
of egotism and attachment, Dhyana employs mandalas, the Five Asian Elements, meditative movement practices, 
and the greater realm beyond Self. 

Associated Abilities: Awareness, Enigmas, Meditation 


nedali : AY 


echniques 


Karma: Devotion to humble labor, the perfect focus of small things, and one’s place within an infinite cosmos, 
epitomized by the saying, "Before enlightenment, chopping wood and carrying water. After enlightenment, chopping 
wood and carrying water." 


Associated Abilities: Art (all kinds), Crafts (all non-martial specialties), Etiquette 


<indness, compassi 


Shastamarga: The Way of Weapons, intended to expand bodily awareness into the tools that extend the body's 
reach. By focusing on weapons, the craftsmanship involved, and the awful consequences of their use and abuse, a 
devotee learns to judge the implications of her own actions upon the greater whole. 


Associated Abilities: Academics (Strategy), Crafts (Weaponsmithing), Melee 


Tricanmarga: The Way of the Triple Struggle, balancing out the forces of Dynamism, Stasis, and Entropy (seen as 
Tiger, Phoenix, and Dragon) within one's own self and then — by extension — reaching greater harmony with the 
world beyond that self. 


Associated Abilities: Acrobatics, Athletics, Esoterica (Body Control, Yoga) 


] | m" ] ( 
tional Rule: Th 'eaceful 
SJ "aiU | E Di F AG Ae WT F Wy ( d ti i 


Do is not merely a martial art. By applying the Way to peaceful tasks, a Tao-shih may focus its principles to great success. 
In story terms, the Akashic character meditates upon the Way as he performs whatever task he has set his mind to doing. 


In game terms, the player spends one Willpower point and then rolls his Do Trait as a dice pool against difficulty 8. Each 
success he rolls adds one success to a mundane task associated with one of the eight limbs listed above. To perform the 
task itself, the player rolls the associated Attribute + Ability, at whatever difficulty seems to fit the task at hand. 


Only the Associated Abilities listed above may be enhanced by this optional rule, with the exceptions of Do combat 
maneuvers and the Abilities associated with the Shastamarga limb. Such violent tasks do not get the benefit of this rule; 
this is, after all, the Peaceful Way, and so martial applications are not appropriate to its purity. 


e Arrow Cutting: With blinding speed, the Taoshih Roll: Dexterity + Do Difficulty: 7/9 
catches arrows and other projectile weapons (no bullets), ^ Damage; As Weapon Actions 
knocks them out of the air, and sometimes even throws them 
back at her attackers. At difficulty 7, the devotee can deflect an 
incoming missile of arrow speed or slower; at difficulty 9, she 
can catch it and throw it back with her next action. 


* Hurricane Throw: The remarkable power of Do allows a 
practitioner to catch or grab his opponent and then throw her with 
incredible force. Essentially, this is a typical martial arts throw with the 
damage and difficulty listed below; each success, however, adds one die 


428 Mage: The Ascension 20" Anniversary Edition 
| oN oe uer". NA im vs 


- F ^p H 4 


By adding a Time 3/ Forces 2/ Life 2 Bullet-Catch 
Effectto the Arrow Cutting feat, an Akashic character 
can catch bullets. Forces reduces the bullet's kinetic 
energy, Life hardens the skin against the projectile, and 
Time quickens the Akashic’s reflexesto incredible speed. 


To perform this trick, an Akashic mage who's aware 
of the attack can cast the Effect, focus it through Do, 
and then roll her Dexterity + Do as if it was a dodge 
against the gunfire. If she scores more successes than 
her attacker, then she catches the bullet before it can 
hit her. Whether or not this is vulgar magick depends 
on where she is; in most places, it would be vulgar, 
but in regions that accept a superhuman martial arts 
paradigm, it's coincidental. 


This feat does not work against shotguns or rapid 
fire weapons. Although a mage could certainly pull 
a Matrix-style vulgar stunt in order to stop a hail of 
bullets, that's a different kind of trick. 


to the Hurricane Throw's damage pool. This damage, unlike that of 
other unarmed attacks, is notlethal... though it can be quite significant. 


Roll: Dexterity + Do Difficulty: 8 
Damage: Strength +3 + successes/B Actions: 1 


* Iron Shirt: Through intense conditioning and focused 
chi, a practitioner can withstand terrible blows. In game terms, 
he gains one bonus soak die for every dot he has in Do. Although 
this Iron Shirt cannot soak lethal damage (unless you're using 
the Cinematic Damage option, p. 412), it can grant fantastic 
stamina to a practitioner of Do. 


Sadly, this technique does not confer total protection from 
harm. Thecharacterwill always take one health level of damage from 
a blow that exceeds her Stamina Trait. If Lucy Hark gets hit for five 
levels of damage and she has a Stamina of 2, then she'll still take 
one health level from that attack, despite her Iron Shirt technique. 


Roll: Adds Do Traitto soak roll Difficulty: N/A 
Damage: N/A Actions: none 


* Kiaijutsu: Also known as the Iron Shout, kiaijutsu 
channels the practitioner's chi through his voice, granting 
him phenomenal powers of intimidation and force. Once per 
combat, the Akashic may focus his inner energy into a terrifying 
kiai, which may have one of the following effects: 


Stamina: The Tao-shih may toughen himself against blows, 
giving himself a three-turn Stamina bonus of one dot for every 
success in a Stamina * Do roll (difficulty 7). 


Terror: Hecan frighten his enemies byrolling Manipulation 
+ Do (difficulty is the targets Willpower +3). Each success adds 
a +1 difficulty to the target's next action, to a maximum of +3 
difficulty. Ifthe devotee's successes exceed the target's Willpower, 
that enemy is either stunned into immobility for a turn or so, 


or else driven to flee. Against several weak-willed opponents 
(Willpower 4 or less), the Iron Shout causes one enemy to flee 
for every success rolled. 


Eloquence: Channeling his power toward a softer voice, he 
may hold the Shout in and fill his words with ferocious energy. 
In this case, he rolls Charisma * Do (difficulty 8), and each 
success adds one success to his next Expression, Leadership, 
Intimidation, or performance-based Art roll. 


In any application, the player must state his intention 
to use the Shout at the beginning of his action, or else hold 
back a few dice to use the Shout as a second action that turn. 


Roll: As above Difficulty: 7/ Willpower *3/ 8 
Damage: N/A Actions: 1 


* Plum Flower Blossom: Through intense balance training 
on stumps, pillars, and poles, an Akashic learns to perform 
incredible feats of acrobatic prowess. By rolling Dexterity * 
Do (difficulty 6), a practitioner may either double her jumping 
distance or bounce from object to object for one turn, plus 
another turn for every two successes scored. 


If one of those leaps gets used as an attack, the difficulty 
rises by *1 but adds two extra damage dice to that attack. 
Leaping and attacking are still considered two different actions, 
so it demands the usual divided dice pool. Especially if it’s 
enhanced by the Correspondence and/ or Forces Spheres, the 
Plum Flower technique can be quite amazing. 


Roll: Dexterity + Do Difficulty: 6 
Damage: N/A Actions: 1 


* Soft Fist: Also known as Jou Chuan or the Redirection 
technique, theSoft Fist guides a hand-to-hand attack back against 
those who wish to harm the devotee. If the Akashic using this 
technique scores more successes than his attacker, he catches 
the blow and sends it into a nearby character - probably the 
one who attacked him, or possibly a different enemy. 


Damage-wise, Jou Chuan inflicts the attacker's Strength + 
weapon, plus one die for every success scored by the Akashic 
character beyond what he needed to catch the attack. If, for 
instance, Raging Eagle needs three successes to catch his 
opponent’s attack, and he gets six successes, then the redirected 
attack inflicts the opponent's Strength * weapon * three more 
dice. 


Roll: Dexterity * Do Difficulty: 7 


Damage: As above Actions: 1 


* Ten Thousand Weapons: In the hands of an especially 
skillful Warring Fist, anything becomes a weapon. With this 
technique, the Tao-shih can use any object - a coin, a wallet, 
a newspaper, whatever - to inflict damage. If the object isn't 
normally a weapon, it deals out one die of bashing damage 
for every dot in the character's Do Trait; if it’s a weapon that 
normally inflicts bashing damage, it does lethal damage; and 
if it normally does lethal damage, it inflicts one extra die of 
damage when this character employs it. 


Roll: Dexterity + Do Difficulty: N/A 


Damage: As above Actions: 1 


Chapter Nine: Dramatic Systems 429 


IN A 


N 


|i 
E 


' 
T; 


* Typhoon Kick: Perhaps the most devastating strike 
in the Akashic technique arsenal, the Typhoon Kick directs 
chi, momentum, and supreme focus into a blow that can 
shatter stone and kill most human beings. Like the martial 
arts maneuver Thunder Kick, this attack requires absolute 
concentration and may be done no more than once every five 
turns. The practitioner can choose to use either bashing or 
lethal damage with this kick. If she directs it against a solid 
object (a car, wall, stone elemental, etc.), or a character who 
manages to soak all the damage, then she must also make a 
successful soak roll or else take half of the damage, rounded 
down, herself. (A successful soak roll means no damage.) 


Roll: Dexterity + Do Difficulty: 8 
Damage: Strength +5 + successes Actions: 1 


* Weapon Art: Applying the mastery of Do into the use of 
hand-to-hand weaponry, a devotee can use certain weapons with 
brilliant efficiency. In game terms, the character gets one familiar 
weapon for every dot he has in the Melee Trait; with those weapons 
only, he reduces the normal difficulty by -1. If the weapon normally 
does bashing damage, the Akashic may inflict lethal damage with it 
instead. He may also use the Arrow Cutting technique with those 
weapons as well, though he cannot use a weapon to catch projectiles. 


In order to employ this technique, the devotee must have a 
Dexterity * Do dice pool that's at least as high as his Dexterity 
* Melee pool, if not higher. This technique does not apply to 
guns, though it may be used with bows or thrown weapons. 


Roll: As per attack Difficulty: N/A 
Damage: As above Actions: N/A 


Magickal Duels 


When allied mages need to hash out a dispute, normal combat 
will not do. Although the time-honored rituals of non-fatal dueling, 
wrestling matches, martial arts sparring contests, and so on remain 
popular in certain groups, mages - especially ones from a mystic 
background - prefer Arts over forcewhen itcomes to dueling techniques. 


Contests 

When a graceful display of superiority seems sufficient to 
resolve a dispute, the antagonists could share a contest. Pitting 
their skills against one another, these rivals choose a field of 
battle to find out which is the better mage. Depending on the 
group, dispute, and antagonists in question, this could take 
one of a number of forms. Here are a few suggestions: 


* Achess match 
* A riddle contest 


e A race (either on foot, in vehicles, or through magickal 
methods like flight or teleportation) 


* An insult contest or bragging competition 


* A juried argument of theories or some similar debate 
(popular among Etherites, Hermetics, Choristers, 
Solificati, Progenitors, and other cerebral sects) 


Ma$e: The Ascension 20^ Anniversary Edition 


e A challenge of physical might, agility, endurance, or 
fearlessness (favored amongwitches, shamans, street-folks, 
and martial artists) 


e A psychic clash of wills (especially prevalent among 
mages who favor mental and spiritual discipline) 


* Sports matches (pretty much anyone) 

* [nvention contests (a technomancer favorite) 

e Scavenger hunts 

* Crime sprees 

e Shape-changing rivalries 

* Acquisition contests (Syndicate reps love this one) 
e Debauchery dares 

* Battles of the bands 


All of these contests play out through a combination of 
imaginative roleplaying and a few rolls off the Dramatic Feats 
chart near the beginning of this chapter. Social, physical, and 
art-and-science feats work best for this sort of thing, with the 
rolls based on the tasks that the duelists agree upon as a field 
of battle. Those feats tend to be decided by either extended 
rolls (to see who gets the most successes first, as in a race) or 
extended and resisted rolls (to see whose skill and luck prevails, 
as in games or physical confrontations). 


Inany contest, the disputants agree upon stakes beforehand, 
with the winner and loser settling their grudge once the contest 
has been won. Meanwhile, each side will probably pick out 
several witnesses and associated seconds to assure a fair and 
official resolution with - one hopes - a minimum of cheating. 


Ordeals 


Ancient customs dared rivals to settle their disputes through 
trial by ordeal: both rivals undertake a painful experience, and 
the one who gives up first loses the dispute. Handling hot irons; 
enduring intense heat or cold; retrieving objects from deep 
underwater without diving gear; suffering consensual torture or 
body modification without crying out; pitting one’s self against 
wild animals, insects, or spirits... all these ordeals, and many 
others, have places of honor in various cultures. And though 
modern mages often consider themselves too civilized (read: 
chicken) to submit to such challenges, willworkers who cherish 
physical and spiritual vitality - shamans, witches, extreme 
athletes, martial artists, Ecstatics, Thanatoics, and other people 
who venerate tribal cultures - tackle such ordeals gladly. 


In game terms, the players again utilize the Dramatic Feats 
chart, this time favoring the Physical Feats table. Resistance 
really comes into its own here, as it reflects a character's ability to 
withstand pain and fatigue. Again, use extended rolls... extended 
and resisted, if the duelists are inflicting the ordeal upon one 
another. The Storyteller might require Willpower rolls as well, 


especially for ordeals that involve courage in the face of personal 
fears or spectacular demise. The Environmental Hazardssection 
features the effects of unfortunate conditions and terrain. 
Regardless of the ordeal’s specifics, both duelists will probably 
suffer damage, too... probably bashing, often lethal, and perhaps 
even aggravated. By the time the challenge gets resolved, the 
duelists might need significant healing, recuperation, or both. 


Flame Wars and Core Wars 

A variation on the previous dueling styles pits netizens 
(often, but not always, Virtual Adepts) against each other in 
online duels or ordeals. In this case, the same systems used above 
come into play, but the feats are social and intellectual rather 
than physical. As the duel rages, the antagonists might need to 
make Willpower rolls - either extended (as when facing taunts 
and scorn), or extended and resisted (as when they’re tearing into 
one another's selfesteem). Losers sacrifice temporary points of 
Willpower, and winners become the Last Ego Standing. 


The Core War 


In a core war - an Internet dueling tradition favored by the 
Virtual Adepts - each disputing partysets up a Quintessence-pool 
server core that has been partitioned outside the Digital Web as 
awhole, to prevent widespread infections from the coming duel. 


Once the duel begins, the antagonists write virus programs 
(Intelligence * Computer, difficulty 8) to attack the other servers. In 
theprocess, they investa partofthemselves into thevirus byenergizing 
it with a point of Quintessence from their personal energy - in game 
terms, from the Quintessence Trait. As with the classical certámen 
style described below, these servers and viruses can take imaginative 
forms; Quintessence servers might be built like dungeon levels, 
cinematic landscapes, mazedike offices, pan-dimensional labyrinths, 
complex mandalas, and so forth. The viruses can look like fantasy 
adventure heroes, cartoon characters, insectoid invaders, angry birds, 
disgruntled office workers, geometric storms, and so forth... all of 
which reflect the personalities of the people conducting the duel. 


As the duel begins, the viruses get sent off to attack the 
cores. Power-ups along the way - power pills, medical kits, pools 
of water or fire, etc. - can fuel and upgrade the virus warriors 
during the attack. With those power-ups, the duelists upgrade 
their viral champions by spending another point of personal 
Quintessence. In game terms, these points let a duelist change 
tactics or lower the difficulty of her attack. 


As the core war continues, the duelists make extended and 
resisted rolls. Generally, thatroll involves Intelligence * Computer, 
as mentioned above. A duelist might change his tactics, though, 
by making new rolls with different Traits - say, Wits * Enigmas, 
Wits * Computer, Perception * Cryptography, etc. Each change 
of rolls requires a Quintessence point, but the change can adjust 
the dice pool to favor a duelist's strengths. The first duelist to 
score 25 successes breaches the core and wins the war... and 
gets the Quintessence that went into making that core, as well. 


Because core warriors invest their essence into their viruses 
and cores, they take damage from the battle. Each failed roll 
indicates a death for the virus, which inflicts an automatic level 
of bashing damage on the duelist and requires a new point of 


Chapter Nine: Dramatic Systems 


43l 


Quintessence so that the virus can respawn. A botched roll offending mage one goal per incident (as well as any Paradox 

inflicts lethal damage instead, as the death backlashes on the — incurred!), and a Paradox backlash forfeits the duel. 
duelist as system shock. Although core wars to the death are Because a reality challenge benefits humanity as a whole 
rare, such duelists do occasionally die. Y'know those stories without tilting the paradigm over a cliff, both mystics and 
about computer game enthusiasts found dead in their chairs, ^ Techinocrats can share a reality challenge with one another. 
the console or keyboard clutched in their hands? Now you Accordingto legend, such duels originated duringthe European 
know what really happened... late Middle Ages, the Red Turbans War in China... or perhaps 
Variations on flame and core wars involve hacking challenges ^ both, or maybe neither. Warring factions would work to improve 
(with systems as Contests, above) or virtual combat; for the latter the lot of the common people, which in time became a suitable 
rules, see the section on The Digital Web later in this chapter. test for a faction’s virtue. After all, went the reasoning, if a 
More recently, however, both the Virtual Adepts and other activist particular mage or faction could win - as 
mages have favored the most productive sort of duel... the expression goes - the hearts and 
better, see Ascension: Can 


minds of the people, 
The Reality Challenge 
mmm LA 
1 N 
y 
There be Only One?in Chapter 


then Reality itself 

In a world that desperately needs hope, a would be the judge of 
reality challenge resolves a dispute in the most 

Seven (pp. 369-370) and Reality Zones in 

Chapter Ten (pp. 611-617). 


that mage or faction's 
altruistic way possible: by finding a problem worthiness. 
among the Sleepers, then seeing who can fix 
it best. Essentially, the field of battle involves 
a situation that cries out for improvement: 
a crimeridden neighborhood, a famine, a 
slave trafficking ring or drug 
cartel war, an environmental 
catastrophe, and so forth. 
A third party picks the 
situation and then places 
acertain number of goals 
that must be fulfilled 
as victory conditions. 
The winning duelist is 
the one who manages 
to meet the most goals 
within the time required. 


In game terms, 

a reality challenge 
is a story hook, 
not a series of rolls. 

For more details about 

changing the world for the 


On a more selfish but literally Traditional 
level, the Council has its longstanding 


One major rule 
dominates all reality challenges: 
the Sleepers must not know what's really 
going on. This forces the duelists to be 
clever, subtle, and secretive - they can’t 
simply fly in with bundles of food and 
wipe out warring factions with a few 
well-tossed fireballs. In the process, the 


of consensual reality. This circle must 
Sh be prepared in a Horizon Realm, 
contestants must also inspire hope and — Sl 
self-sufficiency among the Masses... 
after all, ifthe people themselves aren’t N 
inspired to change, then very little 
has actually improved. 

Dueling mages are usually 

iw to let Le fa them and then blasting one another with mystic 
m EAT tnem. ee P might until somebody surrendered or died. 
v 


as the duel itself manifests exceedingly 
L| NN J X The obvious problems with this method 
( bá made it unsuitable for the Council as a 


A A since the medieval era. Rare but 
EZ fascinating in the new millennium, 
KD 


zd 
AO 27, y this form of dueling involves a large, 
leo e EN magickal certámen circle inscribed ina 
y 
~ S) 
Within the Setting 
Early forms of certámen usually 
mystical trial by combat into a form 
BS that other non-Hermetic mages 


specially prepared ritual space outside 
involved wizards getting into a ritual circle 
could employ, preferably without 


to directly witness magick in action. 
Essentially, the duelists become like 
angels, gods, or heroes, walking 
among mortals without revealing 
their powerful true natures to the 
people. Overt acts of magick in 
front of Sleeper witnesses cost the 


vulgar magick. 
whole. During the Grand Convocation 


The Rules 
dee era, Hermetic wizards refined their 


killing one another. After decades of adjustment, the 
Traditions arrived at a ritualized duel method that 
drained Quintessence without inflicting physical or 
psychological injury. This legal form of certamen 
became the official method for resolving disputes. 
Although old school-wizards continue to duel with 
other methods as well, the sword-and-shield form of 
certámen has been the legal standard since the mid-1500s. 


In official certamen matches, each party agrees to terms, 
putting up a stake as the prize for the duel in question. The 
rivals then enter a specially prepared circle that has been 
configured to shape, confine, and channel the mystic 
energies involved. Due to those spectacularly vulgar 
energies, all official certamen circles must be crafted 
within Horizon Realms; the few mages who've tried to 
wage such duels on Earth have been theatrically undone 
by massive Paradox displays. 


A certámen match features at least two antagonists, the 
circle, one to three Certámen Marshalls, and usually an audience. 
The Marshalls enforce the proper protocols and make sure 
that all sides abide by the duel’s outcome. Depending on the 
antagonists and circumstances involved, the match might 
openwith an elaborate ritual - invocation of spirits, blessing 
of contestants, reading of charges, observation of etiquette, 
reciting of titles, pre-duel bragging, and so forth - a brief 
introduction, or a simple command: "Fight." 


During the pre-duel ceremonies, each 
combatant channels all her Quintessence into a 
single Locus: a large sphere or pool of shining energy. 
If a mage has Tass or receives a loan of additional 
Quintessence from her allies for the duel, she puts that 
into her Locus as well. The Locus provides a target for that 
duel. Rather than attacking the mage herself, the rival strikes 
at her opponent's Locus instead. 


Oncethe match begins, a dome of mystic energy descends 
over the arena in order to protect the Marshalls and spectators 
from errant energies. Each antagonist manifests a number of 
glowing spheres; the more powerful the mage, the more spheres 
he manifests. From among them, each duelist selects two: a 
Gladius (sword) and an Aegis (shield). The Gladius attacks the 
opponent’s Locus, and the Aegis defends the mage's own Locus 
from similar attacks. When one duelist has drained the rival's 
Quintessence from his Locus, the match ends. 


A no-frills certámen match features two mages 
slinging spheres at one another. More often, however, the 
antagonists craft their Gladius, Aegis, Locus, and other 
spheres into elaborate, theatrical, and often fearsome shapes. 
Guiding mystic energies with willful imagination, the duelists 
forge wild weapons, ferocious creatures, curtains of energy, 
elemental tempests, titanic shields, bursts of sound, and 
whatever else the mage can imagine. The certámen circle 
allows its duelists to will their energies into infinite arrays 
ofform. A certámen match between two skilled opponents, 
then, can be an incredible display of occult pyrotechnics... 
which, for spectators, adds a serious entertainment factor to 
otherwise solemn procedures. 


A 


Chapter Nine: Dramatic Systems 


433 


AE ai x 


Dueling Systems 


Assuming that the duelists meet in such a space, the duel 


itself employs the following systems: 


434 


Manifesting Spheres: Once the duelists meet inside the 
circle, they manifest one glowing sphere for each point 
of Arete the characters possess; a duelist with Arete 6, 
for instance, can manifest up to six glowing spheres. 
Only two of these spheres can be used at a time; the 
rest get kept in reserve, though they can also present an 
intimidating edge (below). 


These glowing spheres represent the mage’s excellence 
(her Arete Trait), not her expertise (her Spheres Trait). 
Thus, an Arete 5 duelist can conjure up to five glowing 
spheres, even if she has dots in only three Spheres on 
her character sheet. 


Gladius and Aegis: Each combatant takes one glowing 
sphere as his Gladius (sword), and another as his Aegis 
(shield). The first attacks; the other defends. In this 
case, the spheres chosen are two of the mage’s Sphere 
Traits - typically the ones with the highest ratings. Each 
duelist gets to decide which Sphere he wants to use for 
which position, and those decisions reflect a combatant's 
tactical priorities. 


Locus: Each combatant also manifests all of his or her 
Quintessence (and probably Tass as well) into a single 
glowing Locus. The first duelist to drain all of her 
opponent's Quintessence from the Locus wins. 


Initiative and Tactics: The duel then moves into three-second 
turns. Each turn, the duelists roll initiative, and may choose 
- each turn - to select one of the following dice pools as the 
basis for their initiative rating (p. 399): 


- Dexterity + Arete (reflecting speed) 
- Wits + Arete (reflecting quick-wittedness) 


- Willpower (reflecting sheer force of will) 


Each duelist may change initiative dice at the beginning 
of a new turn, reflecting a shift of tactics. 


Attack: Each turn, each duelist gets to attack. The player 
with the highest initiative attacks first, and the lower 
initiative attacks second. 


Theattacker rolls her Wits + Gladius Sphere or her Dexterity 
+ Gladius Sphere againsta difficulty of the defender’s Aegis 
Sphere + 3. (Aegis Life 3, for example, would be difficulty 
6.) The attacker may divide her dice pool or employ Time 
3 magick in order to attack several times within a single 
turn. Using Time 3 to slow your opponent down, however, 


Mage: The Ascension 20" Anniversary Edition 


is forbidden by certamen etiquette; a combatant who 
attempts this tactic automatically loses the duel. 


e Damage and Soaking: Each success scored by the attacker 
drains one point of Quintessence from the defender’s 
Locus and transfers it to her own Locus. The defender 
can try to soak this damage by rolling his Prime rating 
against difficulty 6; each success deducts one success 
from the attacker’s total. 


* Victory: The first duelist to drain his or her opponent's 
Quintessence Locus wins the certámen match. 


Shaping the Spheres 

The number of glowing certámen spheres reflects a 
character’s Arete Trait rating, but the Gladius and Aegis reflect 
the character’s actual Sphere Traits. When they first appear, 
these glowing spheres are simply balls of energy that look 
like whatever the mage wants them to look like. The Gladius 
and Aegis, however, embody the principle of their respective 
Spheres; Correspondence could look like a quivering warp in 
space, whereas Entropy resembles a black hole or ghostly face, 
Forces conjures a ball of wind or fire, Life creates a green sphere 
of humid energy, and so forth. 


Once the glowing spheres get conjured, however, creative 
duelists (and players) can shape them into whatever forms they 
wish to present. That Correspondence warp could become a 
polydimensional fractal sword or a coruscating hole in space. 
Entropy might shape itself into a ghastly skeleton-thing with 
an obsidian scythe or rip open a portal to an apparent hell. 
Forces could swirl into tempests, and Life could turn into 
dragons or other mythic creatures. Within the certámen circle, 
the possibilities are limited only by each duelist’s imagination. 
These shapes are purely cosmetic - a Life 3 Gladius is a Life 
3 Gladius even if it looks like a giant, tentacled eye-creature - 
but they can be pretty damned intimidating and display each 
duelist's creativity as well. Seasoned duelists might be known 
for their evocative weaponry, and these old pros probably have 
signature shapes for their Gladius and Aegis Spheres. 


The other glowing spheres and the Locus can be reshaped as 
well. A really showy combatant might conjure a chorus of dancing 
sphereimps, a Locus made of shimmering liquid fire, a Gladius 
like a flaming demon sword, and an Aegis like a black mirror filled 
with sneering faces. Stylish certámen spheres can provide extra 
entertainment for the crowd that inevitably attends a certámen 
match. Although the old dueling masters are more or less history 
in the current age, tales still recall the mind-wrenching geometry 
of Caeron Mustai’s abstract designs, the lusty grace of Marianna’s 
sensual artistry, and the awful force of Porthos FitzEmpress's 
elemental certámen arsenal. Sure, a dueling mage could simply 
conjure shimmering balls of energy, and leave the theatrics to her 
egotistical peers... but really, where’s the fun in that? 


Environmental Hazards 


Even without overt violence, the world is a 
dangerous place. From fire to flood to the 
various toxins people ingest for fun, profit, 
or revenge, mortality remains an inescapable 
element of the human condition. Even among 
the Awakened, mostsuffering and death comes 
not from violence but from the world around 
us. So when your characters ride the whirlwind 
or walk on fire, a handful of systems can tell 
you if and how they survive. 


The by-the-numbers game effects of 
environmental hazards can be found on the Environmental 
Hazards charts, starting on (p. 454). The general rules appear 
below. 


Harsh Weather 
and Environments 


Modern-era man is spoiled. Our houses and vehicles 
keep out the worst effects of extreme weather. But in an age 
of global climate change, not even those luxuries can save 
us. You can’t air-condition a farm, or scale a holy mountain 
in a Prius. Especially for mages from the streets, deserts, and 
wilderness of our world, the effects of heat and cold can be 
vital story elements. 


In all but the most extreme conditions, harsh weather 
comes through in narration and difficulty or dice-pool penalties 
(between one and three factors) based upon conditions like icy 
roads, driving rain, high winds, staggering humidity, and so on 
- see Rough Weather or Terrain under Combat Tactics and 
Circumstances, (p. 417). Dice-pool reductions reflect the state of 
acharacter who’s weakened by heatstroke or shivering, whereas 
increased difficulties represent environmental challenges - fog, 
frost, sand, jungle, and so forth. Random hazards like ice patches, 
sinkholes, or lightning bolts are certainly appropriate too. 


Truly dangerous conditions (parched deserts, temperatures 
above 120 degrees or below freezing, hurricane-force winds, ice 
storms, and so forth) may inflict bashing damage on characters 
who remain outside in them. At various intervals - once per 
hour, twice an hour, possibly even three or four times an hour 
in truly extreme situations - a character suffers one health level 
in bashing damage unless she makes a Stamina roll to resist 
those effects. (See the Resisting feat on the Physical spectrum 
of the Dramatic Feats chart.) She cannot soak it otherwise, 
though - that's what the Stamina roll is doing. As with other 
bashing attacks, this damage can kill a character if she's injured 
badly enough. Environmental protection gear can add to the 
Stamina roll (generally between one and three dice), but bulky, 
exhausting, or otherwise unsuitable gear (like wearing armor 
in a desert or being naked in a blizzard) may inflict penalties 
on the roll unless the character has already acclimated to those 
conditions. Life 2 magick can protect against those effects 
(assuming that an appropriate spell has been cast, of course), 


as can the Esoterica specialty Body Control (see that sidebar, 
Chapter Six, p. 285) or a character whose background history 
includes being conditioned to those elements, as an Inuit 
would be to cold conditions. Even then, however, certain 
extremes - like being nude in Antarctica or wrapped in furs 
for a trip through Death Valley - may override some or all of 
that protection at the Storyteller's option. 


Deadly situations - like hard vacuum or deep-sea pressure 
- inflict lethal damage instead. A successful Life 3 Effect would 
protect against such environments, but the other methods 
won't. Such damage usually involves quarter-hour intervals, 
although some hazards - thick smoke, boiling liquid, toxic 
gases, crushing pressure - can kill in minutes or even seconds. 
Intense radiation inflicts aggravated damage and can kill in 
seconds, minutes, hours, or days, depending on the nature of 
the radiation and the intensity of its effects. 


In suitable surroundings, a character may be able to 
avoid some or most of those effects by constructing shelter, 
gear, or both. A successful Survival (or Urban Survival, for 
city environments) roll - perhaps backed up by some related 
magick - can help her manufacture such protection, so long 
as she's got something to work with. Making a cold-weather 
shelter in the Canadian wilderness would be fairly easy if you 
knew what you were doing. Radiation shielding in a nuked 
city, though? Not quite so easy... 


Starvation and Thirst 


Mages don’t go hungry, do they? That depends on who 
they are, where they are, and what sorts of magick they perform. 
After all, storm arts won’t teach you a damned thing about 
conjuring food or drinks! Sure, it’s easy to find chow if you’re a 
financially solvent city-dweller; take away ready cash or easy access 
to food merchants, though, and that’s a totally different story. 
People die of hunger even in American suburbs, and though 
your mage might not have to worry about that fate himself, 
a willworker who's concerned about the world at large has to 
take hunger into account... other people’s hunger, if not his own. 


Thirst is a far more serious issue. The industrialized world has 
plenty of drinkable water, but once you leave the urbanized sphere, 
that easy access disappears. Rural water may be contaminated by 
rust, pollution, sewage, or animal waste; drinking from a stream 
in the wilderness can infect your intestines with parasites or toxins 
unless you've filtered that water beforehand. Many so-called 
developing nations have limited access to safe drinking water; 
in some regions, water is either “privatized” (that is, if you can’t 
afford to buy it, you can’t have any), contaminated, or essentially 
nonexistent. Together, starvation and thirst kill more people 
most years than wars and other violence combined. 


Both starvation and thirst inflict damage on characters who 
go long periods without nourishment. Figure that a character 
suffers one health level of bashing damage for each day he goes 
without food, and one health level of lethal damage for each day 


Chapter Nine: Dramatic Systems 435 


s 


he goes withoutwater or other potable fluid. A successful Stamina 
roll can put off these effects for one day, but the difficulty of 
that roll starts at 6 and then goes up one level per day without 
nourishment. A character can go a maximum of one day without 
water for each dot in Stamina he possesses, and a maximum 
of three days without food for each dot before starting to take 
damage automatically. A starving character can spend Willpower 
points in order to put off this effect (one point per day), but he 
cannot do the same thing to avoid thirst. In neither case can 
the character soak that damage - his body is already soaking it 
simply by surviving through it. The Storyteller may reduce that 
character's dice pools (other than Stamina and Arete) by one 
for each day suffering thirst and each two days suffering hunger. 


For the effects of consuming tainted water or food, see 
Drugs, Poisons, and Disease, (pp. 441-442). 


Fire 

The most fearsome form of death (especially for mages), fire 
fries skin, devours tissue, cooks organs, cracks bones, and consumes 
the body’s essential water supply. Burns kill not only from shock 
trauma and tissue damage but from dehydration as well... and 
burns can kill long after the fire itself has passed. It’s no wonder 
that all living things... and many undead ones too... fear fire - and 
that so many hells are said to be filled with eternal flames. 


In game terms, this awful element inflicts aggravated 
damage, from one to three health levels of it per turn. A 


Mage: The Ascension 20" Anniversary Edition 


successful Stamina roll, made against the difficulty on the 
Fire Damage chart (p. 454), indicates a minor burn but no 
damage that turn; failure means damage, obviously; and a 
botch reflects a major injury - blinded eye, flash-seared hand, 
scorched windpipe, and so forth. Every turn spent in the fire 
demands another roll. Life 3 magick can protect against open 
flames, but Life 2 and Body Control cannot. 


Beyond the harm caused by the flames themselves, fire creates 
intense heat, consumes oxygen, releases superheated gases, and draws 
the body's water to the surface (as blisters) and then evaporates that 
moisture. Fire also ignites flammable materials and can melt many 
artificial substances, sometimes from the heatalone. A character may 
be protected from the flame but not from that heat and its effects. 
A character who's got flame-esistant armor or clothing suffers 
half damage from the fire, but he still feels the fire's side effects, 
like inhaling superheated gases, and or blistered flesh that's not 
covered by the fabric, unless he's protected against that factor too. 
Meanwhile, someone in heat-conducting protection (like metal armor) 
takes the same amount of damage as an unarmored character, but 
from radiant heat and side-effects rather than directly from the fire. 


Metaphysically, fire turns material Patterns into 
Quintessential chaos. Prime 3 magick can channel Quintessence 
from a large fire (as per the Base Damage or Duration chart 
in Chapter Ten, p. 504), but the disruptive nature of Lucifer's 
favorite element taxes the skills of every mage. Even Masters of 
the Forces Sphere respect the power of raw flame. 


Explosions 


Flames and explosions go together like wizards and 
books. And between fireballs, plasma cannons, and the more 
mundane sources like bombs and gas leaks, the combination of 
compressed space and irresistible force has serious consequences 
for anyone nearby. 


Metaphysically, explosions blast Patterns into pieces 
through application of intense energy. For survival's sake, 
however, explosions tend to inflict bashing or lethal damage, 
though fiery (napalm) or catastrophic (nukes) ones inflict 
aggravated damage instead. 


In reallife (as opposed to the movies), explosions usually cause 
more damage from the concussive force of the blast than from the 
pyrotechnics involved. Bystanders can suffer bursteardrums, broken 
bones, and ruptured organs even when their skins remain unburnt. 
Shrapnel, too, is often deadlier than the heat, with people cut to 
ribbons by flying debris. The level of realism, then, depends upon 
the Storyteller’s approach. In cinematic tales, lesser characters can 
be wiped out by explosions that major characters walk away from 
with a bit of singed hair; gritty realism, however, dictates lethal 
harm for everyone, with little dodging allowed unless it involves 
ducking behind walls before the bomb goes off. 


Blast Area and Blast Power 

Regardless of the damage involved, explosions radiate their 
effects outward from the center of a detonation, to a distance 
called the Blast Area. The Storyteller (or the player who set off 
the explosion) rolls a dice pool based on the Blast Power of the 
explosive involved - one die per point of Blast Power for each 
pound of the explosive involved. The difficulty of that roll is 
6 for concussion blasts (grenades, plastique, bombs, etc.), and 
4 for balls of fire (napalm, gas tanks, Molotov cocktails, etc.). 


Each successon that roll equals one health level of damage. 
Everyone and everything within the Blast Area takes full damage, 
and everyone outside that Area takes damage based upon their 
distance from it. That Blast Area (and everything in it) suffers 
the full force of the explosion; each yard (or meter) outward 
from the center subtracts one success from the original roll. 


Certain explosives just use a dice pool for their effects - no 
Blast Power involved. In this case, just roll the dice as above. 
The Blast Area, though, still counts when you're figuring out 
who takes what amount of damage. Flaming explosions may 
ignite fires (see above), and concussive ones might weaken 
surrounding structures. 


Handling Explosives 

Some explosions go off by accident. Others are deliberate. 
Especially in our age of terror, the ability to design, modify, employ, 
and disarm explosives can mean the difference between live Sleepers 
and dead Masses. The secondary Knowledge Demolitions reflects 
a character's grasp of explosive substances, their use, and - when 
possible - their disposal. Without such knowledge, explosions 
remain mysterious forces of chaos; with it, a character can exert a 
small but helpful amount of control over the process. 


Rules-wise, a character with Demolitions may design, use, 
and possibly deactivate explosive devices. He'll understand a 
bit about the forces and reactions involved, and might even be 
able to shape and direct them with Forces or Matter Effects. 
In general, use Dexterity * Demolitions to build or manually 
defuse an explosive; Perception * Demolitions to note traps 
involving explosives (including booby traps on a particular 
device); Intelligence + Demolitions to analyze or design a 
bomb or to gauge what its effects would be after it goes off; 
and Wits + Demolitions for those last-second situations when 
quick thinking saves the day. 


Successful rolls, of course, are essential when you're playing 
with this sort of thing. Designing or defusing an explosive 
device may demand an extended roll... and by all that's holy, 
don't botch that roll! Meanwhile, a mage with Demolitions 
may enhance or suppress the effects of an explosive situation 
by using a Demolitions roll to lower the difficulty of a Forces- 
based explosive device, using an Arete roll to lower the difficulty 
for a Demolitions-based roll, or turning her knowledge toward 
magickal use by employing explosives as a focus for her Arts. 


For sample explosives, see Explosives under the Combat 
System Charts, (p. 455). 


Duck and Cover? 


Characters who expect an explosion can dodge behind cover 
(assuming that such cover exists), go prone, or - if you use the 
Dodge the Blast option - save themselves in the nick of time. 
In this case, a successful Dexterity * Athletics (or Acrobatics) 
roll allows the characters to escape the worst effects. All of these 
choices count as a defensive action. If you've already used your 
action that turn, though, you're kinda screwed. 


* Cover: A character who ducks behind a wall or other 
large solid object (car, counter, large heavy machine, 
etc.) gets the protection of that object's Durability and 
Structure. (See Bustin' Stuff, p. 455.) Essentially, the 
explosion destroys those objects first. 


The protection absorbs one success from the explosion 
for each point of Durability and Structure the object 
has. If the protection gets destroyed and there are still 
successes left over, then the character behind that 
protection takes the remaining damage, plus another 
health level in lethal damage from the shrapnel of the 
object being destroyed. Cover works only if the object 
in question is fairly solid; a bicycle won't protect from 
you from a grenade, and a glass window would just make 
the effects of that blast even worse: two health levels of 
lethal damage from its shrapnel. 


* Going Prone: Dropping to the ground can help a mage 
minimize an explosion's worst effects. Again, a successful 
Dexterity + Athletics (or Acrobatics) roll lets the character 
hit the dirt before things go boom. A prone character 
suffers two successes fewer from the blast, assuming that 
the explosion is not a ball of flame; in the latter case, a 
prone character still takes full damage. 


Chapter Nine: Dramatic Systems 437 


. 


TN AE 


4 
S 


Cii ha rams 


P 
J 


iu 
oa 
- En 
Ht 
k 


"rtr. 


* Dodging the Blast: Although this sort of thing's 
impossible in real life, action-movie heroes manage 
to outrun explosions, leap up and ride the blast, use 
kitchen appliances as space capsules, and other sorts 
of nonsense. Under an optional rule (see sidebar), mages 
can use magick to do similar things. Again, such stunts 
ignore basic physics; then again, though, so does magick. 


* Armor: If all else fails, armor can absorb one health 
level's worth of lethal damage for every point of the 
armor's protection. The character inside the armor, 
however, still takes the explosion's full force in bashing 
damage. As all too many war vets know, Kevlar won't 
stop a concussive shock wave. Armor might absorb 
certain kinds of aggravated damage, like werewolf 
claws or vampire fangs; it will not, however, stop fire 
or radiation unless that armor has been specially made 
to protect against such elements or the fire involved is 
very small and quickly removed. 


Example: Some idiot at a Pagan ritual decides to “help” a 
flagging bonfire by spraying it with lighter fluid. Jinx realizes the 
danger right before the flames leap up the stream of lighter fluid and 
into the bottle in Das Idiot’s hands. 


The Storyteller decides that a quart bottle of lighter fluid has a 
Blast Area of 10 feet. The Blast Power is only 3, for a total of three 
dice, but fire inflicts aggravated damage. He rolls three dice against 
difficulty 4 and scores two successes. Idiot-Boy takes two health 
levels of aggravated damage, as do the two kids standing next to him. 
Folks standing within 13 feet of the moron take one health level of 
aggravated fire damage, and the folks further out remain dazzled but 
unhurt. 


Jinx, whose specialty is Entropy, stands within that Blast Area. 
She makes an instinctive dodge; her player Camille rolls five dice for 
Jinx’s Dexterity + Awareness. Getting two successes, she manages 
to duck out of range quickly enough to take only one health level 
of damage, not two. Her biker jacket absorbs that level (it’s just 
splashed with a little bit of burning fluid), so she rolls to extinguish 
the flame, yanks off her jacket, and throws it over one of the still 
burning kids... 


Electrocution 


Roughly 150 years ago, electricity was a mysterious 
element that only the most esoteric scientists dared to mess 
with; today, it fuels our everyday world. And yet, it’s still 
dangerous as hell. Electricity is the galvanizing fire that ignites 
and extinguishes life. So when your characters battle near a 
third rail or ride the lightning in any number of ways, they 
risk getting badly burned. 


Minor shocks from tiny self-contained battery-powered units 
- Tasers, TENS units, even car batteries - inflict shocks of bashing 
damage. Essentially unlimited sources of electricity, however - 
household currents, third rails, lightning bolts, Tesla coils, etc. 
- cause lethal damage: burnt tissue, organ trauma, disrupted body 
functions, and the like. Both sources cause astonishing pain and 


438 Mage: The Ascension 20" Anniversary Edition 


Optional Rule: 
Dodging the Blast 


Awakened combatants excel at using Entropy, Forces, 
Life, Matter, and Time magick to avoid the worst effects of 
an explosion. Bending probability (Entropy), the elements 
(Forcesand Matter), physical prowess (Life), orthe temporal 
physics of a critical moment (Time), such mages manage 
to enact coincidences that defy expectations, if not reality. 


Essentially a paranormal duck-and-cover rule, this 
optional rule allows a mage with at least two dots in 
the appropriate Spheres to make a Dexterity + Arete 
roll to metaphysically dodge the blast. (Wits can work 
in place of Dexterity, as this dodge is more mental than 
physical.) The difficulty depends upon the nature of the 
explosion. Success means half damage or — with five 
successes or more - no damage beyond cosmetic stuff 
like burnt clothing or minor scratches. 


This sort of dodge is reflexive and doesn't require an 
action. In the aftermath, it seems as though the mage has 
found some miraculous bit of cover, dropped through the 
floor, rolled just right, or committed some other barely 
believable dodge to save his skin. Even so, this trick has 
limits. Large-scale explosions — like the kind that level 
buildings or city blocks - cannot be dodged this way. 


Difficulty 


Size of Explosion 


6 Small detonation (grenade, 
Molotov cocktail) 


Large explosion (gas tanks, small 


bombs, IEDs) 


Huge explosion (artillery rounds, 
tanker trucks, truck bombs) 


9/13 


T=Threshold; the number given is the minimum number 
of successes needed to dodge the blast 


Amagewith higher Sphere ratings anda full action before 
the blastcanuse other optionstoo: vulgar magick shields 
(Forces, Matter, or Prime), coincidental dodges behind 
protection, Life-based toughness, Correspondence or 
Spirit magick gateways that take the mage out of harm’s 
way before the bomb goes off, that sort of thing. Only 
the Mind Sphere remains useless in such explosive 
situations. Even so, we advise Storytellersto avoid letting 
players escape nuclear explosions by hiding in kitchen 
appliances. That's just plain silly. 


tend tolock muscles into uncontrollable spasms or rigid immobility. 
Our bodies run on electrical impulses, so such impulses ona larger 
scale do serious damage to the human animal. 


The Electrocution chartshows the number of health levels 
per turn that a character suffers from contact with sources of 
electricity. The literally galvanizing effects of electrical shock 
also render that character more-or-less helpless - in game terms, 
stunned for at least one turn per health level’s worth of damage 
taken. Pulling away from an electrical current requires a Strength 


roll, difficulty 9. Prolonged contact with even a minor source 
of electricity (like a car battery) generates intense pain and 
can disrupt vital bodily functions... most especially the heart, 
nerves, muscles, and brain. 


Oh yeah - and electricity travels, too. Anything in contract 
with a character or surface that conducts electricity will get 
shocked and damaged as well. 


Characters reduced to Incapacitated by electrical injuries 
may suffer permanent damage: nerve trauma, impaired motor 
functions, brain damage, and so on. Gamewise, this might take 
the form of reduced Physical and/ or Mental Traits, disfiguring 
scars or uncontrollable tics (reductions in Appearance), and other 
story-based effects. There’s a reason we equate paralyzing trauma 
with the effects of electricity. Lightning might do our bidding 
these days, but - like fire - it’s not wise to consider it tamed. 


Falls and Impact 


Gravity is a harsh mistress. A character who falls between 
10 and 100 feet takes one die of bashing damage for every 10 
feet - rounded down - that he falls. Over that 100-foot mark, the 
damage becomes lethal damage instead, thanks to the wonders 
of terminal velocity and physics, unless that character happens 
to land on something that’ll cushion such falls. 


Realistically speaking, tree branches and rushing water 
won't cushion long descents. A person falling offa cliff is more 
likely to be impaled on branches or shattered on waves than 
she is to be saved by them. Decades of movies and adventure 
fiction, however, allow mages to use such surfaces as coincidental 
cushions without going outside the bounds of consensual 
reality. Technically, lethal damage should kick in after only 30 
feet. The World of Darkness rules, however, say 100 feet, so 
what’s a little physics between friends? 


A long-distance fall inflicts a maximum of 10 dice, lethal; 
it is possible, then, to survive such falls, though it’s not bloody 
likely. If the gravitationally challenged individual happens to 
land on something sharp or broken (rubble, rocks, racks of 
polearms, etc.), then all of the damage is aggravated. Armor 
absorbs only half of its usual rating (rounded down) in falling 
damage, unless it has been specially designed to cushion impact. 


Ramming and Slamming 

Ramming into, or being rammed by, other characters or 
solid objects (walls, tables, vehicles, etc.) may - at the Storyteller’s 
discretion - inflict one die of bashing damage for every 10 feet 
(or three yards) of velocity at the time of impact. A dude who 
runs 20 feet before slamming into a wall, for instance, might 
take two dice of bashing damage from the impact. 


If that object’s Durability Trait is higher than the character’s 
Stamina Trait, he may take an extra automatic bashing health 
level from the impact. A car that had traveled 40 feet within the 
previous turn, for example, would inflict four dice of bashing 
damage for its velocity, plus one health level of automatic impact 
damage to whatever it hits because... well, it’s a car. If that impact 
exceeds both the object’s Durability and its Structure, however, 
then that object could be destroyed, at the Storyteller’s option. 


Objects or characters that smash into each other at roughly 
equal velocity take the total of both impact dice pools, plus one 
additional automatic success for each turn they were traveling before 
they hit, to reflect the cubed effects of colliding velocity and mass. 


A flying object loses one die of effect after the first 20 
feet unless it’s self-propelled or aerodynamic, two dice after 
30 feet, and three after 50 feet. A thrown table, for example, 
loses momentum thanks to its mass; a motor-powered car, 
however, does not. 


Armor, because it’s designed to protect against impact, 
reduces ramming and slamming impact by the usual amounts. 
These impact rules do not affect weapons, as impact damage is 
already figured into the weapon’s normal effects. 


Optional Rule: Bustin’ Stuff 


From breaking down doors to dropping chandeliers on 
people’s heads with Entropy magick, mages can be rather 
destructive. Generally, the ins and outs of breaking things should 
be left to narration and good die rolls (“Five successes? That wall is 
history!”) For those times, however, when you need to figure out 
the relative toughness of an object or surface - and perhaps the 
fate of the person on the other side of it - the Storyteller may 
use the following optional rules about Durability and Structure. 


Durobility 

The Durability of an inanimate object or surface represents 
the amount of damage it can absorb. Assume that an object 
can stop damage up to its Durability rating - one health level 
per point of Durability. A Durability 4 wall, for instance, could 
absorb four levels’ worth of damage before an attack breaks 
through. If someone's standing on the other side of that wall 
when an explosion goes off, then take four health levels off of 
the damage she might have suffered from the blast. 


Based on a combination of thickness, flexibility, and tensile 
strength, Durability reflects only the innate properties of inert 
materials, not vampires, robots, elementals, or the like. Think of 
it as a material's permanent soak roll. Both bashing and lethal 
damage affect Durability the same way, though certain forms of 
aggravated damage (mystic fire, werewolf claws, etc.) may halve 
an object or surface's Durability rating. No, vampires should 
not be able to bite through walls even though their fangs inflict 
aggravated damage; the idea of Dracula chewing through a bank 
vaultdoor is kindasilly, though his claws may be another matter... 


Structure 


An overall reflection of an object’s or surface’s internal 
integrity, Structure represents the amount of damage a thing can 
take before it stops working. Complex items might be durable 
on the surface (like a laptop computer) but break easily once you 
disrupt their innards. Simple items have a higher Structure, even 
if their Durability rating is low; you might be able to crack a door 
with a good shove, butsmashing it down entirely is more difficult. 


If Durability represents an object’s soak, then Structure 
reflects its health levels. The object in question won't necessarily 
be destroyed once its Structure gets exceeded, but itwon’t function 
in the way it’s supposed to function. A car stops running; a 


Chapter Nine: Dramatic Systems 439 


~~ eo 


TN AE 


"rtr. 


computer goes dead; a wall gets a nice big hole knocked through 
its surface even if most of the wall still stands. 


Structure damage cannot be healed. Someone needs to 
fix it, either with normal repair work or with Matter Sphere 
magick. As a general rule, assume thatan object that takes more 
than twice its Structure rating is essentially destroyed - perhaps 
not vaporized, but beyond repair. 


Magick Versus Objects 

Certain types of magick are pretty hard on material 
objects. Damage-inflicting Effects from the Entropy, Matter, 
and Prime Spheres undermine the Durability Trait - Entropy 
by exploiting weak spots, Matter by disrupting the substance, 
and Prime by disintegrating its Pattern on a Quintessential 
level. In all three cases, figure that a damage-based Effect from 
any of those Spheres reduces an object's Durability by -2. At 
the Storyteller's option, the Life Sphere may cause the same 
effect on wood, plants, and other living, organic materials. 


If, using this option, the mage wants to transmute an object, 
she'll have to score at least one success for each point of Durability 
in that object; if she falls short, then she'll need to use an extended 
rollin order to overcome that object’s Durability. This explains why 
turning safes into cotton candy is not exactly an easy proposition, 
even if you use vulgar magick. And yet, Entropy, Matter, Prime, 
and perhaps Life still subtract -2 from the target’s Durability for 
each success rolled, and so you can turn a safe into cotton candy... 
it’s just not particularly easy and certainly not a coincidence. 


Inspired by the Objects rules in the New World of Darkness 
series, this option has been adjusted and simplified for Mage 
20. So when a cyborg punches through a wall ora street prophet 
makes a cop car accidentally blow a tire, these rules can help 
you decide the amount of force it takes to succeed. 


For sample objects, see that entry on the Combat System 
Charts. The Vehicle Systems section has Durability and 
Structure ratings for various riding machines. 


Example: Secret Agent John Courage plans a nasty surprise 
for the pack of flesh-munching Reality Deviants upstairs. Noting the 
slender pillar that’s holding up the timbers of their makeshift squat 
(Durability 6, Structure 6), he scans the framework with his Stability 
Integrity Matrix (an Entropy 1 Effect built into his mirrorshades), 
spots the weak spot in that support, and lets fly with a massive kick at 
that location — a coincidental Forces 2/ Matter 2 Effect that fractures 
the pillar’s integrity, focused through a martial arts kick. 

Brian, the player, picks up his dice and rolls for the weak-spot scan. 
He gets four successes on the scan, which gives Brian a -3 reduction to the 
difficulty of that kick. Using “violence as a focus” (as described on p. 
413), he rolls John Courage’s Enlightenment of 7. This gives Brian seven 
dice to roll. After the successful Entropy scan, his difficulty is 3. (Sphere 
2 + 3 for coincidence, -3 for the scan. Magickal Effects have a 
MINIMUM difficulty of 3, however - see p. 535). Brian rolls six 


SUCCESSES. 


If he were trying to hit a moving target, Brian would need to roll 
Dexterity + Martial Arts in order to score a successful kick. Since the pillar 
isn’t going anywhere, the Storyteller gives the shot to Brian for free. 


440 . Ma$e: The Ascension 20" Anniversary Edition 


Structure 


Durability Substance is... 


Fragile (normal glass, thin wood, or 
ceramic) 


Breakable (sturdy glass, plywood, 
crockery) 


Tough yet flexible (interior door, safety 
glass, drywall, thin metal) 


Strong and rigid 
Strong and flexible 
Solid 
Solid and thick 
Solid, thick, and reinforced 
Thick, solid, and dense 
Exceedingly strong and dense 
Damn near impenetrable 
Structure Object is... 
1 Fragile (wineglass, light bulb) 


2-3 Easily broken (window, laptop, 
drywall) 


4-5 Sturdy and complex (car engine, 
camera, printer) 


6-7 Sturdy and simple (table, plank, tire, 
thick door, brick wall) 


Thick and simple (stone wall, streetlight 
pole, metal bulkhead) 


Thick and reinforced (safe, bank vault, 
building foundation) 


Built to take enormous punishment 
(airliner, ship, military vehicle) 


Based on six successes scored on the Enlightenment roll, plus 
one automatic success for using the Forces Sphere, the kick itself 
inflicts 14 health levels of damage on the pillar. Use of the Matter 
Sphere reduces the pillar’s Durability to 4, so that kick deals out ten 
health levels against the pillar’s Structure of 6. 


Pillar? WHAT pillar? You mean that splintered ruin that 
USED to be a pillar? 


The pillar breaks, the floorboards creak, and Secret Agent John 
Courage prepares a fitting reception for his impending guests... 


Drowning and Suffocation 

Even Awakened beings need to breathe. But when smoke 
or water force a character to hold her breath, that character can 
hold her breath for a length of time based on her Stamina Trait: 


Stamina Holding Breath 
1 30 seconds 

One minute 

Two minutes 

Four minutes 
Eight minutes 

15 minutes 


20 minutes 


30 minutes 


'O DAN Oo OA KR W h2 


45 minutes 


o 


One hour 


That character can extend her breath-holding time by 
spendingtemporary Willpower; each pointspentgrants another 
30 seconds of time. If the character cannot reach breathable air 
by the end of that time, she starts to suffocate or drown at the 
rate of one health level per turn. If she reaches Incapacitated 
and still cannot breathe, she dies one turn afterward. 


Suffocation damage is automatic; it is not rolled and 
cannotbe soaked. Oxygen deprivation accumulates and heals 
like bashing damage, although drowning damage (which 
involves inhalation of water, and can damage 
the lungs and windpipe) may accumulate 
and heal like lethal damage instead, at the 
Storyteller's discretion. 


If a character with First Aid training 
(Medicine 1 or higher, assuming modern 
medical techniques) can reach a drowned 
or suffocated character within fewer 
than 10 minutes of death, he can try to 
resuscitate her with a successful Wits * 
Medicine roll. In unusually cold water, 
this time extends up to half an hour. 
The difficulty starts at 6 and goes up 
by *1 for each five minutes after the 
first, however, and starts racking up 
thresholds of successes needed once 
it reaches difficulty 9. Successful Life 3 
magick can restore a person to life within 
those first few minutes. However, after 
10 minutes (30 minutes in cold 
water) without air, the brain 
begins to deteriorate. After 
that point, only Life 5 
will do. 


Assuming that the 
character has had time 
to meditate herself into a 
trancestate, asuccessfuluse ofthe 
Body Control specialty can extend 
breath-holdingtime by the amounts 
shown in the sidebar dealing with 
that Trait. After that, the devotee 


lt 
begins suffocating or drowning like any other person would do. It's 
worth nothing that drowning is one of the biggest accidental killers 


on Earth, especially among children... and, contrary to popular 
impressions, is not marked by thrashing and yelling, but by silence. 


Drugs, Poisons, and Disease 


Each living being isa chemistry set. The sublime features of 
life come about through complex chemical processes. Certain 
other processes - often referred to as drugs, poisons, and 
diseases, among other names - change the chemical default 
settings in a given living thing. Some hurt, some help, and 
some have both effects. For simplicity's sake, think of drugs as 
chemical compounds intended to alter a person's body and 
mind, poisons as chemicals intended to harm a living thing, and 
disease as an internal alteration that causes suffering. Mages 
have long histories with all three. 


Despite its negative connotations, a drug is simply a 
substance; medicines are drugs, and drugs are medicines. 
Psychotropic drugs represent a certain kind of medicine meant | 

to enhance various mental and physical states. Mystics — — 4 
andtechnomancersalikeusepsychotropiccompounds | | 

as tools for transcendence, relaxation, heightened 
awareness, and physical vigor. As the Drugs and 
Poisons entry in the Instruments section of Chapter / 
Ten explains, various practices use drugs to focus their 
intentions. Even so, psychotropics alter body chemistry... 
and in that sense, they become intoxicants, working 
their effects through potentially hazardous chemical 
changes. 


Poisons are intentionally harmful drugs and 
diseases - venoms, toxins, infections, and so forth, 
with unpleasant effects upon a body and mind. 
Some are natural and many others are not. Thanks 

to the long associations between poison and the 
i Awakened, most Sleepers consider magic to be 
asort of metaphysical or even literal toxin. The 
word “witch” in the infamous Exodus 22:18 
passage, “Thou shalt not suffer a witch to live,” is 
rooted ina Hebrew word sometimes translated 
as “poisoner.” As for disease, mages of all types 
have been regarded throughout history as 
both healers and carriers of sickness. Drugs, 
poisons, and disease, then, can be tools of 
magick; subjects of magickal activity; 
and things that mages suffer from, 
cause, and cure. 


Calling 
Dr. Feelgood 


Given that long 
association, it’s not surprising 
that certain mages specialize 
in drugs and poisons. 
The secondary Knowledge 
Pharmacopeia/ Poisonsreflects 
a character’s dedication to such 


441 


Chapter Nine: Dramatic Systems 


M 


PW. 


br 


—— m 


substances, from the perspective of either high-tech research or 
time-tested, traditional practices. With that Trait, your character 
can analyze, concoct, enhance, dilute, or diagnose the effects 
of various substances. As with the Demolitions knowledge 
(referenced above), a properly skilled mage might make certain 
toxins and psychotropics more or less effective with magick; 
use Life, Mind, or Matter magick to help create unusually 
potent substances; and employ poisons, medicine, and drugs as 
instruments offocus... probably while also enhancing their effects 
- a common gambit for Progenitors, Verbena, Dreamspeakers, 
Bata'a, Children of Knowledge, and Cultists of Ecstasy. 


Bythesametoken, aknowledgeable character can also recognize 
the effects of certain substances (Perception * Pharmacopeia); talk 
intoxicated people down during a bad experience (Manipulation + 
Pharmacopeia); spot the nasty potential of an apparently harmless 
substance (Wits + Pharmacopeia); and potentially use Life or Mind 
Arts to counteract a given toxin, because he understands the way 
it works (Intelligence * Pharmacopeia). So yes - mages have deep 
relationships with chemical alterations... and some understand 
those relationships better than others do. 


Toxin Ratings 

In game terms, poisons, diseases, and dangerous drugsall inflict 
damage, alter Traits, and can be caused or cured with Life Sphere 
Effects. Mages who specialize in such things - especially Ecstatics, 
Thanatoics, shamans, alchemists, witches, and Progenitors - tend 
to favor that Sphere, and they can focus Life, Mind, and other 
Spheres through diseases and chemical compounds. 


All diseases, drugs, and toxins have the following Traits: 


* Toxin Rating: The number of health levels that a 
particular toxin or disease inflicts upon the afflicted 
character. Entries marked with a (B) inflict bashing 
damage, and those marked with an (L) deal out lethal 
damage. Drugs and poisons cause this damage one or two 
times per ingestion unless the player makes a Stamina 
roll (below), whereas long-lasting diseases inflict that 
damage once per week or perhaps - as in the case of 
slow killers like cancer - once per month or longer. 


* Difficulty: The difficulty of the character's Stamina roll 
to resist the damaging effects. If the disease or poison 
continues to affect the character, or if that character 
keeps taking the drug, make new rolls as necessary. On 
a botched drug roll, the character overdoses which - as 
the warning goes - “may be harmful or fatal.” 


Certain diseases or substances have both a (B) and an 
(L); these designations reflect the severity of the disease or the 
purity of the substance. Lethal compounds or diseases tend to 
affect a victim until either he's cured or he dies. 


Especially vile paranormal toxins deal out aggravated 
damage, but fortunately such substances are rare. Powerful 
Night-Folk often shrug off toxins and disease (or, like vampires, 
remain immune to most of them), but typically one or two 
substances - like silver to werecreatures or iron to the fae-folk 
- inflict aggravated damage against them. 


Medicine and Magick 


Given time and the tools of her trade, a character with the 
Medicine Trait can ease the symptoms of a disease or substance. 
The toxin still needs to work its way out of the body, though, so 
although a successful Intelligence + Medicine roll can help the 
patient feel better - and perhaps speed the healing process as 
per the healing rules detailed under Health and Injury - they 
can't actually heal the problem, merely treat its effects. 


Life magick, on the other hand, can cure such problems. 
Game-wise, this usually involves successful Life 2 Effects to 
alter the mage himself, and Life 3 Effects to alter someone else. 
Slow cures tend to be coincidental, especially when focused 
through a commonly accepted tool or practice. ("Here - take 
this. It'll help you feel better in no time.") Instant cures, however, 
tend to be vulgar unless the patient and observers literally do 
believe in miracles (“Be HEALED”). 


The same runs true for inflicting intoxication and disease. 
Although a person can have a literally intoxicating effect on 
other folks... a specialty of Ecstatics, Nephandi, and Syndicate 
ops - that effect still needs to be fairly subtle. A person who 
gets falling-down drunk after shaking hands with a stranger will 


Poison or Drug 
Alcohol (B), THC (B) 
Methamphetamine (B), Methanol (L) 


Ptomaine (B), Tainted Water (B), Tear Gas (cloud; 
B), Belladonna (L) 


Salmonella (B), Ammonia (L), Fouled Water (B) 
Bleach (L), Industrial Waste (L) 


Strong Acids (L) 


Toxins 
Toxin Rating Difficulty Disease 
One 6 Cold (B) 
Two 7 Chicken Pox (B), Food Poisoning (B), 
MRSA (L) 
Three 7 ee (B), Cancer, Early (L), Pneumonia 
Four 8 HIV (L), Leprosy (L), Cancer, Advanced (L) 
Five 8 Severe Flu (B/L), Cholera (B), Cancer, 
Extensive (L) 
Six 9 Bubonic Plague (L), Anthrax (L) 
Seven 9/73 Ebola (L) 


Sarin (L), Cyanide (L), Acidic Sludge (L) 


Notes: Clouds of toxins cannot be dodged; to avoid the effects, a character needs protective gear or Life 2 magick. Many 
toxic chemicals work on skin contact, and cannot be avoided by holding one’s breath. 


442 Mage: The Ascension 20" Anniversary Edition 


wonder what the fuck just happened. And though curses and 
poisons have deep connections to witchcraft and Voudoun, a 
mage who points her finger at someone and gives him instant 
leprosy is working vulgar magick for sure. 


Better Living Through Chemistry 


You don't have to be a Cultist of Ecstasy or Child of 
Knowledge in order to deal with psychotropic substances. 
Shamans of all types work with mind-altering compounds, 
whereas technomancers deal with smart and designer drugs 
as well as with more mundane drugs like coke or booze. Sure, 
plenty of mages do just say no. For those who don't, however, 
the following drugs have notable in-game effects: 


* Alcohol: Every two drinks of a moderate alcoholic 
beverage cause one die of bashing damage. Really potent 
drinks have the same effect after a single drink. The 
resulting dice-pool penalties reflect blurry perceptions 
and staggered reflexes. Heavy-duty drinking damage 
can linger for a day or more in the shape of hangovers, 
nausea, and other impairments. If the character drinks 
herself to Incapacitated, she passes out... and, if she's a 
supporting character, she might even die. 


Whether or not the character takes damage, a drinking 
character needs to make a Stamina roll for every two 
drinks she consumes. The difficulty depends upon the 
potency of the drink - 5 or 6 for wine coolers or weak 
beer, 8 or 9 for the really hard stuff. Failure on that roll 
subtracts one die from Perception- and Dexterity-based 
dice pools. A botch knocks the character out right then 
and there. Yes, heavy drinking can indeed fuck you up! 


* Cannabinoids (Pot, Hashish): The mellowing effects 
of ganja alter a character's sense of time, space, and 
wellbeing. On the flip side, they can induce paranoia and 
heartthumping panic attacks. Game-wise, a character 
either gains or loses one die from his Perception-based 
dice pools while under the influence of the herb. The 
player makes a Willpower roll; success indicates a 
bonus, but failure indicates a loss. Continued smoking 
may lead to further rolls and more intense effects. 
At the Storyteller’s discretion, a character under the 
influence of pot or hash could even lose one die from 
his Dexterity- and Willpower-based dice pools for each 
half hour spent indulging. 


Despite occasional perceptions to the contrary, cannabis 
inflicts no physical damage. Its influence might, at the 
Storyteller’s option, reduce the difficulties of Time- 
based spells by -1, thanks to the slipstream effect it has 
on time perceptions. This bonus does not increase with 
continued use of awakened herbs, however, and should 
not be a reliable bonus in any case - sometimes it works, 
sometimes it doesn’t. 


* Cocaine/ Crack/ Meth/ Speed: High-octane stimulants give 
acharacter one extra action per turn while she’s under the 


Awakening Substances 


Accordingto many shamanic practices, allmaterialthings 
have essential spirits within them. By awakening those 
spirits, a shaman can ease or intensity the effects of those 
material things. On a technological level, science can 
ease or intensify the effects of a compound or disease 
by altering its molecular structure. In game terms, both 
approaches awaken a drug or disease, making them 
more or less powerful than they would normally be. 


In the story, a character employs his favored focus to 
enhance the properties of the drug orillness in question. 
Shamans tend to employ trance states, rituals, and 
invocations to the spirit of the drug or disease. Scientists 
employ microscopes and other lab gear, analysis 
procedures, computer simulations, andlive-subjecttests 
in order to verify results. Witches and ecstasy-seekers 
employ fusions of the previous approaches, measuring 
compounds and working with formulas in order to get 
the desired result, but handling that task with respect 


and reverence for the supernatural element as well. 
Your character should use whichever approach seems 
most appropriate to her beliefs and practices. 


Rules-wise, you can use Spirit 3 to rouse the spirit of a 
drug, or Life 3/ Spirit 3 to rouse the spirit of a disease 
in someone else’s body. A scientist can use Matter 2 
to enhance the properties of a substance, Life 2 to 
enhance microbes, Life 3/ Matter 2 in orderto enhance 
the effects of substances within a living body, and Life 
3 to enhance the effect of microbe-based disease. 
Combined with the rituals described above, all of those 
approaches seem coincidental and add one level to 
a substance’s effects (its Toxin Rating and possibly its 
other effects as well) for each success on the Arete roll. 


Awakening the spirit inside a substance can also 
create mystic drugs, and enhancing the properties 
of microbes and compounds allows a mage to craft 
technomagickal drugs and diseases. For an example 
of psychoactive totem spirits, check out Mary Jane in 
the Totem Spirits section of Appendix I, (p.635). 


influence, but they also reduce her Willpower-based dice 
pools by one die for rolls based on judgment, restraint, or 
common sense. Each dose inflicts two automatic health 
levels in bashing damage once the drug wears off and the 
character crashes. She might put off this effect by using 
the drug again, but the crash gets two levels worse each 
time: four health levels for two consecutive uses, six after 
three uses, and so forth. A dose of coke lasts about an 
hour, crack lasts roughly half that long, and crank lasts 
between four to six hours per dose. 


Each time a character consumes a heavy stimulant, 
the Storyteller may require a Stamina roll, difficulty 6. 
Failure means irrational behavior (recklessness, flash 
temper, violent mood swings, etc.), and a botch means 
an overdose. In the latter case, the character takes double 
the usual damage... lethal, not bashing. Prolonged use, 


Chapter Nine: Dramatic Systems 443 


in any case, tends to lead to addiction, irrationality, and 
other ugly side effects. 


* Designer Drugs: Concocted by either Awakened or Sleeper 
chemists, designer drugs alter bodies and minds in 
various interesting ways. The most famous concoctions, 
LSD and Ecstasy, have been around for generations and 
aren'tusually considered designer goods any more, even 
though that's technically what they are. 


In game terms, a designer drug can have whatever effects 
the Storyteller wants it to have - typically a temporary 
boost of Mental and/ or Physical Traits, at the cost of 
unfortunate behavior and potentially serious side effects. 
| Such concoctions make excellent plot hooks and mystic/ 

technomagickal focuses (“...you take the blue pill, and...”). 


* Ecstasy/ Mood-Altering Drugs: Technically, all 
psychoactive drugs have mood-altering effects. However, 
this category - epitomized by MDMA, a.k.a. Ecstasy, 

| or X - reworks brain chemistry in an effort to promote 

trust and wellbeing. Game-wise, these substances may 
add bonus dice to Willpower-based dice pools at the 
expense of a level or two of automatic bashing damage 
when the user comes down. Ecstasy, in particular, has 
tooth-grinding, dehydrating side effects; a botched 

Stamina roll while "rolling" on X may cause a seizure 

that inflicts one to three health levels of immediate 

lethal damage instead of that post-roll bashing damage. 


On the good side, ecstasy promotes intense (often 
compulsive) sensory awareness and may add a die or 
two to Perception-based dice pools for about an hour 
during the highest point of the Ecstasy roll. Depending 
on the dose and purity, an MDMA roll may last between 
two to five hours. 


e Psychedelics (LSD, DMT, peyote, etc): Mind-bending 
substances provide the keys to many mystic practices; some 
folks have even theorized that human consciousness itself 
arose when primates ate psychotropic fungi. Truth is an 
especially hazy concept where psychedelics are concerned. 
Certain folks prefer the term entheogen over the more 
common hallucinogen, because hallucinations project dreams 
and delusions, whereas entheogens wake the “inner god.” 


Rules-wise, a dose of psychedelic drugs reduces a character's 
dice pools by one to three dice for the duration of the trip. 
A mild trip bends the landscape, and a major trip skews 
every reflex and perception. At the Storyteller’s option, 
a character who's using such drugs in a focus may reduce 
the difficulties of her Correspondence, Mind, Spirit, and 
Time-based magick rolls. 


Although such drugs inflict no physical damage, many 
entheogens induce nausea, dry mouth, dehydration, and 
profound - sometimes painful - perceptual intensity. 
Typical trips last between four and 12 hours, peaking 


Ma$e: The Ascension 20^ Anniversary Edition 


between one and three hours after the first dose. 
Contrary to popular belief, trips don't jumpstart weird 
shit as soon as the user drops the dose. Most often, the 
perceptions begin skewing within a half hour, gradually 
rising toward more intense sensations. 


Somewhere along the trip, the Storyteller might request 
a Willpower roll, with difficulties based on the stuff 
that's going on in the character's life at the time. Happy 
circumstances lower the difficulty, butfears and challenges 
raise them. A successful Willpower roll means a generally 
good - perhaps profound - experience, whereas a failed roll 
drops the user into a bad (perhaps shattering) excursion 
through Nightmare Alley. Either trip can inspire a Seeking, 
and a really bad one might cause a Quiet. (See Chapters 
Seven and Ten for details.) Thankfully, an experienced 
guide can help ease a bad trip or enhance a good one. 
Successful social rolls from a character who's familiar with 
psychotropic experiences (like many shamans, certain 
alchemists and doctors, various witches, and almost all 
Ecstatic devotees) allow a tripping character to make new 
Willpower rolls in order to master her experience and 
perhaps gain long-term benefits from even the bad trips. 


Opiates (Heroin, Morphine, Opium, etc.) and Sedatives 
(Valium, Quaaludes, etc.): Suppressing the sensory and 
nervous systems, the various downer drugs reduce pain 
and promote euphoria. Although opium has a mystic 
history ofvisionary trance states, the addictive properties 
of such substances make them risky and problematic 
tools. 


In game terms, a dose of opiates or downers reduces 
pain-based dice penalties, typically by one or two health 
levels’ worth of damage. That damage isn'tactually healed, 
but the associated penalties don't hinder the character 
so long as the drug remains in effect. Meanwhile, the 
character's Dexterity- and Social-Trait dice pools drop by 
one die per dose. Each dose also inflicts one automatic 
level of bashing damage, not from injury per se, but from 
the deadened energy associated with such drugs. 


At the Storyteller's option, an opium or heroin trance 
might decrease the difficulty of vision-based Mind or 
Spiritspellcasting rolls. A character who's concentrating 
on a particular problem could receive a one or two-die 
bonus to his Intelligence or Perception rolls... after 
all, Sherlock Holmes was an opium user who believed 
that the drug sharpened his mental faculties. On the 
downside, opiates and sedatives are ferociously addictive. 
Regular users should certainly have a Flaw or two 
associated with the drug. Also, each new dose of an 
opiate or strong sedative that has not been meticulously 
measured by someone who's not under the influence - or that 
has been mystically awakened or enhanced - demands 
a Stamina roll. Failure means a deadening trance, and 
a botch means potential coma or death. 


E 


Combat System Charts 


For specific wizard duel systems, see the Magickal Duels section. 


Order of Battle 


Initiative: Initiative Rating (Dexterity + Wits) + one die. 
Attack: See whether or not attacks hit their targets. 


Defense: See whether or not a defender has avoided 
an attack. 


Damage: Determine how badly the combatants get 
hurt. 


Attack 


Projectile Guns: Dexterity + Firearms. 

Hypertech Force Guns: Dexterity + Energy Weapons. 
Thrown Weapons: Dexterity + Athletics. 
Hand-Held Weapons: Dexterity + Melee. 


Bare-Hand Attacks: Dexterity + Brawl, Martial Arts, 
Athletics, or Do. 


Magickal Attacks: Arete. If attack involves a strike or 
weapon, roll appropriate Trait as above. 


Defense 


Dodge: Dexterity + Athletics, difficulty 6. Each success 
removes one attacker success. 


Block: Dexterity + Brawl or Martial Arts, difficulty 
variable. 


Parry: Dexterity + Melee or Martial Arts, difficulty 
variable. 


Desperate Defense: Dexterity + Athletics, -1 die per 
attacker after first. 


Countermagick: Arete, difficulty 8, as a dodge; see 
Chapter Ten. 


Damage 


Damage: As attack type, difficulty 6; dice pool is 
attacker’s damage roll + numbers of successes after the 
first. 


Soaking: Stamina roll, difficulty 6; each success 
removes one damage success. 


* Bashing: All characters can soak. 


* Lethal: Humans cannot soak without armor, except 


under Cinematic Damage option. 


* Aggravated: No soak without special protection. 


Magick and Violence 


* Violence as Focus: One action, two rolls: Arete/ 


Enlightenment, to see if magick succeeds; and attack 
roll (as above) to see if attack succeeds. If violence is 
focus and character cannot perform one without the 
other, then player does not need to divide dice pool 
as if performing multiple actions. 


Violence Enhances Magick: Two actions, two rolls: 
roll attack normally; each success lowers difficulty for 
subsequent Arete roll by -1 (maximum modifier -3]. 


Magick Enhances Violence: Two actions, two rolls: 
Arete roll to cast Effect; each success reduces difficulty 


of subsequent attack by -1 for each success (maximum 
modifier of -3). 


Fast-Casting: Improvised magickal attack; +1 difficulty 
on Arete roll. 


Spirit Combat 


Initiative: Spirits roll Willpower for initiative. 


Attack: Spirits roll Willpower, difficulty 6, unless using 
a Charm. (For specifics, see Charm entries.) 


Defense: Spirits roll Willpower, difficulty 6, to dodge; 
or else split Willpower dice pool between attack and 
dodge. 


Damage: Spirits roll Rage, difficulty 6; each success 
inflicts one health level of damage. Said damage may 
be lethal or aggravated, depending upon Charm. 
Mages with Spirit/ Dimensional Science Sphere can 
soak spirit damage, difficulty 6; mages without Spirit 
can soak with Arete, difficulty 8. 


Soak Damage: Spirits soak damage with their 
Willpower Trait. Materialized spirits attack and defend as 
physical characters. Most physical attacks and weapons 
cannot harm un-Materialized spirits, nor can Spheres 
other than Prime and Spirit/ Dimensional Science. 


Chapter Nine: Dramatic Systems 


445 


B ERES 77A 


A 


n3 
Wp Ru at i- 
ak 


p 7 


Health Levels 


Dice Pool Penalty 


The Health Chart 


Movement Penalty 


Bruised 0 Minor pain and swelling; he's banged up but otherwise fine. 
Hurt -] Cuts, bruises, aches, perhaps bleeding, but no major impairment. 
SN Injured -] Minor and painful injuries limit the character to half his normal movement. 
| N Wounded -2 Notable injuries handicap him; the character can't run but may still walk. 
| Mauled -2 Significant internal and external damage; character can hobble around (three 
re yards/ turn) but not move normally. 
|. ^. Crippled -5 Catastrophic injuries; character can only crawl (one yard/ turn). 
Incapacitated N/A Character's unconscious from pain and trauma; no movement possible. 
Dead N/A Another soul greets the Great Mystery. 
Ó Healing Damage Targeting Locations 
Health Level Recovery Time* Target Size Difficulty Damage Modifier 
k BASHING DAMAGE Medium (arm, +] 1 die 
f Bruised to Wounded One hour briefcase} , 
c Mailed Three hours ou: (head, hand, +2 2 dice 
Crippled Six hours Precise (eye, heart, +3 3 dice 
Incapacitated 12 hours kneecap) 
LETHAL AND AGGRAVATED DAMAGE 
Bruised One day Cover and Concealment 
ati issus Difficulty to Hit ^ Shooter's 
Injured One week Cover Target Difficulty 
Wounded One month Lying Flat +] 0 
Mauled Two months Moving +] +] 
Crippled Three months Behind Wall +2 +] 
Incapacitated Five months Only Head Exposed +3 +2 


* Recovery times are cumulative. 


Character Is... 


Ambushed: Attacker rolls Dexterity + Stealth (+ Arcane Background), resisted by target's Perception + Alertness, difficulty 
6. Attacker gets one free action if she wins, with one additional die per success after the first one; attacker goes first in tie; 
target spots attacker if target wins. 


Blinded: Cannot block, dodge, or parry; all other tasks +2 difficulty. 


Knocked Down: As per Immobilized until standing back up. 


Immobilized: Attackers reduce difficulty to hit by -2 if target can move; hit automatically if target cannot move. 


Stunned: If, from one blow, target suffers damage that exceeds Stamina rating, then target is stunned one turn; attempts 
to hit are -2 difficulty during that time. 


Fighting Multiple Opponents: +1 difficulty per attacker, to character's attack and defense rolls, up to a maximum 
penalty of +4. A mage with Correspondence 1, Mind 1, or Time 2, and who has an active sensory Effect in one of those 
Spheres at the time of combat can ignore penalty. 


In Rough Conditions: +1 to +3 difficulties, depending on circumstances. 


Ma$e: The Ascension 20^ Anniversary Edition 


—— ĖĖĖŮĖ 


N 
te 


- ese 
d 5 A J 
ps ri Keg Fo: 


Armor and Shields 


Armor Type Rating Dexterity Penalty 
Tough Hide 1-3 0 
Cybernetic Armor 1-4 0 
Reinforced Clothing — 1-2 0 
Enhanced Clothing 1-5 0 
Biker Jacket 1 -1 
Leather Duster 2 -2 
Cosplay Mail 2 -1 
Chainmail 4 -2 
Steel Breastplate 3 -2 
Full Plate 5 -2 
Kevlar Vest 3 -1 
Flak Vest 4 -2 
Riot Suit 4 -2 
Military Armor 5 -2 
Alanson Hardsuit 7 -2 
SHIELDS 
Trash Can Lid 3/+] 0 
Wooden Shield 2/42 -] 
Metal Shield 4/*2 -2 
Riot Shield 5/+2 -1 
Notes: 


Tough Hide reflects animals, Bygones, constructs, or 
shapechanged mages with especially thick or armored skin. 


Cybernetic Armor has been built into the wearer. See the 
Background: Enhancement. 


Reinforced Clothing has been stiffened, padded, or layered 
with thin mesh protection. 


Enhanced Clothing is apparently normal clothing modified by 
the Matter Sphere. 


Biker Jacket represents thick, practical, heavy-duty protection. 
Cosplay Mail reflects modern costume armor. 

Chainmail represents battle-worthy chain-link armor, heavier 
than cosplay mail. 

Full Plate is articulated knight's armor. 

Riot Suit is police heavy body armor. 

Military Armor reflects a full suit of modern battle armor. 
Alanson Hardsuit is a standard-issue, full-body suit of 
hypertech Technocratic armor, used by Union security forces 


composed of extraordinary citizens and Enlightened agents 
alike. See Appendix II (p. 656) for details. 

Wooden and Metal Shields represent field-ready shields built 
for jousts and reenactment battles. 


Riot Shield is a thick Plexiglas or metal-with-viewport shield, 
employed by police forces (typically in a wall formation) 
during civil unrest situations. 


Ranged Combat Maneuvers 


Maneuver Traits Difficulty Damage 
Aiming Dexterity+ N/A +2 dice to hit 
Firearms per turn spent 
aiming 
Full-Auto Dexterity + +2 +10 dice 
Firearms 
Point Blank Dexterity + 4 Weapon 
Firearms 
Strafing Dexterity + +2 Special 
Firearms 
3-Round Dexterity + +1 +3 dice to hit; 
Burst Firearms damage as 
weapon 
Thrown Dexterity + 6 Weapon 
Weapon Athletics 
Two Dexterity + +1 Special 
Weapons Firearms 


Dirty Fighting Maneuvers 
(min. three dots in Brawl 


Maneuver Traits Difficulty Damage 
Blinding Dexterity+ 9 Special *' 
Subterfuge 
Body Slam Dexterity + 6 Strength + 2/B 
Brawl or L 
Curbstomp Strength + 6 Strength +2 /L 
Brawl 
Haymaker Dexterity + 7 Strength +2/B 
Brawl + Knockdown 
Head Butt Dexterity + 6 Strength +1/B 
Brawl 
Jab Pistol Dexterity + 6 As Firearm 
Brawl *2/L 
Low Blow Dexterity+ — 7 Strength + 
Brawl Stun/B or L 
Pistol Whip ^ Dexterity* — 7 Strength +2/L 
Melee 
Notes 


#1 = Enemy blinded for one turn per success, loses two dice 
from his dice pools until he recovers. May cause lasting injury, 
depending upon attack. 


Chapter Nine: Dramatic Systems 447 


A 


General Hand-To-Hand Maneuvers 


Maneuver Traits Difficulty Damage 
Bite Dexterity + Brawl 5 Strength +1 to +3 /B or L 
Claw Dexterity + Brawl 6 Strength +1 to+3 /LorA 
Disarm Dexterity + Melee +1/8 Special *' 
Flank/ Rear Attack Dexterity + Ability -1 /-2 As Attack 
Grapple Strength + Brawl 6 Strength or None 
ELE Kick Dexterity * Brawl 7 Strength +1 /B 

l Punch Dexterity Brawl 6 Strength /B 

| Reading Opponent Perception + Trait 6 Special *? 

| Sweep Dexterity + Brawl 8 Special *? 
Tackle Dexterity + Brawl 7 Strength + Special #4 /B 


| d Notes 


a #1 = Attacker rolls Dexterity + Melee at +1 difficulty; if successes exceed opponent's Strength score, he drops weapon. If not, 
attacker inflicts usual damage. On botched roll, attacker loses own weapon. Bare-handed disarm is Dexterity + Brawl, difficulty 
|. 8, minus one die from usual attack pool. (See also Martial Arts Disarm, below.) 


r) #2 = Resisted roll, observer's Perception + Combat Trait against opponent's Wits + Combat Trait. Successful observer adds one 
4 die per success to the dice pool to perform next action. 


#3 = Knockdown: if blow succeeds, antagonist winds up on ground. 


#4 = Requires at least two yards to achieve effective momentum. Each combatant needs successful Dexterity + Athletics roll 
(difficulty 6 for the attacker, difficulty 6 + the attacker's successes for the target) or wind up on ground. May damage attacker. 


Do Special Techniques (min. two dots in Do; four techniques max.) 


Maneuver Traits Difficulty Damage 

Arrow Cutting Dexterity - Do 7/9 Deflect/ Weapon 

Hurricane Throw Dexterity * Do 8 Strength +3 + successes 

Iron Shirt N/A 6 + 1 die to soak per dot in Do 

Kiaijutsu Special 7/ N/A /8 Special *' 

Plum Blossom Dexterity+Do 6 Leaps; see entry 

Soft Fist Dexterity+Do 7 Attacker’s Strength + Weapon + 
Successes 

10,000 Weapons Dexterity+Do N/A 1 die per dot in Do/B, Weapon/L 
or Weapon +1 

Typhoon Kick Dexterity+Do 8 Strength +5 + Successes 

Weapon Art as per Attack N/A Special — see entry 

Notes 


Do practitioners of all levels may also perform General Hand-To-Hand and Martial Arts maneuvers, choosing between 
bashing and lethal damage; may not perform Dirty Fighting maneuvers at all. 


#1 = Practitioner may give self a three-turn Stamina bonus of one dot for every success in a Stamina + Do roll (difficulty 7); 
frighten enemies by rolling Manipulation + Do (difficulty is the target’s Willpower +3); or hold the Shout in (Charisma + Do, 
difficulty 8), adding successes to Expression, Leadership, Intimidation, or performance-based Art roll. 


€————— 


k mya 


N 448 Mage: The Ascension 20^ Anniversary Edition 


Ma T-w" 


Notes 


Maneuver 
Counter Throw 
Death Strike 
Deflecting Block 
Disarm 

Dragon Tail Sweep 
Elbow/ Knee Strike 
Flying Kick 

Hard/ Soft Strike 
Joint Lock 

Nerve Strike 
Snake Step 

Snap Kick 
Spinning Kick 
Throw 

Thunder Kick 

Vital Strike 
Withering Grasp 


Martial Arfs Maneuvers 


Traits 

Dexterity + Martial Arts 
Dexterity + Martial Arts 
Dexterity + Martial Arts 
Dexterity + Martial Arts 
Dexterity + Martial Arts 
Dexterity + Martial Arts 
Dexterity + Martial Arts 
Dexterity + Martial Arts 
Dexterity + Martial Arts 
Dexterity + Martial Arts 
Dexterity + Martial Arts 
Dexterity + Martial Arts 
Dexterity + Martial Arts 
Dexterity + Martial Arts 
Dexterity + Martial Arts 
Dexterity + Martial Arts 
Dexterity + Martial Arts 


Difficulty 


Damage 
Special *! 

Strength +2/L 
Attacker’s Strength/B *? 
3 

Opponent's Strength /B 
Strength +1/B 

Strength +2/B 

Strength +1/B 

Grapple + Successes/L 
Strength +3/B #4 
Dodge + 3 dice 
Strength +1/B 

Strength +3/B 


Strength + Movement/B #5 
Strength +3 + Successes/B 


Strength/L 
Strength/B + Disarm 


See also Minimum Ability and soft or hard style listings for each maneuver, under full descriptions. 


#1 = Resisted roll of Dexterity + Martial Arts against attacker's Dexterity + Brawl, Melee, or Martial Arts; success deflects 


attack and may Throw, attacker as below. 


#2 = Each success subtracts one success from attacker’s roll; if defender scores more successes than attacker, then attacker 


must roll Dexterity (difficulty 8) or take own Strength in bashing damage. 
#3 = As per Disarm, above, bare-handed; minimum three dots in Martial Arts Skill. 


#4 = If attacker scores at least three successes against opponent, opponent must make Stamina roll (difficulty 8) or be stunned 


next turn. 


#5 = Attacker with Dexterity + Martial Arts dice pool equal to or higher than opponent's Dexterity throws opponent up to one 
yard for each success scored. Extra damage possible — see entry. 


Chapfer Nine: Dramatic Systems 


y 


n: 


AY 


/ 


ae 7 | 


Weapon 


Hatchet 
Tomahawk 
Axe 

Great Axe 


Polearm 


Stiletto 

Knife 

Short Sword 
Sword 

Katana 

Great Sword 
Sai 

Hook Sword(s) 


Riot Baton 
Baseball Bat 
Crowbar 

Staff 

Iron Staff 

Mace 

Nunchaku 

Spiked Club 
Huge Spiked Club 


Sap 

Brass Knuckles 
Spiked Gauntlet 
Hand Claws (small) 
Hand Claws (large) 
Katar 

War Fan 


Wind and Fire 
Wheel 


Broken Bottle 
Chair 
Chainsaw 
Table 


Ma$e: The Ascension 20^ Anniversary Edition 


Difficulty 


NON ON Oo Oo € C "0008 0o O0 RR RA N NNOO 


O10 Oo O Oo O LR 


ce o NOO 


Melee Weapons 


Damage/ Type Conceal 
Axes 
Strength +1/L J 
Strength +2/L J 
Strength *3/L N 
Strength *6/L N 
Strength *3/L N 
Blades 
Strength * 1/L P 
Strength +1/L P 
Strength *2/L J 
Strength *2/L T 
Strength +3/L T 
Strength +6/L N 
Strength *1/L J 
Strength *3/L T 
Clubbing Weapons 
Strength +1/B T 
Strength +2/B T 
Strength * 1/L J 
Strength +1/B N 
Strength *3/L N 
Strength +2/L N 
Strength +2/B T 
Strength *2/L T 
Strength +4/L N 
Fist-Extension Weapons 
Strength +1/B P 
Strength/L P 
Strength * 1/L J 
Strength +1/L P 
Strength *2/L P 
Strength +2 J 
Strength +2/L J 
Strength *3/L N 


Improvised Weapons 


Strength +1/L P 
Strength +2/B N 
Strength *7/L N 
Strength +3/B N 


Notes 


#1 


#2 


#3 


#4 
#1 
#5, #6 


Used as pair, *? # #6 


#1 


#5, #7 


#1 


#3, #5 
#5, #7 


#6 


#8 


#9 


#1 


‘ 


À 


Whips and Chains *'° 

Chain 5 Strength/B J 
Chain Whip 6 Strength +1/L J 
Kusarigama 7 Strength +3 /B mee 
Manriki-Gusari 7 Strength +2 /L reste 
Flogger 6 Strength +1/B 

Barbed Cat 6 Strength/L J 
Whip 6 Strength/L J 
Bullwhip 7 Strength +1/L J 


Notes 

Difficulty: The normal difficulty at which the weapons is used. 
Damage: The number of damage dice rolled when employing this weapon. 
Type: B = Bashing L = Lethal A = Aggravated 

Conceal: P = Pocket J = Jacket T= Trenchcoat N= N/A 

#1 = Two-handed weapon; very heavy - requires min. Strength 3 to employ. 
#2 = Requires two hands to employ properly; +2 difficulty if used one-handed. 
#3 = Penetrates up to three points of armor. 

#4 = May be used two-handed for an additional +1 damage die. 

#5 =+1 to dice pool when used to block. 

#6 = *2 to dice pool for disarm attempts. 

#7 = +1 difficulty to opponent's block attempts. 

#8 = Breaks after three uses. 

#9 = On a botch, user inflicts damage upon self. 

#10 = May be used to entangle an enemy’s limb at +1 difficulty. 


uot 
oa! 
be 


= 
a 
p 
T 
TU aS 


A 


Y 


m. 


pu 7T 


Type 


Revolver, Lt. 

SW M640 (.38 Special) 
Revolver, Hvy. 

Colt Anaconda (.44 Magnum) 
Semi-Automatic Pistol, Lt. 

Glock 17 (9mm) 
Semi-Automatic Pistol, Hvy. 

IMI Desert Eagle (.50 AE) 
Rifle 

Remington M-700 (30.06) 
SMG, Small 

Ingram Mac- 10 (9mm) 
SMG, Large 

HK MP-5 (9mm) 
Assault Rifle 

AK-47 (7.62x39mm) 
Shotgun, Sawed Off 


Ranged Weapons 


Winchester Model 24 double barrel (12 Gauge) 


Shotgun 

Ithaca M-37 (12 Gauge) 
Shotgun, Semi-Automatic 

Benelli M4 (12 Gauge) 
Shotgun, Assault 

MPS AA- 12 (12 Gauge) 


Biggs X-5 Model R Protector 
Biggs X-5 Model A Protector 
Biggs Mjollner Mk. IV 
Castle-Graves WW-3 

Bolan Mk.13 Weapons System 
HIT Mark Chain-Gun 


Short Bow 

Hunting Bow 

Long Bow 

Crossbow, Commando 
Crossbow 


Crossbow, Hvy. 


452 Mage: The Ascension 20" Anniversary Edition 


>— 


t Feeney of 


Damage Range 
Conventional Guns 
4 12 
6 35 
4 20 
5 30 
8 200 
4 25 
4 50 
7 150 
8 10 
8 20 
8 25 
8 50 
Technocracy Sidearms *? 
5 40 
5 40 
10 100 
8 200 
(as noted below] 
8 150 
Bows *° 
4 60 
5 100 
5 120 
3 20 
5 90 
6 100 


Rate 


3 


4 
4 
] 


Clip 


7*1 


5+] 


30+] 


30+] 


Conceal 


z E — Em 


ra 


Notes 


#1 


#1 


#1 


#1 


#3 


#1 


#4 


#1 


#1,#5 


#1 


#7 


NA 


Taser 5 5 ] 1 P i 

Tear Gas 3 3 1 5 P rs by 
Pacification Spray 5 3 1 5 P ae A 

Military Weapons *? i 

.30 Caliber Machine Gun 12 800 5 100 N A i 
.50 Caliber Machine Gun 16 1000 5 200 N urba 

30 mm Cannon 15 1200 8 100 N Sins 

M-79 Grenade Launcher 6 400 1 1 N is —d 

M-19 Grenade Launcher 8 600 2 1 N a Ea 
Flamethrower 3 levels/ turn, fire 60 1 5 N "e | 

Rocket Launcher 12-16 500+ 1 1 N uli | 
Notes 


Damage: All damage from firearms and bows is lethal. 
Range: Within listed range (in yards], difficulty is 6; at twice listed Range, difficulty is 8; within two yards, difficulty is 4. 
Rate: Maximum number of bullets or three-round bursts the weapon can fire in a single turn. 


Clip: Maximum number of bullets the weapon can hold. Some weapons, listed as “+1”, can hold a full clip with a round ready 
in the chamber. , 


e 


Conceal: See Melee Weapons chart. 
#1 = Gun may fire full-auto, three-round bursts, and strafing sprays. 


#2 = All category weapons except chain-gun feature laser sights and can be used by Sleepers and extraordinary citizens; 
issued only to Technocracy personnel of extraordinary citizen level or higher. 


#3 = Revolver; at the touch of a button, can chamber any type of ammunition loaded in the cylinder. Both Model R and Model 
A made of composite materials — invisible to metal detectors. 


#4 = Rarely issued to unEnlightened personnel, as it tends to jam on a failed roll during unEnlightened use; still, more attuned to 
Consensus than it was years ago. 


#5 = Combines a submachine gun main weapon (as per AK-47; 50-shot clip) with auto-shotgun capabilities (as MPS AA- 
12; 20-shot clip) through the main barrel, plus a grenade launcher under that barrel (as a MP-79/ six-shot magazine). Laser 
sights. Heavy; requires Strength 3 or better to employ but has relatively low recoil. 


#6 = Long and short bows take an automatic action to nock and draw; crossbows require two automatic actions to reload. A 
character with Archery 3 or higher can nock, draw, and loose an arrow as a single action but cannot do the same thing with a 
crossbow. 


#7 = Collapsible; requires one turn to unfold from storage configuration, plus one action to load once it has been unfolded. 


#8 = Bashing damage, not lethal; adds no extra damage from successes scored. Tear gas and Technocratic pacification spray 
also reduce target's dice pools by two dice for one turn per success. 


#9 = Requires Firearms specialization in Heavy Weapons and a Class C license to own legally in U.S. 
#10 = Not man-portable; must be mounted on vehicle. 


#11 = Chain-gun; not normally man-portable, but carried by some HIT Marks and heavy-duty cyborgs. Halves armor 
protection due to high-speed “drilling” effect. 


#12 = See Explosives chart. 


Thrown Weapons 


Weapon Difficulty Damage/Type Conceal 
Knife 6 Strength/L P 
Shuriken 7 3/L P 

Spear 6 Strength +1/L N 

Stone 5 Strength/B varies 
Stone, Large 5 Strength +3/B N 
Tomahawk 6 Strength +1/L J 


Chapter Nine: Dramatic Systems 453 


t 


Type 
Ectoplasmic Disruptors 


Explosive Shells 


Flechettes 


Incendiary Rounds 


Rubber Bullets 
Taser Bullets 


| Tear Gas Rounds 


Teflon Bullets 


Type 
Laser Sight 


Sniper Scope 
Night Vision Scope 
Computer Targeting 


Heath Levels/ Turn 
One 
Two 


Three 


Soak Difficulties 


Oo ON OA C 


SY lf SRO WERTE SEEN 


Fire Damage 


Mage: The Ascension 20" Anniversary Edition 


Special Ammunition Types 


Damage Effects 

5/A Blasts spirit entities and vampires with aggravated damage explosion; normal 
damage to physical beings. 

6/L Mini-grenades; six dice on target, minus one die/ yard from impact to max. of -6 
dice; usable only in shotguns and Technocratic firearms. 

7/L Tiny darts; modern body armor reduced by -2 to protection from this ammo, but 
old-style thick armor counts as double for this ammo only; only from shotguns and 
Technocratic firearms. 

4/A Phosphorus - ignites in air when fired; inflict two dice aggravated damage for one 
turn after they hit; ignite flammable objects. 

B Damage as normal bullets for the gun, but bashing, not lethal. 

5/B Electrical charge inflicts 5 levels bashing for two turns; Technocratic special ammo. 

B Fills two meter radius with tear gas — see Toxins, p.456; shotguns and Technocratic 
firearms only. 

L Damage as per normal bullets for the gun, but reduce armor protection value by -1. 


Special Gun Sights 


Difficulty Reduction Notes *! 

-] One turn to aim. 

-2 Two turns to aim. 

-] Dark only; also lets shooter see in darkness. 
-3 One turn to aim. 


#1 = Scopes add two dice to shooter's dice pool for the first shot only. 


Environmental Hazards 


Electrocution 


Health Levels / Turn Electrical Source 


Size of Fire 


Torch; part of body burned Two Minor; wall socket 

Bonfire; half of body seared Four Major; protective fence 

Inferno: body engulfed Six Severe; junction box 
Eight Fatal; subway rail 


Heat of Fire 

Candle (first degree burns) 
Campfire (second degree burns) 
Bunsen burner (third degree) 
Electrical fire 

Chemical fire 


Molten lava or metal 


NEE ZA 


Explosives 
Type Blast Area Blast Power Burn Notes 
Toxic Gas Grenade 4 N/A No uA 
Concussion Grenade 3 8 dice No 22 
Fragmentation Grenade 3 12 dice No 
Molotov Cocktail 2 8 dice Yes w WP i 
IED 3-5 8-15 dice Depends *4 | 
Suicide Bomb 4-6 10-15 dice Depends * os 
Gasoline 3 2 Yes 3 | 
Gas Tank (car) 5 12 dice Yes 9 | ! 
Car Bomb 5 20 dice Depends  *4 | | 
Truck Bomb 20 30 dice Depends *4 | 
Blasting Powder 1 1 Yes He 
Dynamite 3-5 6 dice/ stick Yes i 
Nitroglycerin 4 3 No Pg : 
Plastique 1-6 1-20 No #8 dq 
Napalm 10-50 Special Yes an "I 
Small Rocket 3-6 10-15 dice No E 
Artillery Shell 10 20-30 dice No 
Nuke 1-30 miles Seriously? Yes 23 


Notes 


Blast Area: Center of explosion, measured in 10’ increments; all characters and objects take full damage within Blast Area, -1 
success for each yard outward from there. 


Blast Power: Number of dice rolled per pound or ¥2 gallon of explosive; sometimes simply a dice pool instead. 
Burn: Whether or not the explosive also ignites fires. 

Damage lethal unless noted. 

#1 = See Toxins chart. 

#2 = Bashing damage, not lethal. 

#3 = Aggravated damage. 

#4 = Might also be incendiary (aggravated damage + fire) or shrapnel (half armor protection). 
#5 = Strapped to, or inside of, user; kills user upon ignition. Also, #4. 

#6 = Loose gun- or flash powder; also creates blinding flare when ignited. 

#7 = Liquid, unstable; may ignite upon impact. 

#8 = May be shaped for precise explosion area; stable until ignited by electronic detonator. 


#9 =Jellied gasoline; aggravated damage. Storyteller rolls one die to determine how much flaming napalm hits a given character, 
then rolls that mony dice per turn for 10 turns. Not extinguished by water, only by total lack of oxygen. Successful dodge reduces 
damage dice pool by one die per success. 


Dodging the Blast 
Difficulty Size of Explosion 


6 Small detonation (grenade, Molotov cocktail) 
8 Large explosion (gas tanks, small bombs, IEDs) 
9 Huge explosion (artillery rounds, tanker trucks, truck bombs) 


Chapter Nine: Dramatic Systems 455 


Seven 


Difficulty Disease 


Extensive (L) 
9 Bubonic Plague (L), Anthrax (L) 
9/73 Ebola (avoid as cloud, L) 


Toxins 


6 Cold (B) 

7 Chicken Pox (B), Food Poisoning (B), 
MRSA (L) 

7 Influenza (B); Cancer, Early (L); 
Pneumonia (L) 

8 HM (L); Leprosy (L); Cancer, Advanced 
L 

8 Severe Flu (B/L); Cholera (B); Cancer, 


Poison or Drug 
Alcohol (B), Cocaine (B), Tear Gas (cloud, B) 
Methamphetamine (B), Methanol (L) 


Ptomaine (B), Tainted Water (B), Belladonna (L) 
Salmonella (B), Ammonia (L), Fouled Water (B) 
Bleach (L), Industrial Waste (L), Chlorine Gas (L) 


Strong Acids (L) 
Sarin (L), Cyanide (L), Acidic Sludge (L) 


|. Notes: Clouds of toxins inflict damage per turn spent within the cloud without gas protection gear and cannot be dodged; to 


avoid the effects, a character needs protective gear or Life 2 magick. Many toxic chemicals work on skin contact and cannot 


be avoided by holding one’s breath. Clouds also drift with wind and may be dispersed or spread with Forces 2 or higher 


5 Effects. 


Objects 


Durability Substance is... 


Structure 
1 

2-3 

4-5 


6-7 
8-9 
10 


+ 


X: z 


Fragile (normal glass, thin wood or ceramic) 
Breakable (sturdy glass, plywood, crockery) 


Breakable but tough (interior door, safety 
glass, drywall, thin metal) 


Strong and rigid 

Strong and flexible 

Solid 

Solid and thick 

Solid, thick, and reinforced 
Thick, solid, and dense 
Exceedingly strong and dense 


Damn near impenetrable 


Object is... 
Fragile (wine glass, light bulb) 
Easily broken (window, laptop, drywall) 


Sturdy and complex (car engine, camera, 
printer) 


Sturdy and simple (table, plank, tire, thick 
door, brick wall) 


Thick and simple (stone wall, streetlight pole, 


metal bulkhead) 


Thick and reinforced (safe, bank vault, 
building foundation) 


Built to take enormous punishment (airliner, 
ship, military vehicle) 


Mage: The Ascension 20" Anniversary Edition 


Holding Breath 
Stamina Holding Breath 


30 seconds 
One minute 
Two minutes 
Four minutes 
Eight minutes 


15 minutes 


NO GO BR C ND 


20 minutes 
30 minutes 


45 minutes 


— 0 o 
o 


One hour 


TN 


NC AE 
y% 


Sample Objects and Surfaces 


Object/Surface Durobility Structure Damage Notes 
Barriers 

Window 1-3 1-3 1 * x 
Plexiglas 3-5 5 2 J is 
Screen Door 2 2 N/A A E | 
Flimsy Door 1 5 1 í | 2x 
Thick Door 2-4 5-7 2 os 
Metal Door 3-5 6-8 4 | | * 
Vault Door 10 10-18 8 

Drywall 3 2-4 1 ne 

Wooden Wall 3-5 6-8 2 22 

Brick Wall 6-8 6-8 3 i I 

Stone Wall 6-9 8-9 3 92 

Steel Wall 7-10 8-15 4 #2 | 

Chain Link Fence 2 6 1 i i j ; 
Wooden Fence 2-4 3-6 2 #2 | 

Metal Fence 3-4 7-10 9 We 2 

Furniture 

Chair 3-4 4-6 1-2 

Coffin 2 7 2 

Computer 1-3 2-4 1-2 

Couch 3 7 3 

Lamp 1-2 2-3 1 

Shelving Unit 3-4 6-7 

Table /Desk 2-4 4-6 2-3 

TV 2 2 2 

Street Objects 

Mailbox 2-3 2-6 1-2 

Manhole Cover 4 6 3 

Metal Bars 4-8 6-7 2 

Street Light 5 8-9 3 

Tree 5-10 10+ 3-5 s 
Notes 


Durability: Overall hardness and/ or thickness. 
Structure: Useful integrity; when damage exceeds Structure, the object is broken. 


Damage: The number of dice the surface or object adds to an attacker's bashing damage pool if he uses that object or surface 
as an improvised weapon. 


#1 = Damage lethal if glass gets shattered before use as a weapon; doubled for heavy-duty glass. 
#2 = Damage reflects being hit with a piece of the wall or being slammed hard into it. 
#3 = Extremely varied, depending on age, type, and size of tree. 


ee I 


nj 


Chapter Nine: Dramatic Systems 457 / 
ATE IT 


pe 7T 


Forallthatcertain mages go on aboutthe glories 
of the Mythic Age, their world is our world, and 
our world’s full of technology. From car chases 
to gadgeteering upgrades, that technology 
comes into play fairly often in a Mage: The 
Ascension chronicle. The following systems 
certainly won’t reflect every conceivable use 
of technology in your game, but they'll help 
your troupe address many common moments 
of technological mayhem. 


Vehicle Systems 


Until the early 1900s, you walked, rode a horse, or spent 
lots of time in some rickety contraption that tended to be 
slow, uncomfortable, and subject to weather conditions. 
But ever since the inventions of internal combustion, the 
automobile, and highly durable materials during the mid- 
to late 1800s, most people have traveled great distances 
at high speed and think nothing of it. The Technocracy, 
of course, is quick to claim credit for such innovations. 
Whatever their origins might be, however, our vehicles are 
part of our daily lives. 


Ingameterms, characters mightfind themselves in high-speed 
chases, drive-bys, tense repair situations, and other sorts of vehicular 
chaos. And although Mage’s Storyteller System avoids detailed 
transportation rules (whole games have been built around such 
details!), it’s worth knowing what happens if you grab a jetpack 
or hop inside an armored limousine. 


f Part V: The Technological World 


Vehicle Traits 


For the most part, vehicles are best handled as story 
elements - characters get in them and go. For those times 
when the magick meets the road, though, the following Traits 
define the essential systems for common vehicles. 


* Safe/ Max. Speed: Safe Speed reflects how fast a character 
can drive the vehicle in question withoutrisking a wreck; 
for every 10 MPH over that limit, add +1 to the difficulty 
of that character's operation rolls. Max. Speed is more 
or less where that vehicle tops out. 


e Maneuverability: Certain vehicles handlebetterthan others. 
Maneuverability reflects the maximum dice pool a character 
can use when operating this vehicle. (This applies only to 
the dice pool used for driving, of course... although it's also 
hardtoseducesomeone in the middle ofa high-speed chase.) 


* Crew: The minimum personnel needed to operate the 
vehicle. Pass. (passengers) reflects the number of people, 
other than the operators, who'll fit into the vehicle under 
normal circumstances. Cramming is possible, of course, 
but it may affect the vehicle’s ability to function. 


* Durability: The number of health levels it takes to 
penetrate the vehicle’s body; until that point, damage 
just bounces off the surface. 


* Structure: The amount of damage the vehicle can take 
before it's too destroyed to function as more than a block 


Optional Rule: Minimum Driving Skill 


Cars are easy to drive; 18-wheelers are not. As an optional rule, assume that driving a car requires at least one dot in 
Drive before you can do so competently, but driving vehicles in the Truck class demands atleast three dots. Any character 
can certainly get behind the wheel of such a vehicle... but control it? Not likely. 


Cycles are notoriously difficult too. You may assume that a character needs at least one dot in Athletics in order to operate 
a bicycle, a Dexterity of at least three to operate a unicycle, and no fewer than three dots in Drive (or perhaps a specialty 
in Motorcycles) in order to avoid smearing himself across the pavement on a motorcycle. Again, a character can mount 
a cycle and maybe move slowly down the street on it under calm conditions. If she needs to exert control over that bike 
and its velocity, though, that's another matter entirely... 


of wreckage. (Granted, Matter and Entropy magick can 
do wonderfully creative things with wreckage...) 


* Weapons: This Trait speaks for itself. See the Combat 
section for details. 


For vehicle repair, modification, hotwiring, and car- 
stripping rules, see Inventing, Modifying, and Improving 
Technology, (p. 463-464). 


Stunt Driving 


Tocommitgross acts of vehicular insanity, a roll of Dexterity 
* Drive (or Pilot, Jetpack, or other appropriate Ability) reflects 
your character's skill. The difficulty for that roll depends upon 
the craziness of the stunt and possibly the conditions involved 
as well (icy road, flat tires, shattered windshield, etc.); typically, 
such stunts start at difficulty 4 and go upward from there. 


Remember, though, that the Maneuverability Trait limits 
that dice pool, and exceeding the vehicle's Safe Speed adds to 


the difficulty of that roll. 


Let's say, for example, that Lee Ann Milner tries to pull a 
bootlegger reverse. If she's driving a sports car, her Dexterity 
* Drive dice pool has an upper limit of 9; if she's driving an 
SUV, drop that limit to 5; and if she tries to do it with an RV... 
well, good luck with that, Lee Ann! 


Botches while driving are bad. Seriously, don't botch a 
stunt driving roll. 


Ramming and Collisions 


In order to avoid absurdly complicated rules, assume that a 
vehicle ramming a character inflicts that vehicle’s Durability in 
bashing damage, plus one die for every 10 MPH (14” per turn) 
that the vehicle was traveling at the time. Thus, a crotch-rocket 
motorcycle ramming someone at 50 MPH inflicts eight dice 
of bashing damage, but a limo going at that speed inflicts 10. 


Certain vehicles inflict additional dice of damage simply 
because they’re bigger and harder than a character is. The limo 
in question actually inflicts 13 dice of damage because it hurts 
to get rammed by a limo. (For additional levels of damage, see 
the charts below.) 


Passengers inside a colliding vehicle take the usual damage, 
minus that vehicle's Durability rating; if they're strapped in, 
halve the damage they would normally suffer. In many cases, 


theStoryteller can simply employ the cinematic trope of having 
important characters more or less unharmed and unnecessary 
characters incapacitated or killed in a crash. 


For additional details about getting clipped by vehicles or 
the people in them, see Ramming and Slamming (p. 439). 


Drive-By Shooting and 
Passenger Concealment 

Characters firing from inside a moving vehicle suffer a 
penalty of between -1 (low speed) to -3 (high speed). This goes 
up, of course, if they're moving through rough or obstructing 
terrain (rain, fog, ice, offroad, etc.). 


Characters inside a vehicle are typically protected by that 
vehicle’s Durability. Unless the shooter rolls four successes or 
more to hit her target, assume that the vehicle protects the 
passengers. A targeted shot through the window normally adds 
+3 to the shooter’s difficulty, although smaller windows (say, 
like on an armored car) may add +5 or more. 


Certain attacks, of course, can easily exceed that Durability 
rating; in that case, the passengers might take damage from 
the attack, minus the vehicle’s Durability rating. For typical 
firearms, just figure that the usual cinematic “car protects the 
passengers” rule applies; however, for heavy weapons - .50 
caliber machine guns, rocket launchers, pulse cannons, etc. - a 
shot that rolls at least four successes to hit and penetrates the 
vehicle’s Durability has a good chance of hitting a passenger as 
well. That chance depends upon the size of the vehicle relative 
to the size and number of its passengers. It’s far easier, after 
all, to hit one of the two people in a tiny sports car than to hit 
a specific one of the 30 people in a bus. 


Shooting the Gas Tank 


Movies notwithstanding, it’s pretty hard to blow up a car 
by shooting at its gas tank. But because exploding cars make 
great coincidental Forces attacks, it’s worth noting that an 
attack on a vehicle’s gas tank demands at least three successes 
on the attack roll, and must inflict no fewer than six health 
levels’ worth of damage, before the fuel goes off. 


An exploding car detonates for roughly 12 dice of flaming 
aggravated damage. Larger vehicles (helicopters, boats, tanker 
trucks, etc.) can inflict far more. For details, see Explosions in 
the Environmental Hazards section. 


Chapter Nine: Dramatic Systems 459 


Ne 7T 


t 


s 
wa 
Cr 


Vehicles 
Wheeled Street Vehicles 
Vehicle Safe Speed Max.Speed Maneuver Crew Durability Structure Weapons 
Cycles (Durability does not protect rider; see Minimum Driving Skill) 
Unicycle 1 x Strength 3 x Strength 5 1 1 3 N/A 
Mountain Bike 3 x Strength 8 x Strength 5 1 2 4 N/A 
Racing Bike Ax Strength 10x Strength 6 1 2 3 N/A 
| Dirt Bike 50 80 9 ] 4 4 N/A 
| (Motorcycle) 
| Light Motorcycle 75 130 8 1 3 N/A 
| Touring 90 170 5 1 (1 pass.) 4 4 N/A 
| Motorcycle 
| | Crotch Rocket 100 200 7 1 2 3 N/A 
m Badass 120 250 7 1 5 5 i 
al: Hypercycle 
4 ATV 30 70 5 1 3 5 N/A 
Cars (Mass inflicts +1 die of damage) 
Jeep 60 80 6 1 (4 pass.) 4 6 He 
Compact Car 70 130 6 1 (1 pass.) 3 3 N/A 
Midsize Sedan 70 120 5 1 (3 pass.) 3 4 N/A 
Station Wagon 80 120 4 1 (5 pass.) 3 5 N/A 
Sports Car 130 200 9 1 (1 pass.) 3 4 N/A 
Street Racer 70 240 8 1 (1 pass.) 4 4 N/A 
Cop Car 80 200 7 1 (3 pass.) 5 5 N/A 
Police Interceptor 100 250 8 1 (3 pass.) 5 5 N/A 
Bond Q Division 100 250 10 1 (1 pass.) 6 5 im 
Supercar 


Trucks (mass inflicts * 3 dice in impact-based damage; * 3 protection to passengers) 


Limo 70 110 4 1 (5 pass.) 4 6 N/A 
Armored Limo 70 100 4 1 (5 pass.) 8 6 d 
Stretch Car 80 100 3 1 (5-7 pass.) 3 5 N/A 
Pickup Truck 70 110 5-7 1 (1-4 pass.) 3 6 N/A 
SUV/ Van 60 120 6 1 (3-7 pass.) 4 7 N/A 
Armored 50 100 5 1 (3 pass.) 10 10 N/A 
Supervan 

Off-Road Truck 60 90 5 1 (1-3 pass.) 4 7 N/A 
Hummer 80 120 5 1 (1-5 pass.) 5 8 E 
Armored Car 60 80 4 1 (1-5 pass.) 10 10 N/A 
RV 60 80 3 1 (1-5 pass.) 3 8 N/A 
Bus 60 100 8 1 (20+ pass.) 4 8 N/A 
Large Truck 60 110 4-5 1 (1 pass.) 4 6 N/A 
Heavy Truck 60 100 4 1 (5* pass.) 6 8 N/A 
18-Wheeler 70 110 4 1 (1 pass.) 5 8 N/A 


Wheeled Street Vehicles (Continued) 


Notes 


#1 = May mount any two of the following options: two .30 caliber machine guns (Difficulty 6, Damage 12, Rate 5, Range 
800 yards, Capacity 100 shots); oil slick jet (Difficulty 4, -6 to pursuers’ Drive rolls, 4 shots); smoke screen jet (Difficulty 
4, -4 to pursuers’ Perception and Drive rolls, 4 shots); six rockets (Difficulty 8, Damage 15, Rate 1, Range 3000 yards, 
Capacity 1 shot); one 30 mm cannon (Difficulty 7, Damage 15, Rate 8, Range 1200 yards, Capacity 50 shots). 


#2 = Civilian vehicles have no weapons. Military vehicles may mount one of the following options: two twin-mounted .30 caliber 
machine guns (above); one 30 mm cannon (above); one mounted .50 caliber machine gun (Difficulty 7, Damage 12, 
Rate 5, Range 1000 yards, Capacity 200 shots); one M-19 grenade launcher (Difficulty 6, Damage as grenade, Rate 1, 
Range 400 yards, Capacity 1 shot); one TOW rocket (Difficulty 6, Damage 16, Rate 1, Range 2500 yards, Capacity 1 shot). 


Weaponized vehicles may also carry concealed technomagickal Devices — see The Toybox, Chapter Ten. 


Military Vehicles 
Requires min. 3 dots in Drive * appropriate Specialty to operate at all; 
mass inflicts * 5 dice in impact-based damage. Passengers get full protection from Durability. 


Vehicle Safe Speed Max. Maneuver Crew Durability Structure Weapons 
Speed 
APC 30 60 4 2 (11 pass.) 12 15 | 
Riot Tank 30 50 3 2 10 15 I! 
Light Tank 20 30 (on road) 2 4 18 (front)/ 18 I 
15 sides 
Heavy Tank 30 50 (on road) 2 4 22 (front) / 25 IN 
20 (sides) 
Notes 


| = As #2, preceding chart. 
|! = Two M-19 grenade launchers (to fire gas canisters), two .30 caliber machine guns, and one 

battering ram. Vehicle can be sealed against water and gas attacks. 

III = 105 mm cannon (Difficulty 7, Damage 20, Rate 1, Range 1200 yards, Capacity 1 shot), plus two .50 
caliber machine guns (front and turret) and two grenade launchers. Can be sealed. Pod 
I!!! = 120 mm cannon (Difficulty 7, Damage 30, Rate 1, Range 2000 yards, Capacity 1 shot), plus three — — 4 
.50 caliber machine guns (front and turret) and four grenade launchers. Can be sealed. 


TN Ad 
N ri 


JA 
"1 


Ww 
W 


-- 


? 
y 


N 


br 


mW 7l ! 


€ 


Aircraft 


Requires Pilot Skill to operate at all; military aircraft require at least 3 dots in Pilot + appropriate specialty. 
Passengers get full protection from Durability. For details about the Pilot Ability, see The Book of Secrets. 


Vehicle Safe Speed Max. Speed Maneuver Crew Durability Structure Weapons 
Hot Air Balloon Wind Wind 0 INS 4 4 N/A 
pass.) 


Jetpacks (requires Jetpack Skill; Durability does not protect wearer; technomagickal vehicle.) 


Jetpack 100 250 10 1 4 4 N/A 
Ornithopter 120 200 10 1 4 2 N/A 
Helicopters (requires Pilot + Helicopter specialty. Except for gyrocopter, Durability protects passengers.) 
Gyrocopter 70 150 5 1 3 9 N/A 
News Copter 140 220 6 1(1 4 6 N/A 
pass.) 
Large Helicopter 150 250 6 2 (4 5 6 N/A 
pass.) 
Attack Chopper 180 280 9 3 12 10 | 
Military Utility 180 280 7 3 (10 8 10 II 
Helicopter pass.) 
Black Helicopter 200 400 10 2 13 13 I! 
Small Planes (requires Pilot; military planes require Fighter Jet specialty. Durability protects passengers.) 
Small Prop 110 170 5 1 8] 5 6 N/A 
pass.) 
Medium Prop 180 230 4 2 (10 6 8 N/A 
pass.) 
Large Prop 300 400 3 2 (50 6 10 N/A 
pass.) 
Lear Jet 350 450 4 2 (20 8 15 N/A 
pass.) 
Fighter Jet Mach 2 Mach 2.5 7 ] 8 15 Hl 
Notes 


| = 30 mm cannon, 16 TOW missiles, 16 rockets (all as previous). 
|! = Two .30 caliber machine guns; or two 30 mm cannons; or six rockets and two .30 caliber machine guns. 


II! = Two .30 caliber machine guns, two 30 mm cannons, 12 rockets, and 16 TOW missiles. Also features stealth 
mode (Arcane 5 except vs. Technocrats) and requires Perception roll (difficulty 6) to hear. Requires Technocratic extraordinary 
citizen crew. 


I!!! = 20 mm cannon (Difficulty 7, Damage 15, Rate 3, Range 1000 yards, Capacity 100 shots); four Sidewinder 
missiles (Difficulty 8, Damage 15, Rate 2, Range many miles], six Sparrow A1M-7P missiles (Difficulty 8, Damage 20, 
Rate 2, Range 30 miles, and 14 250-Ib. smart bombs (Difficulty 6, Damage 40). 


462  Ma$e: The Ascension 20" Anniversary Edition 


Inventing, Modifying, and 
Improving Technology 


Who says that magick has to look like old bones and musty 
books? For many mages of the 21* century - of any century, 
for that matter - the gears and wires of apparently mundane 
technology can become vehicles for Enlightened miracles. 


Even without magick, a skillful mage can improve existing 
technology, invent new gadgets, or modify one thing into 
another. The various Spheres can assist such projects, of course, 
but the foundation of such tasks comes from innovation and 
skilled labor - sweat equity, not mystic shortcuts. And so, when 
your Etherite adventurer wants to soup up her Camaro, or 
your Hollow One tinkers with a sound system, the following 
rules reflect the things a smart mechanic can do to apparently 
mundane tech... with and without Sphere Effects. 


Asshown on the Artand Science portions of the Dramatic 
Feats entry and its related charts, the design, creation, and 
jury-rigging process involves a number of rolls if you want to 
play it out in game terms. Naturally, a character needs tools, a 
work space, and the necessary materials before she can make or 
update something without vulgar magick. The world's greatest 
mechanicstill can'tturbocharge an old VW bug withoutserious 
investments of time, gear, and grease, both elbow and otherwise. 
Sure, he could knock three times on the engine block with a 
rusty screwdriver, but unless he's just trying to make it go like it 
did before ("You've gotta know where to hit ‘em JUST RIGHT...”), 


his explanation's not gonna fly and neither is the car. 


Repair and Modification 

Modern mages love to tinker. If your character repairs or 
modifies a vehicle or other mechanical contraption, assume 
that the task involves an extended roll with the appropriate 
Attribute + Ability. (Again, see Artand Scienceon the Dramatic 
Feats chart.) Suitable Traits include Computer, Crafts (with 
the appropriate specialty), Hypertech, Science (again, with a 
given specialty), and Technology. Each roll reflects an hour 
or two of work, with several sample tasks on the chart nearby 
to give you guidelines for the successes involved in each task. 


To determine difficulties and successes, check the Modification 
and Repair chart, which can be used for both vehicle work and 
other mechanical repairs. A well-stocked workshop can lower the 
difficulty by -1 to -3, but improvised repairs without proper tools 
increase it by +1 to +3. Given time and materials, a good mechanic 
can fix or modify almost anything. Use rolls and charts only when 
you're racing against the clock, working with limited resources, or 
trying to do something that’s theoretically impossible. 


It’s easier to work with what you already have than to create 
something that hadn’t been there before. Modifying your old 
Saturn, for instance, involves less effort than building a whole 
new car from scratch. It’s also easier to improve on junk than 
it is to upgrade a high quality-machine; the better the original 
craftsmanship, the bigger the challenge you face. 


Story-wise, repairs and upgrades demand time, labor, parts, 
tools, and space, as noted above. Although it is possible for a 


Modification and Repair 


Job Difficulty | # of Successes 
Diagnostics 6 5 
Routine Maintenance 4 
Simple Repair 4 
Major Repair 7 
Extensive Repair 7 
Fitting New Part 6 
Security Override *! 8 
System Overhaul 7 
Minor Modification Z 
Major Modification 8 
New Capabilities 8 
Hotwiring *' 5 
Strip-n-Chop *! 6 
Electronic Malfunction 5 
Technical Glitch 9 
Jury-Rig +2 
Quick-n-Dirty +3 
On the Fly +5 


Notes: #1 = Can also involve Wits + Streetwise at 
+2 difficulty. 


Quality of Device 


Difficulty Modifier 


Type of Device 

Junk 

Cheap/ Poorly Made 
Average Commercial Quality 
Expensive/ High Quality 
Custom Made 

Cutting-Edge Prototype 


Invention 


# of 


Type of Invention Difficulty Successes 


Moderate improvement 8 5 
on an existing device 


Significant improvement 9 10 
on existing device 


Brand new device 10 
based on new or 
unconventional principles 


Chapter Nine: Dramatic Systems 463 


| 
b, 


- NS 
" 
Iw 


€—————— 2 


s. fe. 


skilled and powerful mage to gesture a few times and make parts 
fly together on their own, that sort of thing is spectacularly vulgar. 


Jury-Rigging 

For quick and dirty improvements - like a pair of machine 
guns grafted onto your Dodge pickup truck, or some special 
improvements to make that truck go faster - a successful jury- 
rigging roll allows for short-term improvements. 


After a scene or two, however, those improvements start 
to break down, causing damage to the machine in question. 
(“But Captain — she canna handle the strain much longer...”) In 
order to keep those improvements permanently, the mechanic 
needs to make extensive modifications -very probably with a 
bit of Matter or other Spheres thrown in for good measure. 


The Modification and Repair chart shows three levels of 
jury-rigged modifications and repairs. Jury-Rig assumes a bit of 
time and materials, Quick-n-Dirty reflects a slapdash job with 
minimal time and resources, and On the Fly represents the sort 
of wing-and-a-prayer job you do when the Hordes of Hell are 
bearing down on you and all you’ve got to work with is the 
contents of your pockets and the junk scattered at your feet. All 
three options add to the difficulty of the repairs or modifications 
listed above, and all three require more successes than usual. 


Inventing Devices 

Innovation is the hallmark of brilliant technomancers 
everywhere. Although it’s not something that comes up often 
in the heat of battle, any self-respecting machine-mage has a 
project or three scattered across her workshop. For times when 
you want to introduce a new gadget or vehicle to the chronicle, 
put the following guidelines to good use. 


Before you can build some great new thing, you'll need 
to hash out the principles, work through the bugs, and tinker 
with prototypes until you reach a semi-workable design. In 
story terms, this sort of thing can take months or years of 
brainstorming, research, and frustration. Game-wise, the 
Research and Design entries in the Arts and Sciences category 
of the Dramatic Feats chart reflect the brainstorming process. 
The Invention listing covers the process of putting the pieces 
together into something that works, and the Invention chart 
nearby features guidelines for the difficulties and successes 
involved in the process, as well as the successes necessary to 
complete each step of that process. 


Mage: The Ascension 20" Anniversary Edition 


It’s worth remembering that a functional invention must 
still be something that can exist within the Consensus and 
operate by currently understood scientific principles. A radical 
invention - like the computer chip in the 1970s - may be 
possible, but it will require extensive testing, refinement, and 
propaganda before it'll be accepted as viable technology. That's 
one of the reasons that Etherites, Technocrats, and Virtual 
Adepts publicize their favorite theories and inventions: popular 
acceptance makes those creations viable. (See the Chapter Six 


sidebar SCIENCE!!!) 


Inventions that defy the current laws of reality are capital-D 
Devices... that is, magickal items. For those sorts of inventions, 
see the Cybernetics, Hypertech, and Weird Science practices 
in Chapter Ten's section Focus and the Arts, as well as The 
Toybox in Appendix IL. Again, invention requires space, 
time, materials, and labor. An invention without some serious 
workshop time is simply an idea. 


Onconventional Enhancement 


Mages of all kinds (most especially technomancers) can 
use the Matter and Prime Spheres to enhance the structure and 
power ofa given machine. Using whichever tools and procedures 
seem appropriate to his focus, the mage crafts high-density cloth, 
advanced polymers, cold-fusion batteries, or other innovations 
to upgrade the quality and functions of a machine he creates. 


In game terms, this simply translates to using Matter 2 or 
3 to make advanced materials, Prime 2 to enhance a power 
supply, or other Spheres to add a bit of extra kick to the device 
in question. (Correspondence 1, for example, to a pair of 
binoculars, Forces to boost a Taser's shock, that sort of thing.) 
The player makes an Arete roll for coincidental magick, and 
each success over the first one adds an invisible but helpful 
boost to the object's properties. Using the Bustin' Stuff rules 
(see pp. 439-440), the mage could add one point to the object's 
Durability or Structure for each success. Perhaps he might add 
to a weapon's damage dice pool (one extra die for every two 
successes), reflecting a supersharp sword, for instance. He could 
also enhance the story-based quality of the item in question to 
make a car with paint that never scratches, a hat that never falls 
far from the mage's hands, and so forth. Such enhancement does 
not make the item itself magickal - just better than it would be 
otherwise. For magickal items, again see Appendix II. 


Part VI: The Digital Web 


Welcome to the front lines of the 
21* century reality wars. Despite its 
origins in technological gadgetry and 
20" century scientific principles, 
the Internet transcends the rigid 
rationalism of its foundations. It has, 
in many ways, failed the Utopian 
dreams of its initial explorers. And yet, 
the Digital Web has indeed opened 
the gates for Reality 2.0. That reality, 
however, seems more rooted in the Internet's effects on 
the material world than in some rarified virtual reality 
beyond Earthly human concerns. 


The Internet of the early 21* century is a globe- 
spanning mass of contradictions. In certain regards, 
it’s a dehumanizing playground where restless people 
distract themselves from the real world with petty 
bickering, pointless games, and near-anonymous echo 
chambers where truths, lies, and everything in between 
blur into overwhelming scads of information. And yet, 
it also opens the doors and windows - for better and 
worse - into the magnificent human drama. People live, 
love, get furious, and find redemption online, in that space 
where physical reality has little bearing on what does and does 
not feel "real". 


Although they're still tools for industrial powers, the net 
and its ports of access - computers, cell phones, reliable Internet 
service, electricity, and so forth - are open to anyone who can get 
those tools to work. In the early '90s, net access was limited to computer 
nerds with expensive gear and impenetrable vocabularies; these days, the web 
is an essential part of life across the globe. Commerce depends upon it. 
Entertainment makes it hum. Social media - perhaps the greatest human 
innovation since the telephone - builds real-time bridges between people of XE 
all cultures, regions, and economic backgrounds. From Cambodian villagers J) 
to Berlin stockbrokers, everyone is more or less equal on the Internet. 


Sowhataboutthe Digital Web, thatvoracious playground of Virtual Adept 
futuriansand Iteration X posthumanists? Now that the Tron-meets-the-Wild-West 
vibe of its early incarnations has given way to the most democratic medium 
since the printing press, what has happened to the Internet's metaphysical 
aspect - the living dimension shaped and accessed by pure information? 


Well, it's grown a bit since then... 


Virtual Crossroads 

As described earlier in Chapter Four, the form and extent of the 
Internet in your Mage chronicle depends a lot on what you want to 
do with your setting as a whole. In a 1990s-style saga, the Digital Web 
retains its Great Race vibe, filled with grids and FREEKS and cyberpunk 
nostalgia. In a more contemporary game, however, the dilemmas shown 
in the sourcebook Digital Web 2.0 have grown in size and complexity. By 
the late '90s, the Web's gatekeepers realized that their elite fantasies of anarchistic 
paradise or enlightened command had been blinked out by the chaos of the human world. In 
the aftermath of that particular wakeup call, they'd also confronted the herds of Sleepers who, for 


better and worse, were beginning to claim the Web as their 
own... and they recognized, in the process, that their pristine 
ideals of light and code were being consumed by the humanity 
they'd thought they could leave behind. 


Beyond that comprehension, the smarter netizens now 
understand thatthe theories of Web consciousness were correct. 
The Internet is alive, is feeding off the life energies of its visitors, 
is growing exponentially and uplifting itself by the square root 
of human knowledge. What apparently began as a rip in time/ 
space ostensibly torn by Alan Turing is now revealing itself to 
be a godlike meta-being whose ultimate nature and agendas 
remain alien - yet achingly familiar, because they come from us. 
Those who understand and ponder such things now wonder 
what the Digital Web wants... what it craves... what it might 
desire in a few years that it hasn't processed yet... and what 
it will do with us if and when humanity really has abdicated 
Meatspace for the world online. 


Meanwhile, the groups that once aspired to leave their 
flesh behind - the transhumanist visionaries of Virtual 
Adepts, Iteration X, and other cyber-topians - have largely 
shifted focus. The old plans of uploading one's self into the 
Internet forever were crashed by the great Whiteout of 1997, 
when Doissetep's implosion proved that the Digital Web was 
not immune to events outside its space. Moreover, the shifting 
focus of life on Earth in the Age of Terror (with or without an 
Avatar Storm and Reckoning) encourages people to look for 
solutions in Meatspace before our entire world blinks out for 
good. More and more often now, the Internet is regarded as a 
tool of revolution, not an escape hatch for the digitized elite. 


Asauthorand socialoracle Erik Davis points outin his book 
Techgnosis: Myth, Magic, and Mysticism in the Age of Information, the 
Internet is the dominion of crossroads trickster gods: Hermes, 
Legba, Coyote, Lucifer. It's both the ivory tower of the empowered 
elite and the back door to that stronghold. A crossways between 
passion and technology, abstract faith and hard mathematics, 
the net provides a techno-temple for sacred profanations. It’s 
the marketplace of dreams and the outhouse of our collective 
imagination - raised with weapons, stocked with data, infused 
with righteous fury, and cemented with pornography. 


Today's Virtual Adepts, then, favor the Trickster Hermes in 
his guise of the enlightened prankster thief. Functioning as his 
Mercurial Elite, they use the Internet - both its mundane form 
and its Digital Web aspect - as a six-dimensional chessboard 
for defeating tyranny and Enlightening humanity... not by 
projecting everyone on Earth online, but by using the power 
of information access to tear down established paradigms and 
open the doors to a techgnostic golden age in which information 
holds the keys to Ascension. 


(For more details about these concepts, see Gnosticism in 
Chapter One, (p. 39), and Techgnosis and Transhumanism 
in Chapter Four, (p. 105.) 


Digital Web Systems 


So what rules do you employ when this ever-expanding 
Web appears in your chronicle? In several regards, that depends 


466  Mağe: The Ascension 20" Anniversary Edition 


upon your Storyteller. The intricate layers and rule systems 
contained in Digital Web 2.0 range far beyond the capacity of 
this chapter... and, in any case, they might be obsolete or altered 
significantly in a new-millennium Mage chronicle. Although 
there is, as of this writing, a sourcebook called Digital Web 3.0 
in the works, the exact contents and rule systems of that book 
have yet to be codified. What, then, should a Storyteller do? 


With a few exceptions (most of which are outlined below), 
the 21* century Digital Web should be simpler to employ and 
closer, in most regards, to Earth than it was in the early days. 
After all, the real-life Internet is easier to use in 2015 than it 
was in 1994, so the cumbersome rules systems presented in the 
original Digital Web sourcebook are clearly obsolete. These 
days, adventures in the Web are more like adventures in material 
reality than they were back then. This era's netizens are more 
native to that environment than the old school Web-spinners 
were, and the Web itself has - for better and worse - become 
more like our world than it used to be. 


Asfarasrulesare concerned, we suggest treating the Digital 
Web as a Realm of the Middle Umbra, subject to Whiteout 
Paradox backlashes and accessed by several forms of astral and 
metaphysical projection, as outlined under Web Access, below. 
Keep things as simple as possible, and treat weird online life 
forms as spirit entities - several of which appear in Appendix 
I. If and when you want to get into the more complex and 
peculiar aspects of the Digital Web, check out Digital Web 
2.0. Although those systems are based in the late '90s, many 
of the specific rules still apply. 


Web Access 


Beyond the obvious web-surfing techniques employed by 
normal people (see the Dramatic Feats chart earlier in this 
chapter), Awakened/ Enlightened people use the following 
methods to project themselves online: 


Sensory Visitation 

The quick and easy way to enter the Web involves simply 
strapping on the right gear and logging in. Any Sleeper can 
do this, although most mortals figure that what they're seeing 
is cool graphics, not actual reality. 


In the old days, sensory visitation required bulky VR gear. 
Now all it demands is a pair of high-end netaccess sunglasses, 
maybe with a pair of sleek VR gloves for tactile contact. Certain 
gaming platforms provide a limited interface for sensory 
visitation through screens, keyboards, and other related devices. 
Sure, this virtual reality looks like state-of-the-art graphics... and 
it is. Still, there's more to that World of Woecraft game than most 
people think. Why else would it be so addictive? 


Story-wise, sensory visitation projects the traveler's visual, 
audio, and - to a limited degree - tactile senses into the Web. 
Through the interface, her mind visits the Web even though 
her physical body remains at home. Although her contact with 
that online world holds certain limitations, she sends a part 
of her consciousness into that space. 


System-wise, sensory visitation requires only the proper 
equipment. Anyone can do it, although few people understand 


Optional Rule: The Data Sphere 


In the Revised sourcebook for the NWO, an optional rule allows certain characters to replace the Correspondence 
Sphere with a related Sphere: Data. Essentially, the character regards the usual Correspondence principles as aspects 
of information. Detailed in Chapter Ten, this option reflects the practice of compiling and correlating data to connect 


things to one another. 


If your group chooses to employ this option, a character using Data instead of the Correspondence Sphere reduces all 
Digital Web-based magick difficulties by -1. Essentially, his approach to data works exceptionally well in a Zone in 
which reality and principles are based upon mathematical information. 


just what it is they're doing. A traveler uses several Mental Traits 
in place of Physical ones: Intelligence instead of Strength and 
Wits instead of Dexterity. Thanks to that uneasy separation 
of body and mind, all rolls for a visiting character receive a 
+1 difficulty penalty; that used to be +2 in the old days, but 
the interface has improved since then, and people are more 
attuned to computer simulations than they were in the ‘90s. 


Astral Immersion 

At the next level of Web access, a traveler immerses herself 
into the Web through a limited form of astral projection. As 
the narrator mentioned in Chapter Four, this trick involves 
projecting your senses - and by extension, your sense of reality 
- into the Web. Thanks to a combination of good gear, a ready 
mind, and the skill to go where the visitor wants to go in the 
way she wants to go there, the average netizen can reach the 
deeper level of digital reality without actually downloading 


herself into the Web. 


In game terms, astral immersion requires good VR 
equipment (by 2015, you could use a high-grade smart phone or 
tablet with correct programs and the right apps), an Intelligence 
* Computer roll (three successes, difficulty 7), and at least two 
dots in the Correspondence Sphere. If your group employs the 
Data Sphere option (detailed in the sidebar and in Chapter 
Ten, pp. 524-525), the roll for that difficulty is 6 instead of 
1. Again, the character uses Intelligence and Wits in place of 
Strength and Dexterity, which gives an edge to agile-minded 
netizens. 


On both game and story levels, the astrally immersed 
character is vulnerable in Meatspace; her entire concentration 
remains focused on the Digital Web environment, leaving her 
body in a deep trance. Smart travelers leave alarms, guards, or 
allies, and other levels of security on their bodies; after all, if 
anything happens to the meat back home, thatvisit may becomea 
one-way trip. On the positive end, they can drop out immediately 
if need be. Although the experience of going from one reality 
to another can be disorienting for a minute or so, the benefits 
of being able to ditch out on a bad situation kinda make up 
for the inconvenience of building a new icon when you return. 


Holistic Immersion 

Maximum access involves projecting one's own self into the 
Digital Web. Downloading the body as information, a high-end 
Trinary computer system disassembles the traveler's physical 


data and jacks it into a different level of reality. Although the 
necessary gear has been refined since the 1990s, this is still 
one hell of a stunt, requiring tremendous processing power 
and Enlightened technology. 


Story-wise, the traveler becomes pure information; this 
requires at least seconds of processing time with the appropriate 
gear. Although rumors speculate that portable HI Devices 
exist, few people are crazy enough to trust their molecules to a 
glorified iPad, so such Devices might or might not exist. 


Rules-wise, holistic immersion requires specially equipped 
Trinary computer Devices, an extended Intelligence + Computer 
roll (five successes, difficulty 7), and a Life 4/ Correspondence 
2/ Forces 2 Effect. A character using the Data Sphere still faces 
difficulty 7, due to the physical nature of this metaphysical 
download process. Each roll reflects 30 seconds of processing 
time. Any interruption during the transfer process disrupts the 
attempt and inflicts an immediate Paradox backlash upon the 
user. (See Chapter Ten.) Downloading yourself into a computer 
is, of course, extremely vulgar in all locations on Earth, so that 
backlash can be very, very nasty. 


A holistically immersed character uses all of his usual Traits 
in all of the usual ways. For better and worse, he is in the Web. 
A traveler could also access the Web holistically by climbing 
into that Zone on the Pattern Web. See the Climbing From 
World to World entry in the Otherworlds section for details. 


Web Traits 


A traveler who enters the Web through either sensory 
visitation or astral immersion uses his Intelligence as Strength 
and his Wits as Dexterity. Stamina is still Stamina. Although 
his icon may take damage, his physical body rarely does. (See 
Digital Damage, below.) 


A holistically immersed character uses his normal Traits. 
Physically present, he enjoys and suffers all effects of his presence. 


Icons 

As with many computer and video games, netizens get 
to design their own small-a avatars to represent their virtual 
selves. Typically called icons (see Mind Matters, Icons, and 
Avatars, Chapter Four, p. 107), these synthetic reflections 
can take whatever form a traveler can devise. Certain areas, 
called Constraint Realms, might limit the types of icon a person 
may wear within that area. In general, though, the netizen can 


Chapter Nine: Dramatic Systems 467 


program an original design, download a predesigned one, or 
select a variety of virtual costumes to reflect her desired persona. 


In story terms, netizens place great importance on clever, 
appealing, and imaginative icons. It’s like dressing for an 
exclusive and very high-end Halloween party - the wrong icon 
marks you as someone unworthy of attention... or worse, worthy 
of the wrong kind of attention. Social interactions in the Web 
can slide up or down the difficulty scale based upon the icon 
you wear. It's alwaysa good idea to keep several options in mind. 


Crafting and Changing Icons 

Gamewise, a player rolls Intelligence + Computer, difficulty 
5, to design an original icon. Wearing a pregenerated one 
requires no roll. Icons start with a base Appearance of 1 and 
an Intimidation of 0. Each success allows the player to add one 
dot of Appearance, Intimidation, or both to her character’s 
icon. Crafting a basic icon requires at least three successes, 
although taking one “off the rack” is more or less instantaneous 
if you don’t much care what it looks like. A really good icon 
might demand five to 10 successes, with each roll reflecting 
five minutes or turns of game time. 


Changing icons is quick and easy if your character has 
preloaded options that were created earlier. Such costume 


468 Mage: The Ascension 20" Anniversary Edition 


q 


changes require one turn and no roll. Really radical or off- 
thecuff transformations, however, demand a Manipulation 
+ Computer roll, difficulty 5; each success allows you to shift 
one dot of Appearance, Intimidation, or both. 


(As the Virus Infection entry points out below, it’s also a 
good idea to outfit your icon with security software. See that 
entry for more details.) 


Asidefrom Appearanceand Intimidation, iconsdo notchangea 
character’s Traits or capabilities. Anyadditionalabilitiesoraccessories 
(fire breathing, wings, etc.) must be created with additional magicks. 
Fortunately, most forms of magick are coincidental within Webspace; 
for details, see Magick in the Web, below. 


Physics and Travel 

Within the Web, space is space and objects are objects. 
Specific features might seem odd by Earthly standards, but 
things that appear to be real in the Web are real in the Web. A 
netizen can lean on a wall, walk down a street, or break a virtual 
chair over another icon's head. Especially given the elaborate 
physics engines involved in modern computer games and CGI, 
the digital world is as real to its inhabitants as our world is to 
us. (With a few sensory quirks, however - see the Flatlands 
entry in Chapter Four, pp. 104-105.) 


et, deos 5, 
uit. — i 


In a Restricted sector, netizens must obey certain protocols or else get booted out of the sector. This effect is immediate 
- it's essentially like grabbing a live power line without protective gear or magick. 


From a game perspective, the boot does not require an attack roll. Although a generous Storyteller might allow a Wits + 
Computer roll (difficulty 9) in order to avoid the boot, the ejection from a Restricted sector is a function of the physics in 
that sector. A person violating a Restriction protocol is acting counter to established natural laws, not the will of someone 
who needs to catch the offender in the act. 


Navigating between Web sectors involves conduits: streets, 
doors, passageways, hot links, etc. Certain Constraint Realms, 
however, might require you to "level up" before they'll let 
you in, which - as in any computer game - involves meeting 
certain conditions to achieve entry. To get around in unknown 
parts of Netspace may require a successful roll of Perception * 
Computer or Intelligence * Etiquette (with a specialty in Web 
Culture), or Area Knowledge (with a specialty in Digital Web). 


Hot Links 


A popular innovation from the late '90s allows travelers 
to access different places via a hot link: a flashing sign or object 
that connects a traveler with another Web sector. In this 
case, the traveler simply touches the hot link and pops into 
the other location. Such links rarely lead back to the original 
location, however, although a savvy traveler can backspace with 
a Correspondence 3 Effect. 


Popping and Backspacing 

“He who controls Correspondence controls the Internet.” That’s 
not entirely true, but a mage with three dots or more in the 
Correspondence Sphere certainly has an edge over visitors who 
do not. In the case of popping and backspacing, the netizen can 
hop back and forth between sectors so long as she has some 
idea where she’s going and doesn’t encounter a Constraint 
that blocks her access to and from that area. 

Popping and backspacing usually employ a pop prog: a 
program that scans for a prospective location, logs that area, and 
focuses the Correspondence 3 Effect. Assuming that he’s going 
back to his previous location within a minute or two of arrival, 
the traveler doesn’t need a pop prog in order to backspace. A 
smart netizen takes a turn to scan for the new location with 
his pop prog, then pops on the following turn. Popping blind 
(that is, without scanning first) raises the usual difficulty by 
+2. If both locations are located in the same sector, the Effect 
remains coincidental; if the traveler pops between sectors, the 
Effect is vulgar. (Again, see Magick in the Web, below.) 


A failed pop lands the traveler in some interesting form 
of hot water: the wrong place, a bad time, in the middle of 
nasty business, and so forth. A botched roll drops the visitor 
into some truly awful place or kicks him off the Web with a 
soft derez, as described under Digital Damage, below. 


If the traveler wants to pop in or out of a Restricted sector 
(an area with tight Constraint protocols), then the difficulty 
rises to 8 or 9, the Effect is vulgar, and a failed or botched roll 
instantly inflicts icon death or a chaos dump upon the traveler. 


Even if the player’s roll succeeds, the character may get booted 
out anyway unless he’s appropriately prepared to suit that 
sector’s particular Constraints. 


Magick in the Web 


The full systems involved with Digital Web magick are too 
elaborate to detail here. Groups that want to explore the range 
of options can check out Digital Web 2.0, pps. 106-111. As 
rough guidelines, however, the Storyteller can assume that most 
forms of magick are coincidental, with the following exceptions: 


* Magick that comes from nowhere. Being technological 
in origin, the Web demands technological origins from 
the so-called magick cast within its dimension. Mages 
who cast spells by will alone are essentially performing 
vulgar magick without witnesses. (See Chapter Ten, 
p. 531-535), for details about the different kinds of 


circumstances.) 


* Spells cast inside a Restricted sector that come from 
outsiders to that area. Netizens set up Restricted sectors to 
keep other people out. Ifand when undesirable visitors show 
up, the spells or Procedures they employ are automatically 
vulgar with witnesses because the folks who established that 
area set the local physics to reject trespassers. A Restricted 
area established by cybershamans, for example, would drop- 
kick a Black Suit’s obvious Procedures. By the same token, 
a shaman dropping by to raise some hell in a Technocratic 
SRVR is in for a nasty surprise... 


* Effects that violate a sector’s Constraint protocols. 
Along thesame lines, C-sectors are configured with reality 
physics that accept certain things while rejecting others. 
A sector built around medieval fantasy, for example, 
would render guns or jetpacks vulgar with witnesses, no 
matter who’s trying to use them. 


* Anymagick cast within the Corrupted web. The localized 
physics are fucked, and so is anyone who tries to mess 
with reality there. Any and all Effects in such areas are 
considered vulgar with witnesses, so just don’t even try. 


* Great Big Magicks™, Large-scale spells throw around a 
lotofenergy. And likea data-hog program on a computer, 
a massive expenditure of energy risks slowing or freezing 
the localized reality. For all its size, the Digital Web Zone 
is still just a few decades old. Unlike the Earth, which 


Chapter Nine: Dramatic Systems 


469 


d 


-1 


4 


/ 


r 
; hil 8 


has had eons to adjust its physics, the Web remains 
structurally unstable; radical power fluctuations disrupt 
its integrity, often leading to a Whiteout. 


* Forces or Prime Effects that score more than five 
successes. For the same reason, Effects that generate a 
lot of power risk triggering a Whiteout. In this case, the 
spell itself may be rolled as if it were coincidental; if the 
player scores five successes or more, however, then each 
success rolled inflicts one Paradox point on the caster. 
(Six successes, then, would inflict six points of Paradox.) 
This rule, however, does not apply in Warzone sectors, 
which have been configured to handle massive surges 
of energy. 


* Effects or gates that jump between sectors or that 
attempt to bridge the Web with other areas of the 
Otherworlds. With the exception of hot links - which 
have been specifically designed to pop folks back and 
forth between locations - an Effect that tries to open new 
passages from one sector to another, or from the Digital 
Web into some other Realm or Umbra, is considered 
vulgar with witnesses... the witness in question being the 


Web itself. 


* Effects thatjump from Netspace to Meatspace... because 
it’s one thing to watch something morph onscreen, and 
another thing entirely to watch your computer turn into 
an asparagus. 


Whiteout: The Paradox Glitch 


Even a reality as flexible as the Digital Web has its limits... 
and when those limits get pushed by too much energy and 
information shifting around at once, the Web crashes. The 
resulting Whiteout can be as innocuous asa localized slowdown 
or as vast as the Great Crash that took the entire net offline in 
97. Anyone with a lick of sense fears a replay of that particular 
incident, so folks online tend to avoid throwing their weight 
around too freely. 


The Lag 

Story-wise, Whiteouts de-rez the offending netizen. Large 
ones crash parts of a sector, and really large ones trash the area 
and everyone in it. Sometimes, if you’re lucky, you can spot an 
impending Whiteout by the lag: a stuttering effect that slows 
and pixelates everyone in the surrounding area. Experienced 
netizens know to log out immediately when lag shows up. If a 
sector starts lagging, a Whiteout’s on the way. 


Rolling the Whiteout 


In game terms, a Whiteout functions like any other Paradox 
backlash. For details, see the Paradox entry in Chapter Ten. 
The scale of a Whiteout, and its effects on the characters 
involved, can be found on the nearby Web Systems chart. The 
associated effects and duration of the Whiteout depend upon 
the Paradox Pool of the person who provoked the backlash. 
The bigger his Pool, the longer the Whiteout. 


Mage: The Ascension 20" Anniversary Edition 


A netizen can invoke the Whiteout when he accumulates 
five Paradox points or more, especially if he accumulates them 
all at once. The Storyteller usually rolls the dice for a backlash 
- one die per point in the Paradox Pool, rolled against a 
difficulty of 6. If the characters have been throwing around a 
lot of Forces or Prime magick, the difficulty may be 4 instead 
of 6. Fortunately, that option doesn’t apply to Warzone sectors, 
which are set up to handle lots of force. 


Thankfully, Paradox doesn’t carry over between Earth 
and the Web unless the offending mage has climbed up into 
the Web from some other area of the Umbra. Going offline 
dumps a mage’s net-based Paradox; he can return a minute or 
so afterward with no ill effects. 


Getting Outta Dodge 


A large-scale Whiteout - that is, one involving more than 
10 points of Paradox - signals its approach with lag. Every 
character nearby, except the one who provoked the backlash, gets 
one action in which to ditch out and avoid the blast. In game 
terms, this involves a roll of Wits * Computer, difficulty 8. 
Success means that a character was able to drop offline in time 
to escape the Whiteout. Failure means that character gets hit 
with half damage as well, and a botch means the character takes 
full damage. If a bystander plans to stay online and ride out 
the backlash, then she takes half damage from the Whiteout. 
The person who triggered it, however, has no such options. 
He's stuck. 


Its worth mentioning that folks who court Whiteout 
aren't terribly popular online. 


Digital Damage 

Despite the transhumanist ideal of leaving one’s imperfect 
body behind, most netizens visit the Digital Web through 
projected minds, not physical forms. So what happens when 
they get hurt or die online? That depends... 


Bashing, Lethal, and Aggravated Damage 

In the Digital Web, combat follows the usual rules. 
Characters still use their Stamina to soak damage. Although 
the settings may be bizarre - adding to or reducing dice pools 
and difficulties - the physics play out in the usual way. The 
primary difference between them comes through in the damage 
suffered through such attacks. 


For sensory or astrally immersed netizens, most injuries 
involve bashing damage. System shock (headaches, nervous 
twitches, fatigue, etc.) may affect the end user back home, but 
with a few exceptions, those injuries clear up quickly. Netizens 
refer to such injuries as eggfrying: your "egg" (head) gets a bit 
fried when you tangle with folks online. 


Holistically immersed people, on the other hand, suffer 
damage as if Netspace were normal space. A punch inflicts 
bashing damage, and a gun deals out lethal damage. Because 
there's no icon to take the punishment, an HI visitor suffers 
the consequences. That's the primary reason folks still prefer 
astral visitation over full-on immersion. 


Aggravated damage is, fortunately, rare. The only 
attacks that inflict such damage involve viruses, chaos 
dumps, Whiteouts, and feedback programs. Among netizens, 
agg damage manifests as burns, internal bleeding, brain 
hemorrhages, and the occasional exploding head. Really 
badly injured netizens tend to die offline, their icons sizzled 
and their bodies suffering aftershocks that leave their meat 
cooked or rotting in front of their computer gear. 


Net Fatigue 

Strenuous activity online leads to fatigue offline. Most 
netizens know all too well the headaches, backaches, joint pain, 
nightmares, fadingvitality, and chronic obesity that plague people 
who spend most of their lives in front of computers. Gamewise, 
such effects are simply left to narration and roleplaying. Although 
aplayer might have to make a Willpower roll after some especially 
traumatic or exhausting experience (failure results in a nasty case 
of fatigue, neurosis, or Quiet), net fatigue is just part of life on 
the Digital Web. It’s been said that the Web feeds on its human 
occupants, and net fatigue may be the end result. 


Virus Infection 

VR VD affects netizens the way herpes infects swingers: 
frequently, pervasively, and with annoying and sometimes 
serious results. One of the more infuriating forms of online 
virus involves the adware infection that causes netizens to 
suddenly talk like commercials at unexpected times. (Make 
a Willpower roll to resist the effects.) Although security 
software for an icon allows a netizen a soak roll against virus 
attacks, most netizens get infected at least once. 


On a more ominous note, hackers, crackers, and 
security programs often pass off deadlier forms of virus. Such 
attacks can follow a traveler back into Meatspace, eroding 
his physical and mental abilities like a physical illness or 
poison. The Environmental Hazards section, earlier in this 
chapter, details the effects of various toxins. The Storyteller 
determines how nasty a particular virus will be. 


Soft De-I2ez 


The most common fate for errant travelers, a soft de- 
rez instantly pops the traveler into some other part of the 
Web... typically a dump site or respawning ground. There, 
the icon and its user wind up stunned for several minutes, 
then get up and start over again. 


In game terms, a softde-rez is typically an automatic effect 
triggered when someone goes where she's notsupposed to be 
or dies in a sector that’s been dedicated to computer games 
so that death is not as dangerous as the more serious forms 
of icon destruction detailed below. The dump automatically 
inflicts one to three levels of bashing damage (no soak roll), 
depending on the severity of the attack. 


For holistically immersed travelers, a soft de-rez inflicts 
between one to four levels of bashing damage but allows for a 
soak roll. The de-rezed character also suffers a penalty of *2 to 
all of her difficulties for an hour or two, thanks to the system 
shock of having her mind and body booted to another part 


Chapter Nine: 


Dramatic Systems 


471 


m " — 


magick necessary. 


Sensory: VR gear; +1 to all difficulties; Intelligence = Strength, Wits = Dexterity; no physical presence in Web. No 


Astral: VR gear; Correspondence 2; Intelligence + Computer, difficulty 7, three successes minimum; Intelligence = 
Strength, Wits = Dexterity; astral presence in Web. Coincidental magick. 


Holistic: Trinary computer; Life 4/ Correspondence 2/ Forces 2; Intelligence + Computer, difficulty 7, five successes 
minimum; normal Traits, full physical presence in Web. Vulgar magick. 


Basic Creation: Intelligence + Computer, difficulty 5. Three successes minimum. 


Changing Icons: Manipulation + Computer, difficulty 5. 


Appearance or Intimidation: One dot added per success. 


Successes Effect 


The responsible mage suffers a hard de-rez. 


Every icon within 50’ suffers a hard de-rez. 


All icons within the sector endure a hard de-rez. The sector itself fuzzes and goes offline, as per 
Duration, below. The offender gets booted to a lost sector (Corrupted Web, Hung Sector, etc.). 


Paradox Pool 


4-6 


11-13 


17-20 


of Netspace. If she happens to be in a Restricted sector when 
she gets de-rezed, then the character also loses one dot from a 
Mental Attribute for the same length of time, to reflect the mental 
fogginess that comes from getting slammed around the Web. 


Hard De-Rez 


Heavier attacks throw the visitor right offline. The icon 
gets blasted out of existence, and the user winds up back in 
his chair, head throbbing and senses boiled. 


472 . Ma$e: The Ascension 20" Anniversary Ed 


Duration 


nir 


One to five minutes. 
One day. 


A month or more. 


Story-wise, a hard de-rez strikes someone who violates a 
major protocol in a Restricted sector, crosses the wrong netizen, 
provokes a minor Whiteout backlash, or sustains enough 
damage to take him to Incapacitated while online. The effect 
boots him out of Netspace and leaves his physical body and 
consciousness scrambled and hurt. 

In game terms, a hard de-rez inflicts two automatic health 
levels in lethal damage. A sensory or astral netizen gets a soak 
roll against this damage (difficulty 7, not the usual 6) because 


of the distance between his icon and his physical form. A 
holistically immersed visitor does not get that roll, however, as 
his body takes the full effects of the dump. 


In either case, the player must also make a Stamina roll, 
difficulty 7, or else lose two points from a Mental Attribute. 
These lost points heal like health levels lost to lethal damage 
and reflect the egg-frying intensity of a hard de-rez. 


Icon Death 
The fate of 
netizens who get V 
-—— 


cacked in sectors 
that haven't been designed 

to protect them from the 
consequences of mortality, 
icon death fries the icon and 
boots the traveler back into 
Meatspace. Story-wise, the 
icon explodes in a shower of 
screaming pyrotechnics or CGI gore 
while the person on the other end wakes up 
back in material reality, probably suffering 
minor burns and a major headache... and 
possiblysufferinga lotworse than that. 


(For the record, a holistically 
immersed traveler who gets killed 
in Netspace dies. That's that.) 


From a rules perspective, icon 
death strikes a character whose 
icon falls below Incapacitated or 
who’s caught in a major Whiteout 
backlash. The Storyteller calls for 
a Stamina roll, difficulty 7. If the 
player succeeds, the traveler gets 
knocked unconscious by the shock; 
waking up several minutes later, 
she'll be hallucinating her way through 
a crushing headache. Any injuries the icon took in Netspace 
manifest in Meatspace as bashing damage, although each success 
on the Stamina roll reduces that damage by one health level. 
The player can heal the remaining damage by spending one 
Willpower point per health level lost. Even then, however, 
the character remains haunted and scrambled for some time 
afterward; in game terms, she suffers a penalty of +3 to all 
difficulties for a day or two after the dump. 


If that roll fails, the consequences become more severe. 
In this case, the damage is lethal and the character falls into 
a coma. A botched roll inflicts aggravated damage, frying the 
character in her chair; if by some miracle she survives, she’s 
still in a coma and will suffer permanent impairment if she 
ever wakes up again. 


- niti E 


A character who dies in a Restricted sector endures a 
profound mental breakdown. Even if the roll succeeds, that 
character loses two dots from each Mental Attribute, which 
heal back as if they were health levels of aggravated damage. If 
the Stamina roll fails, then that character undergoes... 


The Chaos Dump E J, 
The dread of every netizen alive, a chaos dump blasts both 
the icon and its user’s consciousness into fractals. The meat and 
the mind remain connected through the process, which results — — 
in an awful kind of Internet oblivion. An Arete roll (difficulty 
8) sends the traveler’s consciousness into an immediate Quiet, 
from which he may eventually escape. Success inflicts 
aggravated damage on the body as above. Failure 
or a botch on this roll cooks the mage from the 
inside out... the awful fate of many netizens on 
the day of the Great Whiteout. From that fate, 
no resurrection is possible. | 


D 
E~ 


Fortunately, chaos dumps are rare - | 
typically the result of a huge Paradox backlash 
in the web. Among netizens, deliberately — 1 
inflicting a chaos dump on someone is like E 
using nerve gas on a crowded 


subway - theunforgivable 

act of someone too far gone for 
salvation. This is not to say, of course, 
that people don't do such things; those 
who do, however, are hated and hunted 
by almost everyone. 


The Digital Web 
and the Avatar Storm 


To the great relief of its netizens, the Digital Web appears 
to be immune from the effects of the Avatar Storm. Whereas 
other Otherworldly Realms have been scattered, cut off, or 
otherwise rendered unreachable by that Dimensional Anomaly, 
Netspace remains a haven for would-be world-builders and 
posthuman pioneers. 


3 


And if the Storm never happened? In that case, the Digital 
Web mirrors both the IT revolution and the Otherworldly 
aspirations of people who have neither the Arts nor the 
inclinations to take the more *ahem* Traditional path to 
the Worlds Beyond. Unlike the weird Three Worlds and the 
uncertain Horizon Realms, the Web reflects the dynamic 
fusion of imagination and technology - a living embodiment 
of new-millennial Ascension. 


Chapter Nine: Dramatic Systems 473 


Part VIE: The Otherworlds 


Beyond this world, an adventurous mage can 
find infinite numbers more. Although these 
Otherworlds are rarely easy to find or explore - 
especially in the age of the Avatar Storm, which 
might or might not still make passage hazardous 
- a courageous traveler can unlock heavens, hells, 
dream worlds, and that ever-growing Digital Web. 


Chapter Four goes into extensive details about 
these many layers, Realms, Zones, and so forth. 
Whether or not your Mage chronicle reaches 
into these Otherworlds depends upon the focus ofthe chronicle 
and the plans of your Storyteller. Although the earlier editions 
of Mage dealt extensively with Horizon Realms and off-planet 
excursions, the later books concentrated more on adventures 
in the material world. Either option works, and both of them 
feature a wide range of possibilities. 


As detailed throughout Chapter Four, the various 
Otherworldly Realms have different paths ofaccess. A mage can turn 
into spirit-stuff, project her consciousness into the Astral Reaches, 
experience a “little death” and pass into the Shadowlands, or step 
through a portal and into a distant Realm while sidestepping the 
distance (and possibly the Avatar Storm) entirely. 


With orwithoutan “avatar storm,” the Otherworlds remain 
forbidding, unpredictable territory. Even their most familiar 
aspect - the Penumbra that reflects the spiritual nature of the 
human world - is changeable and strange, filled with eerie 
sights and vivid sensations. From a Storyteller's perspective, 
each excursion past the Gauntlet should be different - an 
invitation to the weirdest corners of your imagination. For all 
the rule systems presented below, the most vital rule regarding 
the Otherworlds is that there are no hard-and-fast rules about 
the Otherworlds. These guidelines merely lay a foundation for 
your own interpretation of What Lies Beyond. 


Means of Access 


Entering the Otherworlds involves stepping outside of 
everyday reality... or whatever passes for everyday reality to a 
mage... and literally entering a new state of being. With a few 
exceptions, a physical being does not enter the Umbra without 
undergoing some sort of transformation - projecting an astral 


self into the High Umbra, becoming spirit stuff for the Middle 
Umbra, and dying in order to become a sort of ghost for the 
Low Umbra. A physical person might step through a portal 
and enter a Horizon Realm, but to walk through the three 
Umbrae, a mortal has to become something beyond mortality. 


Theoretically, a person retains her material form when 
she walks into the spirit world through a Shallowing. Thing is, 
as certain mages claim, the Heisenberg Uncertainty Principle 
may be at work in such situations: is that person still material 
because she thinks of herself as material, or is she transformed 
into spirit matter, simply believing she's still material while 
the rest of Creation views her as a spirit? Snarky folks refer to 
this as the Schróndinger's mage theory: a mental puzzle with no 
practical utility beyond its ability to provoke arguments. For all 
game-system purposes, the traveler remains material, though 
she can think of herself as whatever she wants to be. 


Peeling the Onion 


Unless it involves a direct portal into a Realm, every journey 
through the Otherworlds works like peeling an onion from the 
inside out. The traveler begins at the core (the material world), 
perceives the bigger picture (the Periphery), steps through first layer 
(the Gauntlet) and into the next layer (the Penumbra). From there, 
she travels outward, following omens and instincts into other layers 
(Realms), the skin of the onion (the Horizon), and freedom beyond 
that. If she ever makes it beyond the first Horizon, there’s said to be 
another onewaiting out there in thestars. The question as towhether 
that second true Horizon is the true skin of the onion or the skin 
of whoever's peeling that onion is a puzzle best left to philosophers. 


The Periphery 

As depicted in Chapter Four, the Periphery is less a place 
than a perception. The visitor perceives the deeper levels of 
existence through the Vidare - the perspective - that he expects 
to see. In game terms, this heightened perception involves 
either the Awareness Talent (described in Chapter Six), or 
the first dot in any Sphere (described in the Sphere entries of 
Chapter Ten). Essentially, these abilities reveal the shadows 
of the Otherworlds, although those perceptions don't actually 
involve travel as such into those realms. 


After the Storm? 


In the Reckoning metaplot, the Avatar Storm shook things up beyond the Gauntlet. Realms were displaced, transformed, 
and destroyed; paths between the worlds got switched, scrambled, and obliterated. Even the most familiar travelers found 
themselves lost in the Otherworlds. Although the decade and a half since those events might have settled things back to 


their old configurations (as detailed in Beyond the Barriers: The Book of Worlds), it might instead have established 
an entirely new order... or, more fittingly, a general lack of predictable order (as depicted in The Infinite Tapestry). If 
the Storm never happened, things may be very much as they had been back in the old days; then again, the Otherworlds 
are ephemeral, mysterious, and unbound by conventional excuses for human logic. Even without an Avatar Storm, the 
various Realms and pathways can change between visits... even change during visits. May the traveler beware! 


474 . Ma$e: The Ascension 20" Anniversary Edition 


The Gauntlet 


Unless your characters step through a portal, discover a 
Shallowing, or are among the very few people who know how 
to find and employ the Paths of the Wyck, they’ll need to pass 
through the Gauntlet - that metaphysical barrier that separates 
the physical and spiritual worlds. True, a perceptive person can 
sense the Periphery without stepping through the Gauntlet, 
getting feelings or catching glimpses of the Worlds Beyond. 
To actually enter those Worlds, however, your characters must 
penetrate the Gauntlet. And in our modern era, that ain't easy. 


Rules-wise, you need to roll a certain number of successes 
in order to penetrate the Gauntlet by any method. Unless your 
mage's Arete is outrageously high, thatalso requires an extended 
roll. Time-wise, that roll reflects a certain period of time in 
which the character focuses on getting through the Gauntlet 
- anywhere from a few seconds to a minute or more per roll. 
(Storyteller's option, based upon circumstances.) Botching at 
any point while making those rolls has awful consequences; 
the mage gets stuck helplessly in between worlds, and needs 
another party with Gauntlet-crossing skills to push or pull him 
through to the other side. If the Avatar Storm's still in effect, 
then getting stuck can be excruciating and possibly fatal... (See 
the nearby sidebar, Optional Rules: The Avatar Storm.) 


Playing Out the Crossing 


The game systems for crossing over and moving around can 
be found on the Traveling the Otherworlds charts, (p. 484). 


In story terms, this short journey involves some sort of 
ritual or process: focusing ona mirror, drumming and chanting, 
activating a trans-dimensional flux-capacitor, or whatever else 
suits the mage’s practice and beliefs. While the character 
concentrates on passing through, the player rolls dice against the 
listed difficulty until the character phases through and winds up 
on the other side. Whether or not the character has to face the 
dreaded Avatar Storm is up to your Storyteller. Even without 
the Storm, however, the process can feel quite disconcerting. 


The way a given character perceives his passage through 
the Gauntlet probably depends a bit upon the character and a 
lotupon the location and circumstances. An Akashic Brother 
meditating in a harmonious grove might feel a misty fog slide 
over him and then subside, leaving him in the Otherworlds. 
A dimension-hoppingscientist could hear the turbines on her 
trans-dimensional flux-capacitor roar as a blinding light rises, 
fills the room, and explodes into a brilliant flash, shattering 
the dimensional wall. A High Ritual Magus could hear the 
music ofthe spheres as he cuts complex designs in the air with 
his thrice-consecrated blade; meanwhile, a desperate warrior 
in the combat zone cuts runes into the dirt, bathes them in 
her own blood, and prays to Odin or Sif as the distant blare 
of horns alerts her to the crumbling of that barrier between 
worlds. Both the player and the Storyteller should have fun 
describing the crossing of that Gauntlet. And given the odd 
nature of the Otherworlds, it might never happen the same 
way twice. 


Whatever the method and location involved might be, 
a Gauntlet passage should reflect the ease or challenge of 


getting across. Penetrating the thick Gauntlet ofa high-tech lab 
should feel different than sliding through the thin Gauntlet of 
a windswept mountain peak. From a Storyteller perspective, 
make that crossing as dramatic as possible... eerie, calming, 
terrifying, even sensual, depending on who's traveling where, 
how they're doing it, and under what sorts of circumstances 
they re traveling. Crossing the Gauntlet, ideally, should be more 
than just a series of dice rolls until you hit the target numbers. 
Even for people who spend lots of time in the Otherworlds, 
crossing between realities ought to be a memorable experience. 


Stepping Sideways 

The simplest way to travel to the Otherworlds, other 
than a portal, has traditionally involved stepping sideways. 
Whether or not that's still simple depends upon whether or 
not the Avatar Storm occurred. As we've seen elsewhere in this 
book, that Revised-era cataclysm is optional in your chronicle. 
Perhaps it happened in 1999 and is still going full force today. 
Maybe it happened but has since subsided, either to a lesser 
storm (see the sidebar) or to the relative calm of an earlier era. 
Your Storyteller could decide that it never happened at all and 
simply assume that stepping sideways is still as easy as it was 
in the mid-'90s. As any Umbral traveler can tell you, though, 
that trip was rarely as easy as it might appear... 


Becoming Ephemera 


To start with, a mage who steps sideways must use a Spirit 
3 Effect to step sideways, employ Spirit 4 to open a gateway 
in the Gauntlet, or travel with someone else who opens that 
gateway for him. Certain powerful spirits can bring a mortal 
over to their side as well. Whichever way, the traveler becomes 
ephemera: the material of the spirit worlds. He might feel like 
flesh and blood, but he has become like the spirits around him. 


In game terms, there’s no change between matter and 
ephemera. The character still uses all of his Traits the same 
way on both sides of the Gauntlet. Once he’s in the spirit 
world, however, that traveler cannot affect the physical world 
without using Spirit Sphere magick to reach the other side. He 
may, however, see and address spirits as if they were flesh and 
bone - something he can’t do when he’s in the material world. 
Even so, he needs at least two dots in the Spirit Sphere before 
he can actually touch them, and Life and Matter magick have 
no effect on spirits at all. (For details, see Part VIII: Umbral 
Spirit Entities.) 

When the traveler crosses back to the mortal world again, 
the process works in reverse; he becomes material flesh again. 
On both sides of that crossing, the experience can feel pretty 
weird - after all, the traveler's exchanging one kind of form 
for another. (See Disconnection, below.) 


Possessions 

Traditionally, a person can step sideways carrying whatever 
they happen to be wearing at the time. Also traditionally, certain 
things just won’t make that passage, or they malfunction if they 
arrive at all. High-tech materials and gadgets, sophisticated 
non-mechanical machines (like computers and so on), and 


Chapter Nine: Dramatic Systems 475 


~~ eo 


TN E 


Tr | 


EL Pal 


instruments that depend upon complex material physics to 
work (like guns or explosives) tend to be iffy, especially in the 
Middle Umbra's Spirit Wilds, where the principles of capital-N 
Nature take precedence over the vanities of men. 


Wonders, however, work just fine. Any item with an 
effective Arete (see The Toybox in Appendix II) functions in 
the Umbra, although high-tech Devices might fail in certain 
specific areas of the Otherworlds that emphasize the essence 
of primal nature. Thus, a Technocrat's Alanson Hardsuit 
might function in places where an Uzi jams, but it could still 
fail - or entirely bar the Technocrat from entry - in places like 
the Hollow Earth. 


Benefits and Limits 

Stepping sideways involves getting your feet dirty, so to 
speak. Unlike the cleaner disembodied astral traveler, a mage 
who steps bodily through the Gauntlet becomes a part of the 
Otherworlds when he enters. As a result, he can visit the Middle- 
Umbra Spirit Wilds, where some sort of physical presence is 
essential... a featastral travelers cannot match unless they spin a 
body out of Quintessence (see below). Sadly, stepping sideways 
is vulgar magick; the person fades away into nothingness, and 
that's clearly not a natural thing! 


Beyond the effects noted above, a character who steps 
sideways is essentially himself. He cannot fly unless he uses 
magick to do so, walks to get wherever he's going, and can use 
whichever items he holds in his possession, assuming they 
still work where he goes. A traveler who employs astral travel, 


476 Mage: The Ascension 20" Anniversary Edition 


on the other hand, has some very different capabilities, both 
pro and con... 


Astral Travel 

For astral travel, a person enters a deep trance, meditates 
her consciousness outside of her body, and projects that astral 
self toward her destination. Normally, this requires Mind 4 or 
5, although certain Night-Folk and talented Sleepers can do it 
too. As the physical body remains behind in a trance, the astral 
body flies off, attached to that body by the umbilicus argentus, 
or silver cord, that unites both body and consciousness. 


An astral character can travel into the Periphery, journey 
through the High Umbra, or skim along through the material 
world if she chooses not to go into the Umbra at all. Because 
she's consciousness, not a physical body, the astral voyager 
can fly as well as walk. In either case, she cannot affect, or 
be affected, by physical beings - only by spirits or other astral 
entities (mummies, ghosts, astral travelers, etc.). For the cost 
of a Willpower point, she can manifest in the material world 
for one turn as a hazy vision of her idealized self. Even then, 
however, she can't interact with the material world except by 
using magick. 

It's worth mentioning that technomancers, even 
Technocrats, can still employ astral travel. To them, it's not 
mystical - it's a science, a technology of the mind in which one's 
consciousness steps beyond this dimension and enters another 
one. Although such feats are beyond the reach of accepted 
Sleeper science (for now, at least), Enlightened scientists 


understand that the mind transcends the body. Though the 
concept of a soul might seem absurd, the techniques of astral 
travel are perfectly acceptable to technicians of the mind. 


Astral Traits 


In game terms, a character who’s traveling astrally uses her 
Mental and Social Traits as her Physical ones. Manipulation 
becomes Strength, Wits becomes Dexterity, and Intelligence 
becomes Stamina. Willpower takes the place of health levels, and 
so when an astral character suffers damage, she loses Willpower 
points instead of health. Intelligence can soak bashing and 
lethal damage but not aggravated damage, which attacks the 
mage on an essential level. If an astral character loses all of her 
Willpower, her silver cord snaps and she winds up disconnected 
from her physical body. Unless she can catch the cord and ride 
it back home soon, she'll be lost. (See Going Adrift, below.) 


Possessions 

Normally, an astral traveler cannot bring material 
possessions along with her. The default astral form is naked, 
although the traveler can will imaginary clothing around 
herself by spending a Willpower point to do so. (That’s not 
often a good idea, however; in astral travel, you'll want all the 
Willpower you can get!) 

Certain objects can follow the astral form if they have been 
metaphysically bound to the mage by a ritual and a Prime 2 Effect. 
In that case, the player spends a Willpower point and then rolls 
her Arete, striving to get at least five successes. À successfully 
bonded object can travel into the astral realms as well, although 
if it depends upon complex physics to function (like a gun or 
computer), it probably won't work. Theoretically, it's impossible 
to do this with objects that have more mass than the mage herself. 
The existence of certain astral devices, however - like ghost 
trains and phantom cars - makes that theory rather debatable. 


At the Storyteller's option, certain high-level Wonders - 
those with an effective Arete of 5 or higher - may have their 
own form of astral substance. In that case, a traveling mage 
might be able to take the Wonder with her. An allied spirit or 
familiar can accompany the astral traveler too, if the character 
has the appropriate Background Trait. (See Chapter Six.) 
Otherwise, an astral traveler is on her own. 


The Astral Sojourn's Body of Light 

Simple astral travel - the type you get from using Mind 
4 alone - cannot push outside the High Umbra, Periphery, 
or material world. To go further, the traveler must employ the 
advanced Astral Sojourn ritual (Mind 4 or 5/ Spirit 3/ Prime 2). 


This high-level act of magick allows a traveler to project her 
astral form into any layer of the "living" Otherworlds. Entering 
a deep and helpless trance, the mage weaves a metaphysical 
body of light for herself out of Prime energy, duplicating her 
Earthly body out of ephemera and Quintessential force. Once 
that body is completed, the traveler can use it to step sideways, 
carrying the traveler's consciousness with it. 


In this case, the astral body has its usual Physical, Social, 
and Mental Attributes, as well as its usual health levels. If that 


body should lose all of its health levels, however, the body 
disintegrates and the consciousness finds herself adrift in the 
Umbra... not an especially pleasant fate. 


'The Silver Cord 


The mystic umbilicus argentus that connects an astral traveler 
to her physical form is as strong as that traveler's Enlightened 
Will. To snap it, an attacker has to break the traveler's Will, 
either by reducing her to zero Willpower or by proving himself 
superior through raw metaphysical force. 


Snappingasilver cord is difficult. In game terms, it requires 
Mind 5 and a direct psychic attack aimed at disconnecting 
body and mind. In a resisted roll, the attacker tries to roll more 
successes than the target, with the target's Willpower as the 
difficulty of both rolls. Obviously, a strong-willed person can 
break that connection more easily on a weaker-willed opponent 
than he could with an opponent whose Willpower is equal to, 
or greater than, his own. 


A traveler whose astral cord gets snapped still has an 
astral form. By spending a Willpower point, she can grab onto 
that fleeting silver cord and ride it back to her physical body. 
Otherwise, she winds up disconnected... and adrift. 


Going Adrift, Astral Beacons, and Spirit Allies 

An astral traveler who dies has a short time to find her way 
back to her body before the consciousness drifts and the body 
decays. In game terms, she has up to one week for each point 
in her permanent Willpower; after that, her consciousness 
dissipates into the High Umbra and is essentially gone forever. 


To find her way back to her body, the player for that drifting 
mage must make a successful Wits * Occult roll, difficulty 9. 
Each roll reflects six hours of time spent searching. Various 
obstacles - Umbrood jailers, astral storms, and so forth - can 
interfere with this search, although because the consciousness 
has no body left to attack, she's essentially drifting around the 
Otherworlds. 


To attract the attention of a drifting traveler, an ally back in 
the material world can set up an Astral Beacon spell in order to 
draw her back toward her body. Game-wise, this requires a Mind 
2/ Prime 2 Effect. The Beacon lasts one day per success, and it 
gives the lost traveler the ability to roll Perception * Occult (or 
Wits * Meditation, Perception * Meditation, or Wits * Occult, 
whichever is best) to find her way home. That roll's difficulty 
is 9, minus the successes rolled by the ally; an ally's roll of four 
successes, for instance, would give the traveler's rolla difficulty of 5. 


If the traveler has the Totem or Familiar Background, then 
that entity can try to lead her home. In this case, the traveler rolls 
Perception * the appropriate Background Trait, with a difficulty 
of9 minus the Background's rating (Totem 3, for instance, would 
make the difficulty 6). In all cases, the journey of a lost astral 
soul back to her physical body should involve vivid narration 
and roleplaying that deal with the cosmic side of Mage and an 
Awakened person's identity. (See Seekings, Chapter Seven.) 


A drifting soul with sufficient magick can try to possess a 
different body. In this case, the traveler needs to use a Mind 4 
Effectand overcome the target’s Willpower. (See the Mind Sphere 


477 


Chapter Nine: Dramatic Systems 


eo 


Ne Nos 7^: 


oe ee 


description in Chapter Ten.) If that body lives on the other side 
of the Gauntlet from the drifting traveler, then she'll need to be 
able to see him (Spirit 2) before she'll be able to possess his form. 


The Meat 


Unless she uses Correspondence 2 to retain connection 
to the meat back home, an astrally projected traveler cannot 
sense the body she has left behind. Hopefully, she's stashed 
it in a safe, secure location, protected by allies, wards, locked 
doors, and so forth. While the traveler's away, the physical body 
remains vulnerable to pretty much everything. It continues to 
live in a biological sense but is effectively brain dead. If the 
astral consciousness gets lost, the body remains in a coma... 
and, unless there's someone around to take care of it, eventually 
dies of thirst. (For rules, see Starvation and Thirst in the 
Environmental Hazards section, pp. 435-436). 


Benefits and Limits 

In many respects, astral travel remains an ideal method of 
exploration. Immune to the Avatar Storm, that astral self can 
fly from the physical world to the Penumbra, the Vulgate, and 
the High Astral Realms. A sufficiently skilled traveler (Mind 5) 
can even leap beyond the Horizon and venture into the Deep 
Umbra. Astral travel provides the natural way of entering the 
Maya and the primary method of entering the Digital Web. 
Unlike stepping sideways, astral travel is usually coincidental, 
too. Unless the traveler crafts a body of light, the only thing a 
witness would see is the traveler meditating in a deep trance. 
Still, such journeys have inherent hazards and limitations. 


The hazards have been outlined above. As far as limits go, 
an astral traveler cannot explore the Middle Umbra beyond the 
Penumbra layer unless she employs the Astral Sojourn method 
and creates a body for herself from Quintessence. She can't go 
into the Low Umbra at all unless she has, in a sense, died. And 
although she may pass through a portal and enter a Horizon 
Realm in astral form, she's confined to the usual limits she 
would have in the material world. 


On a meta level, astral travel breaks the connection of that 
person as a united self. The mind and body clearly become 
separate entities during astral flight, and that fact can mess with 
the traveler’s head when she comes back to herself in the material 
world. In some regards, this cultivates the ideal of unattachment 
that certain mages and philosophers prize; on the other hand, 
it can leave a person feeling disassociated and remote. Having 
disconnected her body and her mind (possibly her soul as well) 
from one another, that traveler may face existential questions 
that have no easy answers, in this world or any other. 


The Agama Sojourn 

And then there’s the place you have to be literally dying to 
get into. As mentioned elsewhere, a traveler to the Low Umbra 
must be dying or dead in some fashion in order to enter the 
Shadowlands. Even then, depending on the metaphysical 
situation, there might not be much to see there at all. Although 
it’s likely that the Shadowlands have been rebuilt over the last 
13 years even if there had been a titanic Maelstrom, living 


Mage: The Ascension 20" Anniversary Edition 


mages might still be forbidden from entering the Dead Realms 
these days. Given the business with that spirit-nuke, it would 
certainly make sense to have the living barred. 


Living Death 

A mage employing the Agama Sojourn ritual (assuming it 
still works) must pass through the Gauntlet using a combination 
of Entropy 4/ Spirit 3/ Life 2 for her own passage - the Agama 
Re rite - or Entropy 4/ Spirit 4/ Life 3 in order to send someone 
else through and keep them tethered to the living world enough 
to return - the Agama Te rite. Considering that the Sojourn is a 
time-honored method of initiating Chakravanti mages (and, under 
other names, initiates from several shamanic cultural traditions as 
well), we recommend that Storytellers still allow the short, sacred 
initiatory experience to exist even iflonger trips areno longer possible. 


An Agama Sojourn essentially divides the mage’s soul 
between the worlds of the living and the dead, keeping her body 
just alive enough for a return trip to material reality. Although 
there’s no silver cord connecting the two aspects of the traveler’s 
being (as there is in astral travel), the journeying character 
simultaneously becomes ghostly ephemera in the Shadowlands 
and a clinically dead (though not fully dead) body in the material 
world. As mentioned in Chapter Four, it’s an extremely perilous 
trip, one many travelers can’t return from, That edge of danger 
remains a vital part of the Sojourn’s importance. If it was easy, 
after all, then it wouldn’t be the transformative event that it is. 


Agama Traits 

That spiritual body - often referred to as the corpus - has 
10 health levels and sometimes manifests features from the 
mage's Avatar as well as her physical self. Thus, a Sojourning 
mage might appear as a combination of her familiar physical 
person and her metaphysical Awakened Self... which can be 
a rather revealing and enlightening, if terrifying, experience. 


LifeSphere magick means nothingto a corpus, as the traveler's 
life remains behind in her physical form. If she suffers damage in 
that form, then, only Spirit 3 magick can heal it. True ghosts can 
sense that traveler's spark of life with a Perception * Awareness roll 
(or, for Umbroodspiritbeings, a Gnosis roll), difficulty 6. Thatspark 
makes the traveler extremely attractive for all the wrong reasons. 
Certain ghosts will want to strike bargains with the traveler, some 
will try to eat or corrupt her spirit, and some will try to destroy her 
simply for being what they can never be again: alive. 


Unlike living things, a ghost or corpus suffers no wound 
penalties; after all, she's gotno physical body, and thus cannot be 
physically crippled. A traveler who loses all of her corpus health 
levels, however, reaps two awful consequences: a permanent 
point of Jhor (death Resonance - see Chapter Ten, pp. 560- 
561), and a trip into a Harrowing. 


The Harrowing 

Essentially an Underworld Seeking, a Harrowing brings up the 
traveler's worst fears and then forces her through a maze of horrors 
drawn from her own psyche. Split into a helpless Avatarself (robbed 
of most, if not all, of its most powerful features) and a naked victim 
self, the traveler confronts the embodiments of her innermost 


As revealed in previous chapters, metaphysical concussions from 1999 turn the passage between worlds into a danger 
zone for mages. The shredded Avatars of dead souls rip through the Patterns of human travelers. Although spirits and 
shapechanging monsters can apparently pass through the Gauntlet without trouble, mages who step sideways suffer 
devastating harm... and the more powerful the mage, the more severe that harm can be! 


Does the Avatar Storm still exist, has it since subsided, or did it ever happen to begin with? That's your call. If you choose 
to keep the Storm in force, however, the following optional rules apply: 


1ys Into tne mbra, ter 


xr bashing instead. In either case, that damage is automatic unless the traveler has someho 


* Bodily Protection: Magickal, and perhaps mundane, methods of protection from aggravated damage might help a 
traveler soak the damage from the Avatar Storm. Life Sphere magick, technomagickally enhanced armor, protection 
conferred by Wonders, and so forth can all add to a character's soak roll. Because the damage is metaphysical, 
however, it's a Storyteller’s call as to whether or not normal armor will protect someone. Can Kevlar deflect raging 
soul-shards, or will they go straight through it? The answer depends on each Storyteller's judgment. 


Adi varpea or orrel 


* Wonder Damage: Enchanted Wonder items take damage as well. In this case, roll the Arete of the object crossing 
the Gauntlet and apply damage as above. If that object takes more than double the object's Arete, that Wonder gets 
destroyed by the Storm. A spirit bound into a Fetish might escape both the Storm and the Fetish unharmed... but if that 
spirit had been bound into the fetish unwillingly, the mage might have a whole new problem on his hands... 


For details about Wonders, see the Background of that name in Chapter Six and The Toybox in Appendix II. 


IMMUNITIES: oç 


ot 


* Astral Immunity: Travelers who employ Mind 4 or 5 to project their astral consciousness may bypass the Avatar 
Storm. This method, however, can access only the High Umbra — not Horizon Realms or the Middle and Low levels. 
Such travelers also have a silver cord connecting them to their Earthly bodies; if that cord gets damaged, the traveler 
is probably lost. (See the Astral Travel entry for details.) 


stan 


Shield of the Soul: Mages with the Familiar or Totem Backgrounds may ask their companion spirits for a favor... 
the favor of taking them across the Storm without harm. In this case, the mage creates what's called the Shield of the 
Soul (a Prime 3/ Spirit 2 spell) between herself and her allied spirit. Successfully cast, this Shield disguises the mage’s 
spirit within the mantle of her spirit friend. With that Shield in place, the mage suffers damage only from her Paradox 
Trait, not from her Arete. Naturally, the spirit in question must be favorably disposed toward the mage on both ends 
of that journey; if not, the results could be rather painful. 


Chapfer Nine: Dramatic Systems 


479 


Po. or 


Optional Rules: The Avatar Storm (Continued) 


* Stormwarden: A rare but precious birthright, the Stormwarden Merit — described in Appendix II — reflects a 


total immunity to the Avatar Storm’s effects. See that entry for details. 


Peeling of the Soul: A botched roll while a mage steps sideways through the Gauntlet locks that mage in place — 
half in the material world, half in the raging Avatar Storm. That traveler remains stuck until some other party pulls him 
through to one side or the other. Each turn that he remains in this netherspace after the initial botch, the winds peel one 
point of Avatar away from his Avatar Background Trait. If he loses every point in his Avatar Background, plus one, 
then he's effectively Gilguled until and unless he finds a way to heal his spirit. The mage might be able to undergo a 
Seeking to retrieve the missing bits of his soul, but until then, he remains spiritually crippled from the Storm. 


Quiet: A mage who takes more than four health levels in damage from the Avatar Storm might have to make a 
Willpower roll or fall into a Quiet from the trauma. That roll’s difficulty would be 3 + the amount of damage the mage 
suffered from the Storm. If he drops to Incapacitated, the Quiet is automatic — a refuge from the horrific torment of his 
soul. For details, see Quiet in Chapter Ten (pp. 554-561). 


Roving Storms 


Even if the worst of the Avatar Storm has passed into troubled memory, occasional Roving Storms roll through the 
Realms at various inconvenient times. In such moments, a roiling cloud of shrieking voices and tortured faces appears in 
the distance, flowing across the landscape and rearranging things into chaotic and often terrifying forms. For obvious 
reasons, anyone and everyone nearby should run for cover or suffer the consequences. 


The full effects of getting caught out in a Roving Storm are left to the Storyteller’s twisted imagination, but they should 
include the usual type of damage (perhaps lowered to lethal damage, for survivability’s sake), the potential for Quiet, 
and the certain annihilation of familiar landmarks in the Realm. An awful embodiment of metaphysical decay, the Avatar 
Storm — in all of its guises - upends expectations and tears predictability apart. 


nightmares, comprised of a tormentor self that comes from the 
mage's repressed elements. Everything she fears, hates, or tries not to 
recognize about herself becomes part of the Harrowing. Through the 
course of this timeless torture, she’s driven away from Ascension and 
towards despair. Unless she drags up the most determined and yet 
compassionate aspects of herself, that nightmare may consume her. 


System-wise, a Harrowing becomes a Seeking of the most 
intense kind thatyour troupe and boundaries allow. (See Seekings 
and Triggers, Limits, and Boundaries, both in Chapter Seven.) 
Even if only one mage character’s involved, other players might 
take the roles of spectral tormentors in that ordeal. If the character 
can hold true to her vision of integrity and Ascension, then both 
the Harrowing and the Agama Sojourn end with the traveler back 
in her living body. If she falters or fails, the player should roll 
Willpower, difficulty 9. A successful roll brings her back to her 
body in a state of deep panic or despair, whereas failure brings 
her back with one fewer point of Arete (after all, she failed an 
important test), an additional point of Jhor, and possibly other 
lingering effects of that ordeal. (See Flaws in Appendix IL) A 
botched roll at this point turns the character into an Oblivion- 
consumed monster - a Nephandus, possibly, or a demon-ghost 
spectre. Such a fate, however, should be inflicted only on a 
character whose soul is already in doubt and whose player 
seems ready to handle either losing her mage or playing out the 
corruption. One bad die roll should not annihilate a character. 


Possessions 


A mage on an Agama Sojourn brings nothing with her. 
Whether or notthis includes clothing isa Storyteller call, although 


480 Mage: The Ascension 20" Anniversary Edition 


ghosts do tend to manifest wearing either the clothes they died 
in or else some other significant garb, like a wedding dress or 
military uniform. In any case, those clothes are projections of the 
person’s selfimage, not material items. They don’t have useful 
things in the pockets unless those items have been imbued with 
Entropic energies from an Entropy 3 Effect and then bound to the 
mage with a Prime 2 ritual as in the Astral Travel entry, above. 


Agama Travel Beyond the Onderworld 

Although few mages can accomplish this feat, it is possible 
for an Agama voyager to move from the Low Umbra to the other 
layers. Doing so requires either powerful magick (Entropy 5/ 
Spirit 5, plus the usual Agama requirements) that can open a 
gateway between the Shadowlands and the Middle Umbra, or 
a high-end astral projection (Entropy 5/ Mind 5, plus the usual 
Agama requirements) that can take the dead consciousness up 
out of the Shadowlands and raise it into the Vulgate region 


of the High Umbra. 


Note that only an Agama Sojourn voyager can cross between 
the Low Umbra and other layers. A Middle Umbra traveler or 
High Umbra astral visitor cannot cross down into the realms 
of death unless he is already deceased. The only possible 
exceptions involve Shallowings, portals, and the World Tree, 
all of which - according to legend - can take a living person 
to the Realms of the Dead. 


Benefits and Limits 


Self-recognition and a deepened understanding of morality 
are perhaps the greatest benefits of an Agama Sojourn. It's a 


IN E 


risky, morbid trip that leaves a part of the Shadowlands lodged 
within the traveler's psyche. Since the Avatar Storm, that 
journey has also forced travelers to face the very real prospect 
ofa permanent death. Unlike an astral traveler, a visitor to the 
Low Umbra has no protection from the Storm's lashing winds. 
In fact, that Storm, if it still rages, may reach its most chilling 
aspects in the realm where it originated. The Underworld also 
imposes certain limits upon visiting mages and their Arts. For 
details, see Magick in the Otherworlds, below. 


Even for successful voyagers, a trip to the Low Umbra is 
an ugly look at cosmic fatalism. With or without the Storm, 
a Harrowing, or other screaming horrors, such trips mark a 
traveler in ways she cannot truly comprehend until she has 
faced them and returned. 


Travel Between Layers 


Portals, moon bridges, and other passageways allow 
a traveler to move from one place to another within the 
Otherworlds. Human travelers usually need spirit allies to 
open up moon bridge routes - such paths are not intended 
for human feet, especially not in the modern era. 


If a voyager wishes to cross from the High Umbra into the 
Middle Umbra without a portal or bridge, then he'll need to 
either return to the Penumbra, climb the Pattern Webs, or else 
find and scale the World Tree (or Mount Qaf) that supposedly 
rises and descends between every layer of the universe. 


In any case, a traveler to the High Umbra may rise only as far 
as the Courts and Afterworlds unless he has taken astral form. A 
character who has stepped sideways or who's risen up from the 
Underworld cannot ascend to the Spires or Ephiphamies except 
through astral projection or the embodied Astral Sojourn form. 


Climbing From World to World 

Scaling the World Tree or Pattern Webs is a rigorous, 
risky feat. Such a journey should be an adventure in itself, with 
various spirit critters (Pattern Spiders, titanic insect spirits, 
giant creatures, Bane spirits, etc.) interfering with the climb. 
Rules-wise, that feat should involve many Dexterity + Athletics 
and Perception + Cosmology rolls, with horrible penalties for 
failing or botching a roll - nightmarish falls, detours into other 
Realms, cosmic vertigo, and so forth. 


Accordingto legend, the Paths ofthe Wyck and the "backstage 
at the universe” corridors also lead to pretty much everywhere 
within Earthly reach. The truth behind that contention... and 
the truth behind the rumor that these two passageways are the 
same thing after all... is left for the Storyteller to decide. 


Midrealm, the World Tree, and Mount Qaf 

Chapter Four describes the legendary Midrealm, from 
which the Alder Bole, or World Tree, rises and spreads between 
all of the Three Worlds. Certain accounts also liken this Tree 
to Mount Qaf, the center of the universe, although Mount 
Qaf also supposedly resides within the Digital Web. (Damn 
conflicting metaphysics...) According to legends, a person can 
supposedly scale the World Tree and/ or Mount Qaf. In order 
to climb them, however, mages first have to find them. 


An intrinsically primal Realm to begin with, Midrealm 
might remain completely hidden from all but the most primal 
of travelers: shapechangers, shamans, witches, ascetic monks, 
religious primitivists, and other mortals whose ties to Nature 
remain untarnished by modern technology. In game terms, 
locating Midrealm requires an adventure, possibly begun with 
several Perception * Enigmas or Perception * Empathy rolls 
as the travelers read the vibe of their surroundings. IF (big if) 
those travelers manage to find the rainbow and step beyond 
its brightly colored borders, they might be able to climb the 
Tree (or, if it appears as Mount Qaf, the mountain) into other 
Realms and layers of the Umbra. Even then, however, they'll 
be able to rise only as high as the Courts or sink only as low 
as the Shadowlands. The Tree might reach higher and lower 
than that, but mortals remain limited by their own innately 
flawed nature. 


Finding Your Way 


Alllayers ofthe Otherworlds defy normal geography. Their 
paths and landmarks shift in unpredictable ways, and traveling 
is more a matter of instinct than of memory. 

In game terms, an Otherworldly traveler uses the following 
dice pools if he tries to navigate his way around these puzzling 
Umbrascapes: 


* The Penumbra: As per travel in the material world. 


* The High Umbra: Intelligence * Cosmology in most 
areas, Intelligence + Enigmas in the Ephiphamies. A 
traveler thinks her way through the High Umbra. 


* The Middle Umbra: Perception + Cosmology in the 
Spirit Wilds, Wits * Enigmas within the Realms. A 
traveler feels her way through the Middle Umbra. 


* TheLow Umbra: Wits * Enigmas or Occult. A traveler 
puzzles her way through the Low Umbra. 


* Most Realms: Mental Attribute * Cosmology or 
Enigmas... or, in wilderness Realms, Mental Attribute 
* Survival. 


e OldRoads/ the Paths of the Wyck: Perception + Survival, 
plus at least two dots in Cosmology, Enigmas, or both, 
and the proper background (that is, intense witch or 
shamanic training) to understand those Paths at all. 


(These methods of navigation differ somewhat from those 
presented in The Infinite Tapestry and The Book of Worlds. 
If you prefer, use the older systems instead.) 


For other routes and methods of travel, see Chapter Four 
and the Digital Web section above. 


Optional Rule: 
Verbenae and the Old Roads 


The Verbena Tradition was formed, in large part, because of 
the Paths of the Wyck. That group’s founders, Nightshade and 


Chapfer Nine: Dramatic Systems 


E 


"rtr. 


482 


William Groth, used those Old Roads to travel to unknown 
lands and bring back mages from distant regions. As a 
result, the Council of Nine was born, and so those Paths 
are considered a sacred inheritance to that Pagan Tradition. 
Trusted members (that is, people who have spent several 
years in the group and whose deeds have graduated them 
beyond initiate status) are told the secrets of the Path, 
which they swear to protect with their lives. 


Thanks to the secrets handed down to them through 
the Tradition and its teachings, Verbena characters - 
and only those characters who have been trained by, and 
who've earned the trust of, the Verbena Tradition - may 
use Correspondence 1 in order to locate an entrance 
to the Old Roads near a Node. A successful Arete roll, 
used as part of a search for that entrance, can locate 
a Path if one exists in that area. The difficulty of the 
roll, in this case, is the local Gauntlet rating, not the 
difficulty of a coincidental Rank 1 Effect. It's harder to 
find entrances in high-tech places, assuming that such 
entrances exist there at all. 


In many areas, even around Nodes, there are no 
entrances to find. The Paths are elusive, especially in this 
ageofdiminished mysticism and technological dominance. 
Other Paths lead nowhere - a few yards, perhaps, before 
dead-ending in a tangle of thorns, a stone wall, or a cliff. 
It’s theStoryteller's call as to whether or not the Old Roads 
found byagiven character lead anywhere useful. Still, avery 
successful roll - one with three successes or more - should 
yield a Path of some significance. 


As mentioned in Chapter Four (p. 86), the Old Roads 
can be found in, and can lead to, urban areas as well as 
wilderness. That said, they tend to favor primal nature 
over technological constructs. On many levels, it's as if 
such Paths are living things that don't want to be found 
except by their ancient caretakers, so again, this optional 
rule applies only to Verbena witches who have bound 
themselves to that ancient role and who can be trusted 
to protect those Old Roads from would-be trespassers. 


Acclimation 

In another optional rule rooted in the Reckoning 
metaplot, mages who spend time in the Otherworlds 
have to readjust, or Acclimate, to the material world after 
beingaway from itfor a time. Until the traveler reorients 
himself to Earthly reality, he feels disconnected and 
awkward, as if he were balancing between two worlds 
but not fully part of either of them. 


In game terms, a traveler without the Umbral 
Affinity Merit suffers penalties to his rolls when he 
returns to Earth. Longer trips inflict higher penalties 
and greater recovery times, as shown on the Acclimation 
Periods chart. Full details about Umbral Affinity can 
be found in Appendix II. 


Before the Avatar Storm appeared, acclimation 
wasn t really an issue. Even if the Reckoning metaplot 
doesn't come into play, however, the Storyteller may 


Acclimation Periods 


Journey Penalties 
Up to One Week 
Two to Three Weeks 


Four to Five Weeks 


None except for mild disorientation. 
* to difficulties for physical tasks; lasts one or two days. 


+1 to physical difficulties and +1 to the difficulty of all Pattern magicks (Forces, Life, and 


Matter Spheres) for one or two days. 


Six to Seven Weeks 


+2 to physical difficulties for two days, lessening to +1 for a week afterward; +1 to the 


difficulties of all Pattern magicks for three days. 


Eight to Nine Weeks 
magick difficulties for a week. 


10 Weeks+ 


impose a +1 penalty upon Earth-bound physical actions for 
several days after a long trip in the Otherworlds. Our world can 
be emotionally and physically disorienting when you’ve been 
somewhere else - physically, as on an extended wilderness hike; 
mentally, like being immersed in a long session of a roleplaying 
game; or spiritually, journeying through the Otherworlds - 
for a while. 


Disconnection and Disembodiment 

Unless they have shapechanger blood, human beings hold 
only tenuous ties to the Otherworlds. Over time, their ties to the 
material world begin to fade. A traveler who does not return home 
within a given period of time will grow increasingly disconnected 
from Earth, gradually becoming spirit-stuff. Once it happens, 
that's a one-way trip. Many spirit entities supposedly began their 
existence as human beings who lost touch with their former lives 


and became roving Umbral denizens. (See Disembodiment and 
Void Adaptation in Chapter Four, p. 88-89.) 


How long does that take? That depends on the travelers 
and the metaplot. In the days before the Avatar Storm, the 
average person could spend between one and four months in 
the Otherworlds, depending on their ties to the mortal world 
and the nature of their travels. Exceptionally primal mages, 
however, could wander the Spirit Wilds for up to a year without 
losing their ties to the material world. 


Inthe AvatarStorm metaplot, the upheaval between worlds 
cuts this time shorter. If you use that metaplot element in your 
chronicle, then a traveler can spend up to three cycles of the 
moon (three months) in the Otherworlds. After that, he loses 
touch with his old home and joins the Umbrood hosts, possibly 
becoming a strange phantom of his former self. If the Avatar 
Storm did not happen, or if its effects have faded since that 
time, then the old rules for disconnection apply. 


Horizon Realms and the Reckoning 


In Horizon Realms, this spiritual disconnection has been 
suspended. A person can live for years in a Horizon Realm and 


+2 to physical difficulties for four days, lessening to +1 for a week afterward; +1 to Pattern 


+3 to physical task difficulties for four days, +2 for an additional week, and +1 for an 
additional week after that; +2 to all Pattern magick difficulties for three days, then +1 to 
those difficulties for an additional week. 


then return to the material world... a bit unsteady, perhaps, but 
still human. (See Acclimation Periods, above..) 


In the Reckoning metaplot, however, the Avatar Storm 
severs ties between most of the Horizon Realms and Constructs 
outside material reality. Sealed off from their old world, the 
people in those Realms became disembodied spirits - still 
conscious, but no longer human, and exiled from the mortal 
world by the Avatar Storm. Presumably, their weird blend of 
Awakened mortality and Disembodied spirit essence leaves 
them vulnerable to the Storm, which does not normally affect 
spirit beings. In any case, these people have been lost. Now they 
populate the Ghost Realms, literally shades of their former selves. 


Again, the truth behind the situation depends on your 
individual chronicle. Perhaps the Storm did come, did sever 
Realms from Earth, and their residents did wind up as spirit 
beings. Or maybe not - perhaps Horizon is still whole and 
the old Masters are still fully human. Maybe it happened and 
those people are lost, but new Realms have been built since 
then. Ultimately, the only way to know for sure is to find out 
for yourself. 


Magick in the Otherworlds 


Mages being mages, your characters will want - and often 
need - to use magick in the Otherworlds. Such Arts can vary 
wildly in their effects, depending on where the characters are, 
who’s doing what, and how they’re doing it. The specific rules 
for certain locations are too involved to feature in Mage 20, 
and can be found in the sourcebooks The Infinite Tapestry 
and Beyond the Barriers: The Book of Worlds. As simple 
guidelines for such situations, however, a Storyteller can use 
the following rules: 


Onfamiliar Ground 

Being accustomed to the material world, most mortal 
visitors suffer a +1 difficulty penalty to their attacks in the 
Umbra. Characters with the Umbral Affinity Merit doesn’t 
suffer this penalty, nor do characters who’ve spent a few days 


Chapter Nine: Dramatic Systems 483 


Traveling the 
Otherworlds 


Gauntlet Ratings 


Successes 


Area Difficulty *' Needed 
Node 3 One 
Deep Wilderness 5 Two 
Rural Countryside 6 Three 
Most Urban Areas 7 Four 
8 
9 


Downtown Five 


Technocracy Lab *? Five 
Notes 


An area's Gauntlet Difficulty may vary with time and 
circumstances; a dark alley on Halloween night might 
have a Gauntlet of 6, while a rigidly cultivated garden 
at noon could have a Gauntlet of 8. 


#1 = If using the Technocratic victory metaplot, add 
+1 to the Gauntlet Rating when in industrial culture 
zones, whether or not the Avatar Storm is still in force. 


#2 =Treatasa Node when using Dimensional Science. 


Methods of Travel 
and Navigation 


Method Spheres 


Stepping Spirit 3 or 4 
Sideways 


Astral Projection. ¿Mind 4 or Mind 5 


Astral Sojourn Mind Mind 4 or 5/ Spirit 3/ 
Prime 2 


Agama Re Entropy 4/ Life 2/ Spirit 3 
Agama Te Entropy 4/ Life 3/ Spirit 4 
Astral Agama Entropy 5/ Mind 5/ Spirit 3 
Climbing Dexterity + Athletics 

Region Dice Pool to Navigate 


High Umbra Intelligence + Cosmology (or 
Enigmas) 


Middle Umbra Perception + Cosmology (or 
Survival) 


Lower Umbra Wits + Enigmas (or Occult) 


Old Roads Perception + Enigmas (or 
Survival) 


World Tree Perception + Cosmology 


494 


Mage: The Ascension 20" Anniversary Edition 


in (or have made several voyages to) the Otherworlds. By that 
point, they're acclimated to the weird rules of the Umbra and 
its Realms. 


The Shining Ones 


Mages in the Otherworlds tend to reflect the nature of 
their magick, often shining or shadowed with the radiance of 
their Truest Self. In the Otherworlds - particularly along the 
passages between Realms, out beyond the Penumbra - a traveler 
looks like an exaggerated, idealized, version of the person that, 
for better and worse, she is. 


Echoes of Resonance manifest more obviously in the 
Umbrae, too. Avibrantand generous Hermetic magus may glow 
with cheerfullight, making plants thrive simply by walking past; 
adour priest, on theother hand, mayslouch over his exaggerated 
crucifix, a perpetual scowl etched across his stony face. 


Powerful mages radiate the aura of their strongest Spheres 
too, and almost everyone displays at least a hint of their affinity 
Sphere. A Forces-dedicated witch may crackle with electricity, 
while a Time-focused cyborg seems to flicker in place or move 
with clockwork precision. Such manifestations come through 
in roleplaying, narration, and general description, without 
hard-and-fast rules deciding their effects. In many cases, though, 
it's easy to tell a lot about a traveler simply by looking at him. 
Unless that traveler makes an effort to conceal his true nature 
with magick, a successful Perception * Awareness roll will 
almost certainly reveal interesting details about who he is and 
what he does. 


Coincidental Magick 

Asageneral rule, all forms of mystic magick are coincidental 
in the Umbra as a whole. Certain Realms, however, may be 
more or less attuned to certain paradigms, accepting one type 
of magick as coincidental (say, High Ritual Magick) while 
rejecting others (like weird science or martial arts) as vulgar. 


In the High Umbra, technomagick tends to be as 
coincidental as mystic magick is. Science and technology, after 
all, are products of rarefied thought. In the Middle Umbra's 
Spirit Wilds, on the other hand, technomagick is often vulgar, 
and fails completely in the Aetherian Reaches. Again, certain 
Realms flip that around, recognizing technomagick (or at least 
certain forms of it, anyway) as coincidental while rejecting 
mystic practices as vulgar. 


As for the Low Umbra, techomagick tends to be vulgar 
there, while primal, ritual, and sacred magick is coincidental. 
Perhaps the disastrous effects of the spirit nuke added a 
spectacular Paradox Effect on top of the usual conflagration... 


The Spheres 


Certain Spheres work better or worse in the Otherworlds 
than they do in the material world. Although the following 
guidelines may not apply in various Realms, they hold true 
for most of the Umbra at large: 


* Prime and Mind Sphere Effects work normally, perhaps 
even at a -1 difficulty in certain situations. 


Time and Forces suffer a * 1 difficulty to their associated 
Arete rolls. 


Life and Matter don't work on Umbral creatures or 
objects unless those targets originated in the material 
world. Life would work on a Black Suit, for example, 
but not on a stag spirit. 


Spirit makes the user shine like a beacon, and acts 
like Life against creatures and Matter on objects. As 
noted elsewhere, a mage needs at least two dots in the 
Spirit Sphere before she can physically touch a spirit 
being; otherwise, her hand just slides right through its 
ephemeral form, even though she's ephemeral as well. 


Correspondence is downright weird. Although 
Correspondence-based senses function more or less 
normally in a single Realm or area, they cannot reach 
into other Realms orareas. Co-location and teleportation 
are hazardous, dumping the traveler into random and 
often dangerous areas unless the player scores three 
successes or more on her roll. 


The Data Sphere does not function in the Three Worlds 


at all. Its metaphysical properties are drawn from, and 
limited to, the Digital Web. 


Entropy works normally in most regions. In the 
Underworld, however, Entropy-based spells have a -2 
difficulty but unlock the darkest side of every ghost in 
the vicinity. For details, see Spirit Combatants (pp. 
417-418), Umbrood Spirit Entities below. 


In the Low Umbra, all Arete rolls suffer a +2 difficulty 
penalty. Life and Prime are always vulgar, Forces and 
Matter do notworkatall, and Paradox manifests as storms 
of screaming specters that tear holes in the world to let 
Oblivion through. Time and Correspondence manifest 
unreliable and inaccurate Effects. Entropy magick works 
as above (often drawing unwanted attention by its very 
presence), and only Mind and Spirit function normally... 
although with the increased difficulty on the Arete roll. 


KENA 


e Characters can use Spirit 3 magick to step sideways 
through the Pericarps (Gauntlets) between Realms, 
although certain Realms might require Spheres other 
than Spirit (say Mind, Forces, or even Time) instead of 
Spirit, at the Storyteller’s option. 


e Magick cast in Paradox Realms tends to backfire in 
awful ways, especially if the magick cast is related to 
the magick that got the mage sent into time out in the 
first place. See Reality Among the Realms under The 
Paradox Effect in Chapter Ten (p. 553). 


As an overall rule, assume that most rules, within the 
Otherworlds, are optional. The unpredictable nature of the 
Otherworlds remains one of the few predictable constants in the 
notoriously inconstant Realms beyond Earth’s material reality. 


Example of Umbral Travel 


Lee Ann Milner meditates in a darkened room, sinuous drifts of 
nag champa incense drifting past her face. Focusing on a faint bell only 
she can hear, she slides into a trance and sends forth her astral self... 


At the gaming table, Lynn picks up her dice. “No one can 

see you leave your body,” says the Storyteller, “so you don’t need to 
worry about Paradox.” Unlike the act of stepping sideways, astral 
travel is invisible to the naked eye, and thus it’s coincidental. Lynn 
rolls Lee Ann’s Arete Trait against the local Gauntlet. Here in Lee 
Ann’s Chantry, that barrier’s pretty thin. The difficulty of the roll, 
therefore, is 6, with three successes necessary. Lee Ann’s Arete of 8 
makes this a simple roll; even so, Lynn gets only one success with 
her first roll, and two more with her second. It takes a minute or so 
of meditation, but Lee Ann's astral self slips into the Penumbra. 


Later, during a wilderness hike, Lee Ann steps sideways to 
venture into the Spirit Wilds. Bracing herself for the awful Avatar 
Storm, she's relieved to find that while the shrieking spirits still 
grimace and gnash their teeth at her as she passes through the 
barrier, the soul-scouring agony of past trips has faded. “Mark off a 
level of Bruised damage,” the Storyteller says to Lynn. “It stings a 
bit, but there’s no serious harm done.” Following her instincts and 
the strange signs of this vivid landscape, Lee Ann heads off into the 
mist. Lynn rolls the character’s Perception + Cosmology against a 


difficulty of 7 to see what Lee Ann finds... 


Part Vill Ombrood Spirit Entities 


simplicitys sake, we call those masks spirits. 
Rooted in a word meaning “breath” - and, 


and Earthly principles, giving recognizable 
personality to natural forces and psychic ideas. 


So in game terms, they’re characters who are 
far more transcendent than they might appear. 


Infinity wears infinite masks. And for 


by extension, “life” - spirits embody cosmic 


identities to things beyond comprehension. In 
plain English, then, spirits give character and 


In the World of Darkness, spirits inhabit the Otherworlds 
and occasionally venture into material space as well. Some 
folks view them as gods or demons, totem allies or elemental 
forces. Mages catalog the spirit hosts with a bewildering array 
of names and titles, the most basic of which can be found 
in the sidebar nearby. And yet, as any mage worth that title 
understands, a spirit is more than a name or a set of powers. 
Each spirit is a principle or force incarnate - the essence of ideas 
given a relatable form. Folks familiar with the spirit world... 
most especially those who study the Spirit Sphere... know that 


Chapter Nine: Dramatic Systems 485 


the entity you're dealing with is like the tip of an iceberg you 
never totally see. 


For the Technocrats and other technomancers who insist on 

a materialist perspective, spirits are puzzles. The comforting term 

aliens comes up a lot in conversation, and most Technocrats view 

spirits as alien beings from alternate dimensions. This perspective 

isn't wrong, exactly, though it's limited. The word alien means 
[1 » , toe H H 

other," and that’s whatspirits are: something other than humanity. 


To slap a different handle on such entities, some mages call 
the spirits Umbrood - a bastardized term meaning “the offspring 
of shadows.” Again, that term’s not wrong, though many spirits 
find itinsulting. The term “brood” suggests children, and when 
mages use it, that suggests that mages feel parentally superior to 
spirits. It’s not hard to understand, then, why spirits would get 
a bit hacked off at a presumptuous mortal who regards himself 
as the father of a cosmic entity. No wonder that so many mages 
find themselves in hot water with the spirits! 


Ultimately, spirits are Other. As recognizable as they 
might seem, they should never feel too familiar. Although 
werewolves deal with spirits on a firstname basis, and many 
mages think they do the same, there should always be a sense 
of the ineffable - the sacred and indescribable - about even 
the most common spirit entities. 


You See What You Expect to See 


As mages throughout time have noticed, the appearance of 
a given spirit depends on what the viewer expects to see. In yet 
another example of the Rashomon Effect at work, a single spirit 
can look different ways to different people. Each mask of that 
spirit depends upon the expectations of the viewer. A classical 
Hermetic magus could behold a trickster spirit as an aspect of 
Hermes the Thief, laughing god of misdirection. His Apache 
counterpart views the ever-shifting face of Coyote, the lustful 
shapechanging beast-man whose pranks undermine stability but 
backfire on him in the end. To the media-hyped Virtual Adept 
in their company, that spirit is Bugs Bunny on crack. Their 
Scandinavian rune-keeper glances sideways at Loki, the grand 
liar... perhaps even the Marvel Comics version as portrayed 
by Tom Hiddleston! One spirit, four faces, all of them true, 
and yet none of them the real image of that Umbrood entity. 


From a game standpoint, this offers lots of possibilities 
and keeps spirits from being just another set of Traits to throw 
fireballs at. 


As a general guideline, assume that spirits are always more 
than they appear to be. The more powerful the spirit, the more 
varied its appearance. A simple earth elemental might appear 
more or less the same to everyone, whereas a tempter demon 
wears a multitude of masks. As an overall rule, assume that 
High Umbrood can manifest a variety of appearances, and 
Lower Umbrood retain a fairly consistent form. 

At the core, a spirit IS what that spirit IS. A trickster spirit pulls 
tricks. An earth elemental will not burst into flame. A tempter 
demon offers enticing but ultimately malicious treats because that’s 
what that spirit DOES. In the World of Darkness in general, and in 
Mage in particular, each spirit has a particular identity. Under all 


Mage: The Ascension 20" Anniversary Edition 


the masks it might wear, that identity remains firm. And that’s the 
secret that a Master of Spirit - regardless of practice or affiliation - 
understands: the identity of a spirit comes through in the things it 
does, in the masks it wears, in the deals it makes. If you understand 
who and what you're dealing with, the masks aren't important. The 
core of the spirit comes through in its behavior. 


Spirit Types 

To get a common grasp on such elusive entities, Mage 
groups Umbrood into a handful of general but recognizable 
categories. The characters might not use this terminology, but 
the game rules do, simply because it's easier for a Storyteller 
to gauge the difference between an Incarna's abilities and the 
abilities of a Gaffling than it is to simply say, "Just make it all 
up as you go along!" Of course, a Storyteller who wants to just 
make it all up as she goes along is encouraged to do so, as long 
as that doesn't reduce her chronicle to a bunch of arbitrary 
garbage and her mind to a bowl of lukewarm soup. 


An Ombral Powers Hierarchy 

Asarough guide to common terminology, the Council of Nine 
Traditions agrees upon an Umbral Powers Hierarchy that its members 
use in common conversation. A Kha’vadi shaman might refer to 
such-and-such-entity as “a Gaffling servitor of the Raven Incarna,” if 
only for clarity’s sake, when she’s speaking to some High Hermetic 
so-and-so. Even so, that shaman will have her own name for that 
spirit, and you can bet that the Hermetic has placed it somewhere 
on the Grand Celestial Roll of Cosmological Hierarchies. 


Other groups, of course, have their own ways of looking at 
things. A Border Corps Technocrat, when confronted with thesame 
Gaffling, would run itagainsta program of Cataloged Alien Anomaly 
Manifestations, looking to profile that creature’s capabilities. A 
Hollow One might see a playful raven girl; the Templar at his side 
beholds a crow demon from Satan’s hosts. A Bata’a houngan 
welcomes Brother Crow, anally of Erzuli, buta Progenitor sees some 
extraphysical mutant entity worth experimenting on. In Mage, as in 
life, the truth of that spirit is in the eye of the beholder. 


Essential Divinity, Godheads, 
and The Adversary 


One of Mage’s thorniest elements, both in and out of the 
fictional world, involves the question of God and other spirits. 
To be blunt, where does God rank on the Umbral Hierarchy? 
What about Krishna? Is the Goddess somehow lower than God, 
or is Her consort a Horned God in a cosmos where the Christian 
God does not exist? How can someone wrestle with God, as Jacob 
does in the Bible, and does the existence of Raven preclude the 
existence of Allah or the Buddha? Where does Satan fit in there, 
if Satan even exists at all? After all, Mage posits the existence of 
a spiritual world filled with spiritual truths. Which god is God, 
and are there many gods or only One? 


Ultimately, the capitalT Truth depends on what you want 
it to be. If your Mage chronicle favors your own Muslim, Baptist, 
Wiccan, or Tibetan Buddhist creed, then by all means decide that 
all roads lead to your Divinity of choice. If you're an existential 
atheist, then maybe all of this is just delusion. We're not here to 


Greater Spirit Entities 
* Essential Divinity (God/ Goddess/ The Great Spirit/ The One) 
* Godheads/ Celestines/ God-Avatars (Zeus; Inanna; Jesus; Krishna; Satan; Grandfather; the Wyrm; Maiden, 


Mother, and Crone; etc.) 


¢ The Adversary (often seen as Godhead, occasionally regarded as the Dark Twin of Essential Divinity, frequently 


not recognized at all) 


Lesser Powers 


Aeons/ Incarnae/ Godlings 
Lords and Ladies/ The High Umbrood 
Totem Avatars 
Archangels 
Demon Lords 
Greater Courtiers 

Bodhisattva Manifestations 
Praeceptors/ Demigods 
Seraphim 
Greater Demons 

Oracles 

Jagglings 
Greater Court Servitors 
Minions/ Lower Umbrood 
Cherubim 
Guardian Angels 
Demon Hosts 
Gafflings/ Epiphlings 
Lesser Courtiers 
Djinni 

Loa 


Saints 


Miscellaneous Spirits (exist outside the Hierarchy; 
power ranges from Incarna to Minion) 


Elementals (manifestations of Earthly forces) 
Banes (a.k.a. Wyrm spirits) 
Chaos Manifestations (Wyld spirits) 
Pattern Entities (Weaver spirits) 
Naturae/ Kami (Nature spirits) 

Ghosts (the Restless Dead) 
Ancestors (the Honored Dead) 


Bygones (mythic creatures) 


Paradox Spirits (manifestations of metaphysical 
retribution) 


Legends (personifications of mythic figures) 
Abstracts (quantum astral enigmas) 

Web Spirits (entities native to the Digital Web) 
Sendings (weird psychic emanations) 

Cthonic Entities (primal enigmasthatdefy understanding) 


Those Beyond (alien entities, theoretically of 
malignant or indifferent disposition] 


Indented and italicized entries reflect entities that do 
not fit comfortably into the hierarchy's ranks. 


Forexamples of differentspiritcharacters, see Appendix 
I; the Werewolf: The Apocalypse and Wraith: The 
Oblivion lines; and a variety of Mage sourcebooks. 


tell you how to believe or to force a religion (or the lack of one) 
down your throat. Maybe all spirits really are aliens or angels or 
demons or archetypes. That's your call to make, not ours. 


Within the Mage world, the various Traditions have been 
arguing these points for centuries. The Technocracy discarded 
an official creed beyond Enlightened Science, and the Disparates 
have left that question off the table, definitely for now and 
probably for good. The Umbral Hierarchy represents an uneasy 
compromise with lots of room to move. It’s certainly not definitive, 
and it neither demeans nor demands a single point of faith. At 
the top of that Hierarchy, however, the terms Essential Divinity, 
Godhead, and The Adversary deserve some explanation: 


Essential Divinity is the name given to That Which 
Cannot Be Named - the IAM THAT I AM at the core of sacred 


mysteries. An indefinable essence that pervades Creation, it 


transcends names and identities. As ineffable things go, this 
one scores the top of the list. 


Godhead is what you get when you assign Divinity a face, 
personality, and name. Sometimes that Divinity incarnates itself 
in an avatar: an identity that humans can relate to (Krishna, 
Mary, Old Man, and so forth). Other times, it remains a 
transcendent yet still relatable force... a Holy Spirit, if you will, 
understood by certain people in certain terms. 


The Adversary is the cosmic Antagonist, the force of 
Opposition that may or may not be another aspect of Divinity. 
Some folks see it as an evil anti-god, others view it as a rebellious 
lesser creation, and still others view it as a shadow of Essential 
Divinity. Many people refuse to recognize it at all or theorize 
that it exists because people think it exists. In any case, the 
Adversary is godlike... and might, as the Nephandi believe, be 


Chapter Nine: Dramatic Systems 487 


M 


488 


Ma$e: The Ascension 20^ Anniversary Edition 


that summation of cosmic Absolute against which god is 
the rebel who will eventually be consumed. 


Compared to these Greater Powers, all other spirits 
are functionaries - courtiers, servants, embodiments of 
principles, or incarnations of ideas. They've got their own 
identities, even though such identities often remain unclear 
to human witnesses. At the top of the Hierarchy, however, 
the Greater Powers defy easy categorization, transcend game 
Traits, and command powers far beyond any human reach. 


What that means, in the long run, is up to you. 


Yo v Y 
Spirit Traits 

As mentioned earlier in the Combatsection, spirits don't 
use the same rules that mortal characters do. Ephemeral 
entities of Will and Essence, these beings use distinct Traits 
that work in certain ways: 


Willpower 

Essentially the physical Traitfor spiritbeings, Willpower 
allows Umbrood characters to fly, chase, attack, climb, escape, 
and perform most other activities that a human character's 
Dexterity or Stamina can do. 


When a spirit struggles with another spirit, those 
characters resolve their issues with a resisted roll of Willpower 
against Willpower. If the spirit's trying to accomplish 
something on its own, the Storyteller strives to make a 
successful roll on its behalf, just as any other player would 
do. In either case, the difficulty of that roll depends on the 
task, as per the chart nearby. 


Spirit Tasks 
Difficulty Action 


3 Easy 

5 Simple 

6 Straightforward 

8 Difficult 

10 Virtually impossible 


Rage 

A reflection ofa spirit's determination and wrath, Rage 
handles those tasks that would normally require Strength: 
breaking things, hurting people, throwing force against an 
opponent. 


When a spirit attacks another character, the Storyteller 
rolls one die for each point of Rage against difficulty 6. 
Each success inflicts one health level of lethal damage. 
Mages - thanks to their Awakened Avatars - can try to soak 
this damage by using the Avatar Background as a soak roll. 
Night-Folk with the proper Disciplines or Gifts can try to 
soak this damage as well. Most mortals, however, cannot 
endure spiritual injury, and normal armor (that is, armor 
that hasn't been enhanced with magick or technomagick) 
means nothing to a spirit's Rage. 


(Note: In Werewolf: The Apocalypse 20" Anniversary 
Edition, spirit-based Rage damage is aggravated. Because mages 
don’t regenerate aggravated damage, however, this option may 
be too fatal for a Mage chronicle. If the Storyteller decides to let 
the Avatar Background soak aggravated damage, then the usual 
Werewolf rule may be used instead. Using the agg-damage option, 
however, can send the average mage straight to the cemetery.) 


Gnosis 


The sublime knowledge that spirits understand, Gnosis 
allows a spirit to perceive and communicate with the world 
around it. Most tasks that would normally involve Social or 
Mental Traits - as well as feats or attacks that involve certain 
Charms (see below) - employ the Gnosis Trait. 


Essence 


Representing the raw energy of an Umbral being, Essence 
is the stuff from which spirits are made. In game terms, each 
point of damage scored upon a spirit, after that spirit’s soak roll, 
removes one point of Essence. When that spirit casts a charm, 
it often spends Essence in order to do so. Typically, the Essence 
comes from the total of that spirit’s Willpower + Rage + Gnosis. 
The Storyteller, however, can always add or subtract from that 
base essence in order to reflect especially strong or weak spirits. 


As a spirit starts to lose Essence, it begins to look haggard 
and translucent. Damage wears away that spirit’s being until its 
ephemeral form gets dispelled. Once it dies, the injured spirit 
dissipates into the Umbra and remains gone for several hours. 
(Storyteller’s judgment, although as a rough guideline you could 
figure 20 hours, minus one hour for each point of that spirit’s 
Gnosis Trait.) After that time, the spirit re-forms with a single 
Essence point, then flees to some secluded spot where it can 
safely recharge itself in a state called Slumber, described below. 


Spirit Feats 


Although they might occasionally assume human form, 
spirits aren’t mortal beings. As creatures of ephemera, they 
handle certain things differently than other characters do. 


Communication 


Umbrood entities communicate through impressions and 
feelings, rarely through words as people understand that term. 
The spirit tongue is more a matter of reading and sending such 
impressions than it is a language of words and sounds. Even so, 
many of the more intelligent spirits - especially totems, demons, 
angels, courtiers, and godheads - can speak and comprehend 
human languages when they choose to do so. 


Until and unless these entities decide to communicate this 
way, a mortal needs Spirit 2 in order to share a conversation 
with the Umbrood. Without such magick, a human might use 
Perception + Awareness or Enigmas to try to puzzle out a spirit’s 
feelings and attempt to communicate with it; this method, 
though, is crude and imprecise - kind of like trying to mime a 
conversation with someone from a vastly different culture and 
social class than your own. (The roll’s difficulty depends on the 
alien-ness of the spirit in question, but it is rarely less than 7.) 


Movement 

All spirits can fly or float through the Umbra. At top 
speed, an Umbrood entity can move at (20 + Willpower) yards 
or meters per turn. It’s worth mentioning, though, that time 
and distance work strangely in the Otherworlds, often warping 
in unpredictable ways when viewed by human beings. 


Slumber 


A weakened spirit retreats to a secluded region where it 
can safely restore its Essence to full strength. Godheads, totems, 
kami, and ancestor spirits often go to temples or shrines where 
mortal belief and reverence nurture their recovery and provide 
sacred ground where such spirits feel safe. Other entities flee 
to hidden Glens, Courts, or Afterworlds. Spirits of malaise 
might retreat to Blights, hells, or even the Umbral side of crime 
scenes and atrocities. During its recovery, the spirit floats in 
a state of Slumber, dreaming whatever passes for dreams in a 
spirit’s mind. 


Binding Spirits Into Fetishes 

While Slumbering, an Umbrood entity may be bound into 
a Spiritfueled Wonder - a Fetish - by a person with Spirit 4. 
That Fetish won't be usable, however, until the spirit returns to 
its full Essence - the item draws off of the imprisoned spirit's 
Essential self. Even so, it's the Fetish's user, not the spirit 
itself, that activates that Fetish... and the spirit is very much a 
prisoner inside that item. 


Although certain spirits strike bargains with mortals 
who craft Fetish Wonders, most entities get VERY annoyed if 
they wind up being held prisoner inside some presumptuous 
human's toy. Considering that spirits are more or less immortal, 
it's not wise to court a spirit's anger by imprisoning it within a 
Fetish unless you're some sort of badass... like, say, a werewolf 
or master shaman. 


Spirits in Combat 

As detailed earlier in the Spirit Combatants section (pp. 
417-418), spirits attack with Willpower and inflict damage 
with Rage. They also soak damage with Willpower, possibly 
augmented with the Armor Charm, below. All forms of 
damage - bashing, lethal, and aggravated - are the same to 
spirit entities. Any damage a spirit doesn’t soak gets deducted 
from its Essence Trait. 


Most mortal beings cannot touch spirits unless there’s 
magick involved. A human character needs Spirit 2 in order 
to make physical contact with a spirit that has not employed 
the Materialize Charm (again, see below). For other details, 
see Spirit Combatants and the Spirit Combat section of the 
Order of Battle chart (p. 445). 


Spirit Charms 


Every spirit commands a certain number of metaphysical 
powers called Charms. Innate extensions ofa spirit's self, Charms 
typically cost Essence to employ. Certain Charms (like Feedback) 
are rather specific, whereas others (Armor, Blast) are open 
to all kinds of Storyteller creativity. Because all Umbrood are 


Chapter Nine: Dramatic Systems 489 


IASA 


fi AA | 
Yr | 
| 
| 
| 

| 
dr 3 
"[ | 
i » 


Although Umbrood beings do not use Awakened magick the ways mortals understand that term, the truly powerful ones 
have mystic abilities that, in game terms, work very much like magick. And so, underthis optional rule, a handful of spirit 
entities have Arete and Sphere ratings to reflect their godlike talents. 


Unlike mortal mages, these beings don't use a focus or gather Paradox. On the Earthly plane, however, an Umbrood 
character who suffers a botched roll when casting a vulgar Effect is immediately banished to the other side of the Gauntlet 
for at least one day for every point of Arete that character possesses. Thus, powerful Umbrood avoid flashy magicks in 


the world of men. 


embodiments of natural forces and principles, Charms do not 
invoke Paradox on either side of the Gauntlet. 


Several of the following Charms invoke destructive natural 
forces - fire, electricity, floods, and so on. For the larger effects 
of such forces, check out the Environmental Hazards section 
of this chapter (pp. 435-441). 


e Airt Sense: A natural ability of all spirit entities, this 
Charm allows spirits to find their way through complex 
Otherworldly non-geography. To find a particular place, 
or to locate a given creature or spirit among the realms, 
the Storyteller may roll the tracking spirit’s Gnosis 
against a variable difficulty - 6 in most cases, 8 or 9 in 
the cases of obscure locations or powerful spirits. As an 
innate ability, this Charm costs no Essence to employ. 


* Appear: Revealing itself in an immaterial form, an entity 
can use this Charm to manifest on the physical side of 
the Gauntlet, unable to touch but also immune from 
being touched. Doing so costs 10 Essence when the spirit 
appears in a high-Gauntletarea, although it may cost fewer 
points (Storyteller's option) in places or circumstances 
with especially low Gauntlet ratings (3 or less). 


* Armor: By spending two points of Essence, the spirit 
gains a dice pool equal to its Gnosis rating; that soak 
pool applies to bashing and lethal damage. For one 
additional point per die, the Armor Charm may protect 
againstaggravated damage too. Either way, the protection 
lasts until the end of the scene in which it is invoked. 
The spirit may invoke its armor at any point before an 
attacker rolls her damage against the spirit. 


* Blast: An all-purpose attack Charm, this power projects 
damaging energies against the spirit's opponents. Those 
energies cost one Essence per die of bashing damage, 
two Essence per die of lethal damage, and three Essence 
per die of aggravated damage. 


(For a deadlier option, the spirit may simply spend a point 
of Essence and roll the spirit's Rage as aggravated damage, 
as seen in Werewolf: The Apocalypse 20^ Anniversary 
Edition. As noted above, however, this option may be too 
lethal for Mage chronicles.) 


Whatever type of damage it inflicts, the form of the Blast 
depends on the nature of the spirit; a fire elemental could 


Ma$e: The Ascension 20^ Anniversary Edition 


breathe flame, a frost spirit might spin frost, a shrieking 
horror from beyond space might warp its target's bones, 
and so forth. The spirit does not need to hit, and the attack 
cannot be dodged, although the Spirit Sphere can be used 
as countermagick against the Blast. 


As a rough guide to range, assume that this Charm can 
reach one yard for each point of Essence in the spirit's 
permanent Essence Trait. An Essence 20 entity, then, 
could Blast an opponent from up to 20 yards away. 
Spending Essence does not decrease this range; that 
same entity could still Blast its opponent from 20 yards 
away even when its Essence has dropped to 5. 


Blighted Touch: Invoking the essence of corruption, a 
demonic entity can bring outa target's worst qualities. If 
the spirit successfully inflicts damage upon its opponent 
- including damage at range, via the Blast charm -the 
target must make a Willpower roll, with the difficulty 
being the spirits Rage. If the target's roll fails, the 
character's worst qualities surge to the surface, making 
him aggressive, arrogant, lusty, depressive, or whatever 
else fits his personality. That change of personality lasts 
for several hours - generally an hour or so per point in 
the spirit's Rage. If the player botches that Willpower 
roll, then the blight upon his character's personality 
becomes more-orless permanent. 


Brand: Certain spirits of the Digital Web use this Charm 
to brand netizens or other spirits with tags that identify 
the target even if she changes into some newshape. Three 
Essence inflicts a brand that lasts until the target leaves 
Netspace, and five Essence tags her with a brand that 
lasts indefinitely. (Storyteller’s discretion about how long 
the brand lasts and what it takes to remove it.) Typically 
employed by Free-Ranging Electronic Encroachment 
Kill Systems (FREEKS) and other countermeasure and 
security programs. 


Break Reality: The hallmark ofa chaos spirit, this Charm 
changes the Umbral form of an object into some other 
- maybe radically different - form. A wall becomes mist, 
fire might become ice, a tree could become a fountain of 
water. To transform a given object, the Storyteller rolls 
that spirit’s Gnosis; simple transformations would be 
difficulty 4 or 5, with radical changes rated at difficulty 


8 or 9. Success transmutes the object into its new form, 
failure costs the spirit one Essence, and a botch costs 
the spirit a point of Gnosis as well. 


Calcify: With this Charm, a Pattern Spider binds its target 
into its Pattern Webs. To use the Charm, the Storyteller rolls 
the spirit’s Willpower in a resisted roll against the target’s 
Avatar Background (or against the target’s Rage Trait if that 
target is one of the shapeshifting Night-Folk). Each success 
subtracts one dot from a Physical Attribute of the spirit’s 
choice; when that Attribute has been reduced to zero, the 
target is stuck in the Pattern Web. From that point onward, 
the target must be freed by his companions - he himself 
remains physically helpless, although he could use Mind 
magick if he does not have to move in order to do so. This 
charm does not work at all on Marauders, Nephandi, or 
mageswith an Entropy Sphere of 4 or higher... the Dynamic 
or Entropic energies around such mages are simply too 
potent to contain in the Pattern Web. This Charm costs 
no Essence but requires a turn of webspinning for each 
point of Physical Attribute drained. Once he's freed, the 
character's Traits return to normal. 


Call for Aid: With an expenditure of five Essence, the 
spiritcalls upon other entities of its kind. TheStoryteller 
rolls the spirit's Willpower, with the difficulty based on 
the likelihood of other spirits being nearby at the time: 
difficulty 3 if the other spirits are within sight, difficulty 
6 in an area where such spirits are common, difficulty 
8 for unusual spirits within that region, and difficulty 
9 for rare spirits outside their normal habitat. 


Cleanse the Blight: With a wave of purifying energy, 
a nature spirit, angel, or other benevolent entity can 
purge spiritual corruption from its immediate area. The 
Storyteller rolls the spirit's Gnosis against a difficulty 
based on the level of corruption - from 4 or 5 for an 
area with mild taint to 9 or 10 for areas of massive abuse 
and sickness. This Charm costs 10 Essence. 


Cling: Using this Charm, an entity can cling to an 
object or another creature. The spirit must first make 
a successful grappling attack in order to hang onto an 
unwilling target. After a successful grappling roll, the 
spirit gains five extra Willpower dice for the purposes 
of hanging on and resisting other grappling attacks. 
Once the spirit latches on, the target can free himself 
only by reducing the Spirit's Essence to zero, pulling it 
free with a successful grappling attack, or else binding 
the spirit into a fetish. This Charm costs one Essence 
point per use, but it lasts until the spirit lets go or is 
otherwise removed. 


Control Electrical Systems: Engaging its bond with 
technology, an electricity elemental or spirit of electrical 
tech can seize control of an electric device and run it 
according to the spirit's desires. The Storyteller rolls 
the spirits Gnosis against a difficulty based upon the 


M EN 


complexity of the machine or system - from 3 to control 
light bulbs to 9 to control a HIT Mark or cybernetic gear. 
The Essence cost likewise depends upon thesophistication 
of the device, from one Essence to control simple objects 
to five Essence to command complex machinery. 


Corruption: Asa demon or other spiritual temper employs 
this Charm, the Storyteller spends one Essence point. The 
spirit whispers foul suggestions in the target’s ear (perhaps 
in a voice only that victim can hear...), and the victim 
must make a Willpower roll or else act out the corrupting 
spirit’s suggestions. If that character might be inclined to 
act on the suggestion to begin with (like, say, a bank teller 
facing a bunch of money that hasn’t yet been logged into 
the system), she might not even try to resist it. 


Create Fire: With a successful Gnosis roll, the spirit 
can ignite a fire. The difficulty depends upon the size 
of blaze - from 3 for small fires to 9 for an inferno. 
The Essence cost also depends upon the size of the fire, 
ranging from one point for a simple flicker to five for 
a conflagration. 


Create Wind: Elemental air command conjures 
windstorms. Essence cost ranges from one for a light 
breeze to 20 for a tornado. 


Death Fertility: Is something already killing a living 
thing? If so, a spirit can use this Charm to accelerate 
the process. Assuming that the target’s already suffering 
from some malady - injury, infection, starvation, 
freezing, disease, poison, etc. - an expenditure of five 
Essence and a Rage roll against the target's Willpower 
Trait will inflict further damage upon the target. Each 
success causes one health level of lethal harm, and the 
spreading sickness or wound might have other effects 
as well - see Health and Injury, Harsh Weather and 
Environments, Starvation and Thirst, and Drugs, 
Poison, and Disease for possible effects. 


Digital Disruption: Deployed only by Digital Web entities, 
this Charm inflicts either a soft de-rez - that is, one that 
dumps the target out of the Web and back into Meatspace 
without hurting him - ora hard de-rez, which inflicts two 
automatic health levels in lethal damage and deducts two 
points of a Mental Attribute unless the target makes a 
Stamina roll, difficulty 7 (the damage and Trait loss heal 
as lethal damage). The entity must hit the target with a 
Willpower-based attack roll, but success automatically 
dumps the target out of Netspace. A soft de-rez costs 
three Essence, and a hard one costs five. 


Disable: This stunning Charm can paralyze a single 
victim. The Storyteller rolls the spirit's Rage against the 
appropriate difficulty (target's Stamina * 3, or Rage if 
the target is another spirit). Cost is one Essence point 
for each level of the target's current health or one point 
per Essence point if the Charm gets used against a spirit 


. 


Chapter Nine: Dramatic Systems 49l 


d 


| 

1 
1 
1 


A 


/ 


J 


T 
zm 
«P 
NT. 
I 


entity. Minimum cost is 10 Essence. The paralysis lasts 
one turn for every Essence point spent... and yes, the 
spirit can spend extra Essence to disable its opponent 
for longer periods of time. 


Disorient: By altering both nearby landmarks and 
the target's sense of direction, the entity confuses its 
opponents on either side of the Gauntlet. To do so, the 
Storyteller rolls the spirit's Gnosis against difficulty 6 or 
the local Gauntlet rating, whichever is higher. Possessed 
only byspirits of confusion and the raw Dynamicenergies 
often called Wyld spirits, this Charm costs no Essence. 


Dream Journey: For 10 Essence points (15 if the spirit 
wants the target to remember it in the morning), an entity 
may intrude on a sleeping subject's dreams. Although the 
Charm has no lasting effects beyond the emotional pain or 
comfort involved in that dream, the spirit can do whatever 
itdamnwellpleases within the confines ofthe dream realm. 
Of course, if the subjectis a lucid dreamer with a Demesne, 
the intruder might get more than it bargained for... See 
the Lucid Dreaming Talent (p. 294) and the Demesne 
Background (pp. 310-311) in Chapter Six for details. 


Ease Pain: By spending one Essence, the spirit may ease 
another creature's pain. In game terms, this alleviates all 
wound-based penalties except penalties to movement. 
The Charm doesn’t actually heal the injuries, however - 
it merely soothes the pain involved. Each Essence point 
removes the subject’s pain for roughly one hour. 


Element Sense: Through instinctive contact with its 
native element (earth, fire, etc.), an elemental spirit can 
sense things that happen to be touching, or happening 
near, sources of that entity’s element. When activated, 
this Charm extends in a circle roughly 500 feet around 
the elemental itself and lets the entity perceive things that 
occur within a yard or two of its element, so long as the 
source of that element lies within the area affected by the 
Charm. A fire elemental, for instance, could sense things 
within a yard of a candle flame or fireplace if that flame 
flickers within 500 feet of the elemental itself. Each use of 
this Charm costs five Essence and lasts roughly an hour. 


Feedback: Possessed only by certain aggressive Digital Web 
spirits, this Charm fires off a shattering wail of sonic or 
electronic feedback. Every two points of Essence put into 
the attack inflics one health level of bashing damage in 
the form of headaches, scrambled senses, mental trauma, 
and misfiring nervous systems. Every five points in the 
attack inflict a level of lethal damage - cooking organs, 
killing brain cells, electrocuting flesh, and disrupting 
muscular control. This Charm affects only travelers in 
the Digital Web, but it can kill their meat back home. 


Flee: With this Charm, the spirit can temporarily boost 
its Willpower to 15 for the purposes of escaping danger. 
This bonus does not actually raise the Trait with regards 


Mage: The Ascension 20" Anniversary Edition 


to activities other than escape, although it might aid a 
spiritwho’s trying to avoid or hide from a confrontation. 
Costs two Essence per turn. 


Flood: A typical trick for storm spirits and water 
elements, this Charm raises the natural water level to 
flood a given area. The size of that area depends upon 
the power of the spirit: a Gafflinglevel entity could 
flood a small building or a short city block, whereas a 
Jaggling could flood a small town. (Don’t ask how much 
an Incarna could flood with this Charm...) The Charm 
normally costs one point of Essence per turn to use, 
and it generally takes several turns to flood a significant 
area. If there is no water around, the spirit would have 
to import some via storm clouds, broken water mains, 
or other potential sources of a flood. 


Freeze: Asudden drop in temperature frosts the immediate 
area. The spirits Rage Trait drops by one, and every 
character within that area suffers one health level in 
lethal damage for every point in the spirit's new Rage 
Trait. (Rage 6 would drop to Rage 5, inflicting five dice 
of lethal damage, for example.) The range of this Charm 
is roughly 20 feet (three meters) for every dot in the spirit's 
permanent Rage Trait. That sharp drop in temperature 
could have other effects too - see Harsh Weather and 
Environments under Environmental Hazards. 


Healing: With a surge of spiritual energy, the spirit can 
heal an injured physical being. To do so, the Storyteller 
rolls the spirit's Gnosis - difficulty 6 for lethal damage, 
difficulty 8 for aggravated damage. That spirit can heal 
one health level for each point in that spirits Gnosis 
Trait and may use this Charm only once on a character 
per scene. The spirit could heal each of six characters, 
for example, but it could only do so once. The Charm 
costs no Essence, but the spirit will probably want some 
sort of favor in return for the healing. 


Illuminate: Suffusing itself with light, the entity 
illuminates an area roughly 20 yards or meters from its 
body or changes the color and intensity of existing lights 
in thearea. This Charm requires no roll or Essence cost. 


Influence: For three Essence points, the spirit can 
gradually shift a subject's mood in whichever direction 
that spirit desires. A successful roll of that entity's Gnosis 
againstthe subject's Willpower sets the Charm in motion; 
the spirit can then influence that person from a distance, 
with no words or obvious contact between them. 


Inhabit: A lesser and more benign version of the 
Possession Charm allows the spirit to briefly inhabit a 
living creature or inanimate object. That spirit slips into 
thesubject, speakingwith hervoice and perceiving through 
her various senses. The Storyteller makes a Gnosis roll, 
difficulty of the subject's Willpower (for a living target) or 
the local Gauntlet (for an object). If the subject consents 


to be inhabited, no roll is necessary. This Charm costs 
five Essence and lasts for one scene. If the spirit tries to 
compel its host into any sort of harm or danger, the spirit 
is immediately ejected from that host. 


Insight: Through this Charm, an entity can puzzle out 
one hidden element of a target's identity, history, or 
personality. If the spirit tries to uncover a specific piece 
of information, the Charm costs 10 Essence; if the entity 
simply attempts to find something worth using, the cost 
is only five Essence. 


Tron Will: Bydecidinguponasingle, specific course ofaction 
(guard this place, watch this child, find this book, and so forth), a 
spirit may invoke this Charm and add five extra dice to any 
roll that helps it meet that purpose or resist being driven 
away from the task. Costs one Essence per hour. 


Lightning Bolt: With a surge of power, the entity 
hurls a thunderbolt. Costs two Essence for each die of 
lethal damage inflicted. (See also the Blast Charm and 
Electrocution under Environmental Hazards.) 


Materialize: This Charm allows a spirit to assume 
physical shape in the material world... a dangerous thing, 
especially in the age of machine-gun fire. To do so, the 
spirit’s Gnosis must be higher than the local Gauntlet 
rating. Once materialized, the spirit can go wherever 
it wants to go, provided that the local Gauntlet rating 
is no higher than the spirit’s Gnosis -2, and assuming 
that no one has bound that spirit in a mystic pentacle 
or hypertech spirit cage (in game terms, a Spirit 4 Effect; 
see the Spirit Sphere entry in Chapter Ten.) If the entity 
gets killed in the material realm, its form is dispersed and 
the spirit winds up banished to the Umbra in Slumber, 
as if its Essence had been dispersed in the spirit realm. 


Under the old World of Darkness rules, a materialized 
spirit had to buy its Physical Attributes, health levels, 
and Abilities per the chart below. (A materialized spirit 
still uses its Gnosis for Social and Mental Attributes.) 
This approach allows a spirit to expand its capabilities, 
so long as it has enough Essence to do so. Alternately, 
the spirit can simply manifest and use its Willpower, 
Rage, Gnosis, and Essence as usual, without bothering 
to generate Attributes and Abilities, as per Werewolf: 
The Apocalypse 20" Anniversary Edition. In that case, 
however, the spirit remains bound to a single form in the 
Earthly realm and cannot adjustits size or capabilities. The 
spirits in Appendix I have been built using the physical 
forms suggested by the older rules. 


Typically, aspiritsoaks damage with its Willpower Trait, plus 
the Armor Charm if it has that power. When a materialized 
spirit gets hit, however, the Stamina Trait (plus armor) 
soaks damage if that Trait is higher than Willpower. To a 
materialized spirit entity, bashing, lethal, and aggravated 
damage are essentially the same - all three drain Essence 


points if they manage to inflict damage against the spirit's 
body. Ifthatspirittakes damage, its materialized health levels 
absorb the damage first; once those health levels are gone, 
the spirit can take up to five more health levels in damage 
before its Essence dissipates back into the Umbra. Whether 
or not the dead materialized husk remains behind after 
the spirit's Essence has departed is a Storyteller call. Given 
the long histories of “demon’s blood,” “angel feathers,” 
and "dead alien bodies," however, tradition suggests that 
a corpse should remain behind. 


Essence Trait 


Cost 

5 Initial manifestation (Paradox spirits 
do not pay this cost). 

1 Per one Physical Attribute level. 

1 Per two Ability levels. 

1 Seven initial health levels. 

1 Per additional health levels (each extra 
health level also increases size). 

1 Weaponry; per die of aggravated 
damage above Strength damage. 

1 Per physical health level healed. 


Meld: Elemental spirits can merge with their native 
element by using this Charm, simply disappearing into 
the element in question. This trick works only for the 
spirit’s native element, however - an air elemental cannot 
meld into wood. The charm costs two Essence and one 
turn to employ. At the end of that time, the element 
may be disturbed by the spirit’s passage, but the spirit 
itself cannot be seen or affected. Obviously, this Charm 
requires a decent amount of the element in question. 


Mind Speech: For three Essence, a spirit can project 
images and impressions, or speak directly into a subject’s 
mind, using a form of telepathy. The subject understands 
the spirit in whatever language she considers her native 
tongue. If the subject resists the message, the spirit could 
spend three Essence per die to try to win a resisted roll 
against the target’s Willpower (difficulty 6 for both parties). 


Open Moon Bridge: A willing spirit with this Charm 
may open up a moon bridge from one Umbral location 
to another. For such service, of course, that entity will 
want a significant favor. The Charm costs no Essence, 
and the moon bridge can reach up to 1000 miles (1600 
km) from the spirit’s current location. 


Peek: The entity peers through the Gauntlet from the 
Penumbra to the physical world. Costs no Essence. 


Possession: The awful power of demons and other 
corrupting entities, this Charm allows a spirit to enter and 
command an object or living thing. As with the Inhabit 
Charm, Possession allows the spirit to see, hear, speak, and 


. 


B No AA 


Chapter Nine: Dramatic Systems 493 


4 
S 


N A, 


7 


"rtr. 


“pi A 
Ys | 
Yr | 
| 
| 

| 
ar. 
"Dev 
» 


P 
4 


va 
a 
- En 
Ht 
k 


otherwise interactwith theworld through the target's body; 
in this case, however, that body may be warped in horrific 
ways through the spirit's influence... becoming, in many 
cases, a freakish fomor (see Werewolf: The Apocalypse and 
Infernalism: The Path of Screams for details). 


It's an article of faith that a possessed person has to bear 
some previous form of corruption in order to open the 
door for demonic possession. Whether or not this is 
true remains a Storyteller call. In any case, the possessing 
entity finds a secluded spot in the Umbra (often protected 
by other allied entities) and then begins the possession 
process. In game terms, the Storyteller spends 10 Essence 
and then rolls the spirit's Gnosis against a difficulty of 
the target's Willpower (or, for an object, difficulty 4). The 
better she rolls, the faster the possession takes place: 


Successes Time Taken 


1 Six hours. 

2 Three hours. 
3 One hour. 

4 15 minutes. 
5 Five minutes. 


6+ Instantaneous. 


Until the possession is complete, the entity may be 
attacked in the Umbra; any successful attack on that 
entity breaks the Charm. Once the possession has taken 
hold, however, the corruption is usually permanent. A 
successful exorcism using Spirit 4/Life 3/ Prime 2 magick 
can eject the spirit from its host, as can a successful 
attack through the True Faith Merit (see Appendix II). 
Until and unless such exorcisms have been performed, 
however, this Charm and its effects tend to last until 
the spirit departs its host. 


Quake: This elemental power allows the spiritto literally 
shake the material world. For five Essence, the entity 
can cause the earth to shake, rattle, and roll within a 
one mile radius of that spirit's presence on either side 
of the Gauntlet. Each additional five Essence escalates 
the intensity of the quake, from a notable tremor at five 
to a devastating catastrophe at 30. 


Reform: For 20 Essence, the spirit may instantly disappear 
from its current location and appear somewhere else in 
the spirit realms... usually far away from its enemies. 


Shapeshift: With a five-point expenditure of Essence, 
the spirit can look like whatever it wants to look like. 
That new form doesn’t have any additional powers or 
abilities, though spirits tend to be fairly protean when 
it comes to things like image, limbs, or size. 


Short Out: Three Essence allow the entity to short out 
nearby electrical systems with a Gnosis roll, difficulty 6. 


Mage: The Ascension 20" Anniversary Edition 


Some systems, however, are harder to disrupt than other 
ones are, especially when hypertech is involved - see the 
Control Electrical Systems Charm for details. 


Shatter Glass: Flexing its will, the spirit breaks all the 
glass in the area. The Storyteller rolls the spirit’s Gnosis, 
difficulty 6. The base shatter area is roughly 10 yards, 
and each success makes the affected area 10 yards larger. 
Costs no Essence. 


Solidify Reality: A Charm for Stasis spirits only, this 
power allows the entity to spin a Pattern Web, bringing 
a choking form of order to its surroundings. With a 
successful Willpower roll, the spirit may craft a spiritual 
wall so thick that no method short of high-powered 
Entropy or Spirit magick can bring it down. The difficulty 
of that roll depends on how large, thick, and potent the 
Pattern Web will be; a small boost for existing Stasis 
would be 5 or 6, whereas a vast web spun across a chaotic 
place would be 9 or 10. The Essence cost also depends 
upon the difficulty of that Web's construction - from 
one for a small and simple Web to 20 for a large and 
static barrier. For other details (including the use of a 
Pattern Web as a weapon), see the Calcify Charm entry. 


Soul Reading: A common trick for demonic or 
aristocratic entities, this Charm allows the spirit a 
brief but revealing glimpse of a mortal's passions and 
temperament. It's not mind reading, per se, but a fairly 
accurate gauge of who a mortal is, what she wants, and 
how she feels in that moment. Costs three Essence. 


Spirit Away: The awful talent of Paradox entities and other 
dreaded spirits, this Charm allows the spirit to snatch a 
creature or character from the material world and then 
bring him to its personal Realm. For 25 Essence and four 
or more successes on a Willpower roll, difficulty 7, the 
entity can grab someone; if that grab succeeds, the spirit 
and its prisoner go directly to that spirit’s Realm - no stops 
in between. The very next turn, both beings wind up in 
the Realm. The prisoner can try to escape, of course, but 
unless she manages to counter the grab with a successful 
dodge, she’s goin’ down... or up... or wherever... 


Spirit Static: A spirit of order and Stasis can raise the 
local Gauntlet rating by one level with this Charm. Up 
to three entities can cooperate on this task, raising the 
Gauntlet by three. To harden the Gauntlet, the Static 
spirits must focus on the task, lowering all of their dice 
pools by two for the duration of the static effect. This 
Charm costs no Essence, only concentration. 


Swift Flight: By spending one point of Essence per turn, 
the spirit can fly at three times its normal speed, up to 
([60 + Willpower] x 3) yards or meters per turn. 


System Havoc: A Charm employed by Digital Web spirits 
and electronic elementals, this power allows a spirit to 


wreak havoc on electrical energies, causing most sorts of 
non-magickal equipment to short out, burn out, or even 
explode. For two Essence, the spirit can disrupt fragile 
electrical systems (radios, computers, lights, etc.) With 
five Essence, it can fry any small electrical system that's 
not designed or protected with hypertech. And with 10 
Essence, itcan disrupt(and probably destroy) electronic gear 
that is protected with hypertech, or else cause widespread 
damage in massive electrical systems, like city power grids. 


Terror: Through awesome majesty or horrific appearance, 
the spirit invokes a primal, screaming fear. Mortals and 
otherspiritbeings confronted with this entityand its Charm 
must make Willpower rolls, difficulty 7, or else tremble 
with soul-deep terror. (If the roll fails, the character is at 
minus three dice to all dice pools if she tries to act; she 
succumbs to headlong flight if she can manage to run or 
fly away from the spirit.) A botch on the Willpower roll 
reduces the target to weeping, fetal panic. The charm costs 
three Essence to activate. By spending 10 Essence instead, 
the entity can raise that Willpower roll's difficulty to 9, 
force everything that fails that roll to collapse in fear, and 
subtract three dice from even the targets who do make the 
roll. For even nastier effects of this Charm on unfortunate 
characters, see Things Man Was Not Meant to Know 
under Part III: Health and Injury. 


Track: For five Essence, the entity can track a certain 
being, without error, throughout the Otherworlds. 
Certain beings might not be willing or able to enter 
certain Realms (say, a demon faced with a heaven), 
but beyond that, the target of this Charm shines like a 
beacon to the pursuing spirit. 


Umbral Storm: Summoning an Otherworldly storm 
(often like a hurricane, but possibly much weirder than 
that...), the spirit invokes high winds (40 mph) and driving 
rains. This being the Umbra, those rains might be blood, 
frogs, Skittles, or some other cascading material. For five 
Essence, the storm covers roughly a mile in diameter; 
for every two additional Essence points spent, that spirit 
can increase the winds by 10 mph or the storm's size by 
1096. A favored trick for elementals and storm spirits, 
this Umbral tempest lasts until it blows over naturally. 


Umbraquake: This shattering Charm shakes the local 
Umbrascape with such force that everyone standing 
within its range (roughly a half mile) suffers half the 
spirit's Rage in bashing damage each turn, either from 
theshakingground or from collapsing structures, falling 
trees, and other debris. Each turn's worth of quake costs 
five Essence. A flying character is, of course, immune to 
the damage, though perhaps not from the sound- and 
shockwave of the quake. 


Updraft: A potent gust of wind lifts human-sized 
creatures into the air. The Storyteller rolls the spirit's 
Willpower against difficulty 6; for each success, the 


spirit can lift one creature of roughly 300 pounds or 
less. Costs no Essence. 


* Waves: This elemental spirit Charm creates strong 
currents on or under the surface of bodies of water. 
Churning waters to froth, the spirit can swamp boats, 
drown swimmers, and send waves crashing againstshores 
or vessels. Such applications cost five Essence to affect a 
50 foot radius, and the effects last roughly five minutes 
for each five Essence spent. 


PPAR $ and 
Storytelling Spirit Entities 


From a game systems standpoint, a spirit is simply a 
character - a bundle of Traits and motivations that deals with 
your heroes just as any other character would. 


And yet, on a dramatic level, a spirit is something more than 
that. Every spirit ought to carry a sense of strangeness when it 
appears. Winds blow, shadows curl, flames flicker, and noises 
go silent. The mere presence of a spirit prickles the senses too: 
hairs rise up on the back of your arms, chills clutch the base of 
your spine, sights and sounds appear to deepen or fade in the 
presence of a spirit. A collection of Traits can’t get such things 


across... but the Storyteller and the players can. 


Atmospheric Powers 


To emphasize the uncanny nature of spirit entities, the 
Storyteller may give such characters a variety of minor powers that 
function as story elements: the ability to chill a room with a glance, 
cry a river of blood, summon every bird or cat within the area, and 
soon. Flies mightsingand trees mightspeak when a powerful spirit 
comes near. From a gaming standpoint, these atmospheric powers 
should simply happen, without rolls or Essence-point expenditures. 
To be fair, such powers should not be overt attacks or defenses - 
merely quirks of narration that show that your heroes are dealing 
with something Other, and thus worthy of respect. 


Mages - even reckless ones - don't take spirits lightly. 
When a spirit character appears, the other characters ought to 
show itsome respect. This doesn't mean cowering in the spirit's 
presence, although certain godlings should certainly earn that 
kind of reaction. It does mean, though, that the characters will 
take that spirit seriously... and, by extension, the players should 
as well. Mocking Thor to his face isn't just a great way to get a 
lightning-bolt colonoscopy - it's also a great way to wreck the 
mood in what should be a potent moment of your chronicle. 


With just a bit of imagination, creativity, and respect, the 
presence of an Umbrood entity can mark a powerful moment in 
your Mage chronicle. The Inhuman Entities entry in Chapter 
Seven (p. 356) features suggestions about the motivations and 
roleplaying involved in an Umbrood character. So if you're a 
Storyteller, invest your spirit with weird quirks of atmosphere 
and behavior; if you're a player, go along with that as well, 
bringing your own imagination to the game when describing 
the reactions of your character in the presence of the Sacred 
Other - a being who could be your ally, enemy, or god. 


Chapter Nine: Dramatic Systems 495 


INS 4 


Chapter Ten: 
The Book of 


Magick 


You have escaped the cage. Your wings are open. Now fly. 


— Jeddaludin Rumi 


Six of Pentacles 


Associations: Exchange of energies; expression and expanse; 
practicality; reciprocation; vanity; self-centeredness; a tendency 
to go to extremes... 


I call it The Look. 


One long Look in a person's eyes, and I can tell you more or less what he's 
thinking. Read whether or not he's feeding me a line. Maybe even rattle him 
enough to get him to scurry off and go bother someone else. 


Or I can seduce him. Dangle him by a little strand of Will, like a spider 
over the candle-flame I've lit just to see him squirm. I can make him believe in 
me, fear me, trust and even worship me. If I really want to get vicious, I could 
even kill him with a long and nasty glare. 

That's no easy trick. I’ve been studying The Look for years. Reading 
dusty old books, practicing new variations, honing my Will until I can reach 
into a person's soul just by looking at his eyes. 


Everything from modern psychology to Left-Hand Tantra to medieval 
French Black Magic has gone into The Look. When I use it, I breathe softly 
and focus everything I have through an invisible tunnel of concentrated Will. 
The Look rides up from the base of my spine, gathering energy as it hits each 
chakra and draws solidity from the way I stand and shift my body weight. 

I feel it vibrate in my bones, especially when I'm about to do something 
seriously dramatic with The Look. 


This isn't just focus, although that's involved in The Look, of course. 
It's something I could not explain unless you had the kind of background I 
have, with the ability to know that there's more going in inside our skins 
than simple science would have you believe. 


Chapler Ten: The Book of Magick 


497 


the magick your character does is an extension of the person 

I've worked hard for that power. But if you're nice, I can your character is. 
share it with you. The ultimate irony of the Ascension War is that everyone's 
What's my price? Funny you should ask... basically doing the same thing, yet they're killing one another 
over their impression of how and why they do it. In game terms, 


An Extension of Ihe Self all mages use the same rules. The characters don't see it that 


"ea i : b Ayers recogni at fact. 
Magick is an extension of the mage. way, but the players recognize that fact 


Mage's magick system allows both the player and the 


Various mystics and authorities can argue about that ; : 
character to invent spells to suit the occasion. Although pre- 


point until the sun goes cold, but in Mage: The Ascension, 


This Book of Magick is pretty huge. Thankfully, it's not essential to read and master this entire chapter before you play 
Mage. Folks who simply want to sling spells around can stick to Casting Magick, the Charts, The Spheres, and 
Focus and the Arts. Everything beyond those sections details the various elements of Mage magick, its rules, and 
the results it can have within your game. Although a Storyteller should have a working familiarity with these rules, the 
players don't need to know it all. 


Also, please remember The Golden Rule from Chapter Eight. These systems are guidelines. Alter them if you see fit, 
and remember that there's usually more than one way to cast a spell. 


Just to keep things clear... 


* The word mage hereby applies to all characters who employ Sphere-based magick, regardless of their practices or 
affiliation. 


(Capitalization as presented below.) 
t Enligh 


Sphere: One of the nine Traits that define what a mage can do with magick. 


Effect: Game term for the effect you have on reality when you use magick to make things happen. 


rote: A pre-prepared Effect; called an Adjustment or Procedure by the Technocracy. 


Paradox: The reality backlash associated with Sphere-based magick. 


Pattern Arts: The Spheres of Forces, Life, and Matter, which can create, adjust, and alter physical Patterns. Spirit is 
an "unofficial" Pattern Art which does not deal in physical materials or elements. 


conjunctional Effect: An Effect that uses two or more Spheres, combining their powers in order to do something 
that neither Sphere can accomplish on its own. 


sing a. S ; na son thing, making 1 ucky J ss DE me hing you 1c Ndr » 


vulgar magick: An Effect that the average person would consider impossible by the prevailing beliefs. Examples: 
Turning into a housecat, stepping out of thin air, snapping your fingers to make someone's bones snap too, etc. 


498 . Mage: The Ascension 20" Anniversary Edition 


prepared spells - often called rotes - certainly exist, the basis 
for the following rules is simple: create the spell you need from the 
things your character would do. 


This chapter, then, explains how and why those rule 
systems work. 


Four Questions at the Core 

Despite a bewildering array of terms and circumstances, 
you can boil the essence of Mage magick down to four simple 
questions: 


What do I WANT to do, and HOW will I do it? 
Can I use what I KNOW to get what I WANT? 
Did I succeed or not? And... 

What happens either way? 


Everything else in this chapter helps provide you with 
the answers. 


Cutting to the Chase 


Mage’s freeform magick system can seem confusing 
both in and out of game. As a result, this chapter will be as 
straightforward as possible. The metaphysical blahblahblah can 
be found in Chapters One and Two. Like the previous two 
chapters, this Book of Magick deals with rules systems and their 
practical applications in your game. Let the characters argue 
about the poetry while the players have a blast. 


On that note, the following systems have been left as 
generic as possible. A Hermetic, a Progenitor, a Batini, and an 


orphan all use the same rules, and this text favors those rules, 
not the methods that different mages employ. (For details about 
those methods, see the section regarding Focus and the Arts.) 


For easy reference, we've divided up this chapter according 
to certain topics: 


e PartI: Casting Magick (pp. 500-510) covers the rolls you 
make and the Traits you employ when your character 
casts magickal Effects. This section also features 
Magickal Reference Charts (pp. 502-510), which lay 
out the material for quick and easy reference. 


e Part II: The Spheres (pp. 511-528) summarizes what 
each Rank of a Sphere can do. 


* Part III: Casting Magick, Step by Step (pp. 528-547) 
details each element involved in the casting of magick. 
You won't need to deal with each element every time 
you cast a spell. When you need them, however, you 
can find them here. 


* Part IV: The Paradox Effect (pp. 547-553) shows how 
things can go wrong for your mage, extending into the 
related section dealing with... 


* Part V: Quiet (pp. 554-561), which deals with the 
insidious effects of metaphysical insanity. 


* Part VI: Examples in Play (pp. 561-565) provides a host 
of examples of the preceding rules in action. 


Chapter Ten: The Book of Magick 499 


= s 


* Part VII: Focus and the Arts (pp. 565-600) offers an 
array of options for your character's personal approach 
to magick. 


* Part VIII: Adjustments, Procedures, and Rotes (pp. 
601-611) presents a handful of sample spells. 


The key to Mage's magick system is this: every 
mage does as he or she Wills. Although World of 
Darkness mages do use spells, tools, Procedures, 
rotes, and rituals, the things they do with those 
instruments change reality in accordance with 
the individual mage's desires. That's why we put 
that contentious (some say pretentious) "k" at 
the end of the word: because each mage changes 
the world in his or her own way, and that’s a 
bit more significant than simple “magic.” 

From a gaming standpoint, Mage’s magick system is 
freeform, based upon what your character knows, needs, and 
believes about herself. The Spheres provide a blueprint, and 
focus provides the toolkit, but each character - and each player 
- is ultimately an architect, building things to suit individual 
desires and abilities. 


That’s true even for the simplest Rank 1 perception Effects. 
You could have three Virtual Adepts using the same Effect in 
three different ways: one might activate a scanning app on his 
cell phone; the second could close her eyes, do some three- 
part yoga breathing, and extend her senses outward; and the 
third takes a few hits off a joint, open his eyes and sees deeper 
than the usual levels of human perception. In game terms, 
all three mages belong to the same group and yet perform 
the same Effect in their own way - the rules are the same but 
the roleplaying is unique. The ways in which you make your 
character's magick happen depend on the way you want to 
play that character and the ways in which you see that person 
meeting their immediate needs. 


Here's How You Do If 


Okay, so how, in game terms, do I cast a spell? 


* Step One - Effect: Based on your character's abilities 
and needs, decide what you want to do and how you 
want to do it. This is called the Effect: the thing you 
want to accomplish with your magick. 


* Step Two - Ability: Based on your mage's focus and 
Spheres, figure out if you can create the Effect you want 
to create... and if so, how your character will make it 
happen in story terms. 


500 Mage: The Ascension 20" Anniversary Edition 


¢ PartIX: Reality Zones (pp. 611-617) explore the cultural 
and geographical flexibility of coincidence and vulgarity. 


For the sake of clarity and easy access, certain important 
rules and charts have been repeated throughout this chapter. 
That way, you don't need to dig through the entire chapter 
to find that one reference you need in the middle of your game. 


* Step Three - Roll: Roll one die for every dot in your 
Arete Trait. The difficulty depends upon the Effect 
you're trying to use; whether it's vulgar or coincidental; 
and whether or not someone's watching you. 


If you're trying to hit a target with an attack (sword, gun, 
fireball, etc.), then roll the appropriate attack roll. For details, 
see Combat in Chapter Nine, pp. 409-457. 


* Step Four - Results: The number of successes that you 
roll determines whether or not you succeed. If you fall 
short of your goal, you may roll again on subsequent 
turns in order to get more successes. (See Rituals, Rolls, 
and Extended Successes, pp. 538-542.) If you fail, the 
Effect fizzles out. And if you botch, bad things happen. 


Those are the basics. Part III: Casting Magick, Step by 
Step follows this process through each stage, and the rest of 
this chapter explains the details. 


Consequences and Paradox 

Even if you succeed, you might still get Paradox: the 
consequence that comes about when you impose your view 
of reality upon the reality that already exists. Although mages 
dispute what Paradox means and why it works the way it works 
(see Chapters One and Two for details), in game terms, Paradox 
is simple: it's what happens when you push reality too far. 


We'll go into the various effects of Paradox later in this 
chapter. For right now, just remember that every time you use 
magick to rearrange reality, you risk having reality rearrange 
your character's face. That's the cost of magick in the World 
of Darkness. Your mage has incredible potential, but he must 
be cautious about what he does with it. 


In Mage, Paradox can strike when your character does 
something flashy, big, and sudden. Essentially, he pushes too 
hard against established reality, so reality pushes back. For 
that reason, you can get Paradox even when your Arete roll 
succeeds. And so, when you decide upon an Effect in Step One, 
remember the potential for Paradox. Be subtle and clever when 
you can... and when you have to go for the big, flashy Effect, 
accept the fact that you'll be paying for it later. 


Thefollowing charts and tables show you whatyou need to 
know when you're using magick in your game. For explanations 
of the various elements of magick and their associated rules, 
see the sections following these charts. 


All elements described below are detailed between p 


Nhat Dx 
What Effect are you trying to accomplish? 


MICE 


Step Tw Ability: Can You Do If! 
How does your character focus belief and practice into making it happen? 
How long does it take? 

hat 
Are any allies assisting you? 


Step 
Roll your Arete/ Enlightenment versus appropriate difficulty (minimum difficulty is 3): 
Coincidental: Difficulty = highest Sphere + 3 
Vulgar Without Witnesses: Difficulty = highest Sphere + 4 
Vulgar With Witnesses: Difficulty = highest Sphere + 5 


If you need to hit your target, roll appropriate combat Traits. 
Check the number of your successes. 


Repeat for extended rituals/ rolls. 


Step Four - Results: What Happens? 
What sorts of results did your magick have? (Damage, Duration, apparent effects, etc.) 


FEsisi, C 


Did you succeed? If so, determine its results. (Take Paradox if required.) 

Did you botch? If so, take Paradox as below: 
Coincidental Botch: Gain one point of Paradox per dot in the highest Sphere used. 
Vulgar Without Witnesses Botch: Gain one point of Paradox + one point per dot in the highest Sphere. 
Vulgar With Witnesses Botch: Gain two points of Paradox + two points per dot in the highest Sphere. 


(Paradox has different rules in Mage Revised; see the Paradox Points Generated chart.) 


Chapter Ten: The Book of Magick 50l 


DAMES T n 
^ Magickal Reference Charts 


Base Casting Roll Paradox Points Generated 
Effect is... Difficulty On a Success 
Coincidental Highest Sphere + 3 Coincidental None 
Vulgar Without Witnesses Highest Sphere + 4 Vulgar One point 
Vulgar With Witnesses Highest Sphere + 5 On a Botch 
Coincidental One per dot in highest Sphere 


Vulgar Without Witnesses One + one per dot in highest 
Sphere 


Vulgar With Witnesses Two + two per dot in highest 
Sphere 


For optional Reckoning metaplot rules, see p. 550. 


Magickal Feats 
Base Successes 
Feat Suggested Successes 
Simple Feat One 
(Enhancing your perceptions, lighting a candle, changing hair color, shielding your mind) 
Standard Feat Two 
(Healing yourself, conjuring a small fire, altering your shape, influencing someone’s mood with Mind magick) 

Difficult Feat Three 


(Healing aggravated damage, conjuring a fireball, transforming yourself into a radically different shape, reading or affecting 
someone else’s mind) 


Impressive Feat Four 

(Growing or regenerating limbs, conjuring a firestorm, transforming someone else into a different shape, controlling someone 
else’s mind) 

Mighty Feat Five to Ten 


(Creating simple life-forms, blowing down walls, conjuring strange entities, commanding a mob) 
Outlandish Feat 10-20 


(Creating complex life-forms, blowing up buildings, summoning Otherworldly creatures, turning a mob into your personal 
zombie squad) 


Godlike Feat 20 and beyond 
(Rewriting your own Pattern permanently, incinerating cities, conjuring monstrous hordes, enslaving hundreds of people) 


Notes 
Personal Effects typically require only one success. 


Effects that affect someone or something else require at least two successes. 
World-altering Effects tend to require at least five successes and go upward from there. 


Damage or Duration for these feats (not both at once) are based upon the number of successes rolled, as per the Base 
Damage or Duration chart. If you chose Damage, then Duration is instant. If you choose Duration, then Damage is zero. 


Additional Damage, Targets, or Duration may be purchased under the Optional Dividing Successes Rule, below. 


If you wish to add to the Effect’s Damage, Targets, or Duration before you make the roll, figure out how many additional 
successes you would need, declare them to the Storyteller, and then roll the total amount (that is, the Base + additional 
successes). 


Mage: The Ascension 20" Anniversary Edition 


Magickal Difficulty Modifiers 


Activity 


Difficulty Modifier 


Tools and Rituals 


Using a personalized instrument 

Using a unique instrument 

Using a unique and specialized instrument 

Working with unfamiliar instruments 

Working without usual instruments 

Using instruments when you don’t need to 

Using personal item from target (sympathetic magick) 
Appropriate Resonance (personal, instrument, ritual, or Tass) 
Opposed Resonance (personal, instrument, ritual, or Tass) 


Manipulating Mythic Threads/ hypernarrative 


Time and Effort 


Spending Quintessence 
Spending extra time (per additional turn each roll; max. -3) 
Fast-casting 


Turning time backwards 


-] 

-] 

-2 (total) 
*2/ +1 
*3 


-] per point, max. -3 
-1 
+] 


+3 


General Circumstances 


Researches lore about subject before using magick 
Near a Node 

Distant or hidden target or subject 

Juggling several Effects at once 

Mage distracted 

Mage in conflict with Avatar 

Domino Effect 


Outlandish to godlike feat 
Notes 
Maximum net modifier +3 or -3. 


-1 to -3 

-1 to -3 

+] 

* per two Effects 
*] to *3 


+] to *3 


Nl 


* per two coincidences after first; see p. 539. 


+] to +3 


Minimum difficulty 3, maximum difficulty 10. If you employ the Thresholds option, max difficulty is 9; in the latter case, 
extra modifiers add to threshold, requiring one additional success per +1 difficulty modifier. 


Modifiers that would take the difficulty above 10 add additional successes at a one-to-one ratio; a +3 modifier to 


difficulty 10, for example, would demand at least three successes. 


If you use both the threshold option and modifiers that take the difficulty above 10, then each additional +1 difficulty over 
9 demands an extra success. A +3 modifier to difficulty 9 would require at least three successes. 


Degrees of Success 
Botch: Character makes a critical mistake, wasting the Effect and all associated efforts. Mage gets Paradox points based 


upon the Spheres and level of vulgarity involved. 


Total Failure: No successes. Effect falls short. Mage can try again at +1 difficulty. 


Partial Success: Player scores roughly half of the Suggested Successes, giving imperfect results. Mage can keep 


going, at +1 difficulty. 


Success: Player scores at least 100% of the Suggested Successes. Effect goes as planned. 


Extraordinary Success: Player scores at least three successes above the Suggested Successes. Mage enjoys some 
bonus — extra Damage or Duration, high-quality item, loyal spirit, etc. — to be decided at Storyteller's option based upon 


nature of the Effect. 


Chapter Ten: The Book of Magick 


503 


Range 
Line of sight 


Very familiar 


Three Familiar 

Four Visited once 

Five Described location 
Six+ Anywhere on Earth 


Base Damage or Duration 


Successes Damage Duration 

One None One turn 

Two Two levels One scene 

Three Six levels One day 

Four Eight levels One story 

Five Ten levels Six months 

Sixt Number of Successes x 2 — Storyteller’s option 
Notes 


Damage also reflects the number of health levels healed by 
the Life Sphere, or the points of Quintessence channeled by 
the Prime Sphere. 


To preserve game balance, the Storyteller may choose to cap 
damage at 20 health levels (10 successes, or nine successes 
for Forces Sphere attacks). 


Magickal Damage 
* Bashing Damage: Mind Sphere Effects. 


* Lethal Damage: Most other Sphere Effects. 

* Aggravated Damage: Any Sphere when charged 
with Prime 2 and a point of Quintessence. 
Fire or electrical Forces Effects. 


Vulgar Entropy-, Life- or Prime-based Effects that directly 
disrupt the target's Pattern. 


Correspondence and Time inflict no damage unless they're 
combined with other Spheres. 


The Forces Sphere adds one automatic success to Damage. 


Entropy inflicts damage only through indirect attacks until 
Rank 4; after that, damage is aggravated. 


Teleportation Locations 


Successes Range 
One Within immediate perception 
Two Very familiar place (home, Sanctum, etc.) 
Three Familiar/ Just saw it recently 
Four Visited briefly 
Five Heard or saw it described 
Six+ Teleporting totally blind 
504 Mage: The Ascension 20" Anniversary Edition 


Correspondence Sphere Ranges 


Connection 

Body sample 

Close possession or companion 
Possession or casual friend 

Casual acquaintance or object used once 
Briefly touched or met object or person 


No connection 


Optional Dividing Successes Rule 


Under this optional rule, each additional success fd fa 
the Base Successes may be spent on one of the following 
bonuses: 


Targets: One additional target for each success beyond 
the Base. 


Damage: Two additional levels of damage for each 
success beyond the Base. 


Duration: Add one level of duration for each success 
beyond the Base. 


One success = one scene 

Two successes = one day 

Three successes = one story 

Four successes = six months 

Five successes = Storyteller’s option 

Six+ successes = permanent (at Storyteller’s option) 


“I Disbelieve? 
Only vs. mental illusions. Roll Willpower, five successes or 
more. 


Believability Difficulty 
No fucking way! 3 
Hard to swallow 4 
Implausible 5 
Possible 6 
Probable 7 
Likely 8 
Too damned likely! 9 


To p flaws in "physical" illusions, roll Perception + Alertness 


as described above. 


Feats of Illusion 


Successes Illusion 
One Simple, one sensation (sight, sound, scent, 
etc.) 
Two Simple and moving, one sensation 
Three Complex and stationary, or simple and 
moving (two sensations) 
Four Complex and moving (several sensations) 
Five Complex and reflexive (multiple sensations) 
Sixt Complex and interactive (full sensations) 
Notes 


Types of Illusions 


* Mental illusions = Mind 2+ (only in target's mind; usually 
coincidental) 


* “Physical” illusions = Forces 2+/ Prime 2+ (visible to all 
witnesses; manipulate elemental forces to manifest sensory 
components) 


* Immersive illusions = Forces 4+/ Prime 4+ (“holodeck” 
level of apparent reality) 


Damage & Duration 


Illusions don't normally inflict damage unless “damage levels" 
are purchased as described below. Illusions may indirectly 
lead witness into dangerous situations, as described under 
Environmental Hazards. 


* Mind = bashing damage 

* Mind 3/ Life 3 = aggravated damage 

* Forces = bashing or lethal, depending upon elements 
involved 

Default Duration is one scene. Additional levels of Duration, 
or "damage levels" of two levels of damage, may be 
purchased for one additional success, each level, above the 


Base. One day * two levels of damage, for example, would 
require two additional successes. 


Gauntlet Ratings 


Successes 

Area Difficulty * Needed 
Node 3 One 

Deep Wilderness 5 Two 

Rural Countryside ó Three 

Most Urban Areas 7 Four 
Downtown 8 Five 
Technocracy Lab ?. 9 Five 


Notes 

An area's Gauntlet Difficulty may vary with time and 
circumstances; a dark alley on Halloween night might have 
a Gauntlet of 6, whereas a rigidly cultivated garden at noon 
could have a Gauntlet of 8. 


#1 = If using the Technocratic victory metaplot, add +1 to the 
Gauntlet Rating when in industrial-culture zones, whether or 
not the Avatar Storm is still in force. 


#2 = Treat as a Node when using Dimensional Science. 


Time Sphere Timelines 


Successes Effect Timespan 

One Within a year 

Two Five years 

Three 20 years 

Four 50 years 

Five 100 years 

Six + 500 years 

10+ 1000 years or more 
Notes 


Timespan limits apply only to looking or reaching through 
time, not to the duration of a given Effect. 


Feats of Time Magick 


Take several characters, or a roughly 10’ x 10’ area, out of time/ severe aging (Mighty feat) 


Successes Feat 

Three Step out of time/ minor aging (Difficult feat) 

Four Take one other character out of time/ noticeable aging (Impressive feat) 

Five 

Eight Take larger area (25' x 25’) out of time/ age to decrepitude (Mighty feat) 

10-20 Take an even larger area out of time/ age to brink of destruction (Outlandish feat) 
20+ 


Notes 
Feats that rewind time add +3 to the difficulty. 


Freeze or isolate very large and dynamic area or event/ age out of existence (Godlike feat) 


Feats that affect time beyond personal perceptions (viewing through time, for instance) are almost always vulgar magick. 


Chapter Ten: The Book of Magick 505 


A 


: DX. i SES NE MEER EN 


Paradox Backlash Roll 


Storyteller rolls one die for each point of Paradox in character's current Paradox pool, against difficulty 6. 


Successes Effects of Discharge 
Botch 


No successes 


All Paradox points discharge harmlessly. 
No effects, but no Paradox points discharge. 


1-5 One point of Paradox discharged per success. Mage also suffers one die’s worth of bashing damage per 
success and acquires a trivial Paradox Flaw. 


One point of Paradox discharged per success. Mage also suffers a Burn of one die of bashing damage per 
success or acquires a minor Paradox Flaw. 


Usual Paradox point-discharge, as well as a Burn of lethal damage or one of the following effects: a 
significant Paradox Flaw, a Paradox Spirit visitation, or a mild Quiet. 


Usual Paradox point-discharge, as well as a Burn of lethal damage and one point of permanent 
Paradox or two of the following effects: a severe Paradox Flaw; a Paradox Spirit visitation; a moderate 
Quiet; or banishment to a Paradox Realm. 


21+ Usual Paradox discharge, plus a Burn of aggravated damage either two ae of permanent Paradox, one 
| drastic Paradox Flaw, a Paradox Spirit visitation, a severe Quiet, or banishment to a Paradox Realm. 


Levels of Quiet 


Level 
1 1-3 


Paradox Discharged Delusions or Disassociation 


Minor quirks or occasional delusions; mage begins to manifest odd behavior and minor 
disassociation from his baseline reality. 


N 


4-6 Delusions and disconnection become more severe; mage perceives things that no one 
else can see, starts denying the experiences of other people, and begins to behave 
irrationally even by Awakened standards. 


wo 
p 
o 


Mage's senses backfire, creating blindness (real or conceptual], vivid hallucinations, 
and erratic — perhaps dangerous - behavior. Hobgoblins might appear, manifesting the 
mage's delusions in ways that other people can perceive. 


Mage either gets trapped in a mindscape of his own design, or else behaves so 
irrationally that he becomes a danger to himself and everyone nearby. 


Stubbornness, minor projection 


Selective perceptions, hypocritical 
behavior 


Irrational behavior, literal blindness to 
denied subjects 


Deadly fanaticism 


Fanatical drone 


C 


Marauder 


o 


Minor hallucinations 


Frequent delusions, mood swings 


Wild hallucinations, sensory 
overload 


Mindscape or constant hobgoblins 
Catatonia or dementia 


Marauder 


Ms 506 Mage: The Ascension 20" Anniversary Edition 


br 


16-20 Mage either drops into total catatonia or takes on many of the characteristics of a 
Marauder but without immunity to Paradox. 
214 Mage goes Marauder and becomes a Storyteller character. 
Types of Quiet 
Denial Madness Morbidity 


Attraction to death and decay 


Fixation with mortality 
Bloodlust and macabre behavior 


Violent sociopathy 
Sadistic killer 


Marauder 


Mindscape Rolls 
Difficulty for all is Quiet Level + 3 


Attempted Task Dice Pool 
Meditate into mindscape Perception + Meditation Subjød 
Meditate into Demesne Perception + Demesne oil clans) Eel rs a 
Reduce time in mindscape Wits + Enigmas or largeaninial (olk harses Auman] 


Perception + Demesne Powerful animal (tiger, elephant, 


Communicate to outside Willpower whale] 
Changeling 

Aura Colors and Textures Mage 

Emotional State Color 

Bitterness Brown spirit 

Calm, Devotion Blue Vampire 

Change, Transformation Violet Werecreature 

Compassion, Affection Pink 

Empathy, Sensitivity Green 

Enthusiastic, Idealistic Yellow 

Fear Orange 

Fury Dark Red 

Pain, Hatred Black 

Passion, Anger Red 

Sadness Silver 

Uncertainty, Depression Gray 

Condition Texture 

Arousal Bright 

Corruption Pulsating 

Dementia, Quiet Flickering 

Excitement Crackling 

Faerie Rainbow highlights 

Marauder Hypnotic, swirling 

Fanatical Intense colors 

Ghost Weak, faded 

Magic/ Mage Sparkling 

Nephandus Wouldn't you like to know? 

Sickness, Dying Fading 

Spirituality, Awareness Gold 

Truth, Purity, Faith White 

Vampire Pale 

Werecreature Bright, vibrant 


Chapler Ten: The Book of Magick 


IN A 


Quintessence Amounts 
Per body, in points, that can be extracted with Prime Sphere Effects. 


Quintessence 
Points 


5 
10 
15-25 


20-30 


10-30 (depending on 
Quintessence Trait) 


Essence Trait 
10+ Blood Pool Trait 
20+ Gnosis Trait 


507 


N 


[| 
c 
] 


Notes 


Matter 2, whereas liquefying it would simply be Matter 2. 


M 


br 


| D" EA e 


Common Magickal Effects 


Entries reflect whichever Spheres apply to the feat in question. Transforming an object into air or fire would be Forces 3/ 


Many Sphere listings feature two Sphere levels. The first lets a mage work on herself, and the second (in parentheses) allows her to 
work on others. Changing your own shape, for example, requires Life 4, but changing someone else’s shape demands (Life 5). 


Other workings begin small but then escalate their effects with higher Sphere levels; these workings have been marked with a “+.” 


Entries with [brackets] have several possibilities, which depend upon the Sphere used in the Effect. For example, [appropriate 
elemental Sphere] could mean Forces, Life, or Matter, depending upon the element the mage is working with. 


Given the flexibility of the Spheres, there may be several options when performing a particular feat. The methods listed below 


separated by semi-colons. 


Body Magick 


Adapt to Environment 
Animate Corpse or Parts 
Animate Bones & Remains 
Cause/ Cure Disease 
Cosmetic Alteration 


Create Body 


Duplicate Body 


Grow New Limbs or Other 
Features 


Heal/ Harm Living Being 
Heal/ Harm Fae 

Heal/ Harm Vampire 
Heal/ Harm Werecreature 
Increase Physique/ Traits 
Increase/ Reduce Speed 
Revive Recently Dead 

Rot Body 

Shapeshift 

Sleep Spell 


Soak Aggravated Damage 


Transform a Body into an 
Element 


Life 2 (3) 

Life 2/ Prime 2 
Matter 2/ Prime 2 
Life 2 (3) 

Life 2 (3) 


Life 2 (simple) or 5 
(complex)/ Prime 2 


Life 5/ Prime 2 
Life 3 (4) 


Life 2 (3) 

life 3/ Mind 3 

Life 3/ Matter 2 

Life 3/ Spirit 2 

Life 3 (4) 

Time 3 

Life 4/ Spirit 4/ Prime 3 
Entropy 4; or Life 4 

Life 4 (5) 


Mind 2 (suggest sleep); 
or Mind 4, Life 3, or both 
(compel instant slumber) 


Life 3 


Life 3+/ [appropriate 
elemental Sphere] 3+ 
(Life 4+/ 3+[appropriate 
Sphere]) 


Fate & Fortune 


Alter Probability 
Bless/ Curse 
Cause Decay 


Spot Weakness 


508 Mage: The Ascension 20" Anniversary Edition 


—— 


Entropy 2+ 


Entropy 3/ Life 3; or Prime 5 


Entropy 3+ 
Entropy 1 


are simply the easiest ways to cast a spell, not necessarily the only ways to do it. Common alternatives for the same task are 


Crafting Wonders 


Device Prime 4 + [Spheres in Wonder’s Effects] 

Fetish Spirit 4 (to bind unwilling spirit); or Prime 
4 (willing spirit) 

Periapt/ Matrix Matter 5 (inanimate); or Life 5 (living) + 
Prime 3 

Talisman Prime 4 + [Spheres in Wonder’s Effects] 

Trinket Prime 2 (to consecrate), or [Spheres 
used to craft Trinket’s special properties] 


For details, see Appendix 


Il, (pp. 651-653). 


Illusions (see Feats of Illusion charD 


Mental Illusions 


Mental Illusions That 
Inflict Damage 


“Physical” Illusions 


Immersive Illusions 


Mind 2+ 
Mind 3+; or Mind 3+/ Life 3+ 


Forces 2+/ Prime 2+ 


Forces 4+/ Mind 4/ Prime 4+ 


Spirit Powers 


Awaken Object's Spirit 
Bless/ Curse 
Command Spirit 
Conjure Spirit 

Create Fetish 

Drain Spirit's Essence 
Harm Ghost 

Harm Spirit 

Open/ Close Gateway 
See Spirits 

Speak to Spirits 

Step Sideways 

Touch Spirit 


Spirit 3 

Entropy 3+; or Prime 5 
Mind 4/ Spirit 4 

Spirit 3 

see Crafting Wonders 
Prime 4/ Spirit 4 
Entropy 3/ Prime 2; or Spirit 3 
Spirit 3 (acts like Life 3) 
Spirit 4 

Spirit 1 

Spirit 2 

Spirit 3 

Spirit 2 


Objects & Elements 
Forces 4+/ Prime 2 


Call Storm 


Conjure Element 


Conjure New Object 
Conjure Physical Illusion 
Direct Existing Elements 


Disintegrate an Object 


Enchant Object/ Organism 
Invisibility/ Silence Field 
Invisibility on Living Being 


Consecrate/ Harden/ 
Perfect an Object 


Levitation/ Flying 


Object Inflicts/ Resists Agg. 
Damage 


Speed/ Slow Velocity 


Transform Objects 


Transform Forces 


Forces 3/ Prime 2 (fire, 
wind); or Matter 3/Prime 2 
(earth, metal, water); or Life 
3/ Prime 2 (living wood) 


Matter 3+/ Prime 2 
Forces 2+/ Prime 2 
Forces 2+ 


Entropy 3/ Time 3; or 
Matter 3 


see Crafting Wonders 
Forces 2 

Forces 2/ Life 2 

Matter 3+; or Prime 2 


Forces 2+; or 
Correspondence 3/ Life 2; 
or Matter 2 


Prime 2 


Forces 2+ 


Matter 2+/ [appropriate 
Sphere] 2 


Forces 3+/ [appropriate 
Sphere] 2 


Time & Distance 


Affect Distant Object/ Being 
Aging/ Reversing Age* 


Conjure Earthly Being 
Create Multiple Images 


Create Multiple Objects 


Open Gateway Between 
Locations 


Rewind Time 

Set Time Trigger 
Speed/ Slow Time 
Teleport 

Time Travel* 
Ward/ Ban 


Correspondence 2+ 


Time 3+/Life 4 (living being) 
or Matter 2 (object) 


Correspondence 4/ Life 2 


Correspondence 3; or 
Forces 2+/ Prime 2 


Correspondence 5/ Matter 
3/ Prime 2 


Correspondence 4 


Time 3* 

Time 4 

Time 3 
Correspondence 3 (4) 
Time 5 


Correspondence 2+/ Prime 
2+/ [appropriate Sphere] 
2+ 


* Turning back time adds +3 difficulty and is always vulgar. 


Perception & Psychic Powers 


Astral Projection 
Astral Body of Light 


Clairvoyance 


Conceal/ Alter Aura 
Conceal Avatar 
Conceal Thoughts 
Conjure Mental Illusions 
Enter a Dream 

Influence Mood 
Influence Subconscious 
Mind Control 
Prophecy/ Hindsight 
Psychic Pain Blast 


Scramble Thoughts 
See Auras 
See Avatar 


See Through Another's 
Eyes 


See Through Mental 


Illusions 
Sense Energies 


Share Perceptions 


Shield Mind 
Telepathy 
Telekinesis 


Translate Languages 


Chapter Ten: The Book of Magick 


A y 


Mind 4+ 
Mind 4+/ Spirit 3/ Prime 2 


Correspondence 2; or Mind 
3/ Correspondence 2 


Mind 1 or Prime 2 
Spirit 2/ Mind 1 
Mind 1 

Mind 2+ Hr 
Mind 3 | 
Mind 2 

Mind 3+ 

Mind 4 

Mind 2/ Time 2; or Time 2 


Mind 3; or Mind 3/ Life 3 for F 
agg. Damage "I 


" 
Mind 3 L i 
Mind 1; or Spirit 1 F 
Mind 3/ Prime 2/ Spirit 1 
Mind 3 


Mind 4 


[appropriate Sphere] 1 
Mind 2/ [appropriate 
Sphere] 1 

Mind 1 (2) 

Mind 3 

Forces 2+ 


Mind 3; Mind 3/ Forces 2 
to translate language so that 
other people can understand 
it too 


509 


A! 
E 


g 
Pa 


di 


A 


. 


Quintessence Energy 


Absorb Quintessence Prime 3 

Channel Quintessence Prime 3 

Create New Node Prime 5 

Create Quintessence Weapon Prime 3* 

Destroy by Draining Quintessence Prime 4 (object) or Prime 5 (creature) 
Drain Node Prime 4 

Drain Quintessence Prime 3 

Employ Periapt Prime 2, or Correspondence 2/ Prime 2 (Avatar rating to use reflexively) 
Enchant Weapon/ Armor Prime 2 

Energize Periapt Prime 3 

Fuel New Pattern Prime 2/ appropriate Sphere 

Nullify Paradox Prime 5 

Refine Tass Prime 4 

Share/ Exchange Quintessence Prime 3 

Tap Wellspring Prime 4 

Weave simple Body of Light Prime 2 (body only — no astral travel) 


See also Crafting Wonders and Quintessence Amounts chart. 
* Costs one Quintessence per health level inflicted. 


Mage: The Ascension 20" Anniversary Edition 


VW 
Y ` 
eg 
X me 
|» EX 0 = = = = = -— - MEAM 
< E E * ais es -— E 2 à - » 
Ac - U^ = = 


Part Il: The Spheres 


Tomakeaterrible pun of it, Mage’s Spheres reflect 
a well-rounded knowledge of nine different yet 
interrelated elements of reality. In story terms, 
these nine constructs representa sort of “unified- 
field theory” of Earthly metaphysics. In game 
terms, they measure what your characters do 
and cannot do, based upon their understanding 
of theoretical knowledge and practical results. 


Each Sphere features five different levels 
of progress and result. That progression is 
represented by the number of dots in your Sphere 
Trait. As detailed in Chapter Two, within the sidebar Levels of 
Sphere Progress and Expertise (see p. 68), each successive level 
allows your mage to understand a bit more about the principles 
of that Sphere. As a result, he can do more things with it, adding 
anew level of abilities onto the previous levels of accomplishment: 


e Rank 1: Perception - the ability to perceive 
and observe the forces in question. With such 
basic (yetuseful) understanding, a character can 
sense things that few mortals ever recognize. 


eo Rank 2: Manipulation - the ability to do small 
things with those forces. At this point, the 
mage begins to exert minor control over the 
phenomena she sees, and may use it to work 
small changes upon herself. 


Rank 3: Control - the ability to alter reality 
in noticeable ways, though these are usually 
restricted to the mage's self. In most cases, 
the Sphere begins inflicting damage at this 
level, and allows the character to work small 
alterations on other characters. 


Rank 4: Command - the ability to perform 
major acts of alteration through the principles 
of that Sphere. Generally, this level allows 
the mage to make significant changes to the 
Patterns of other characters. 


Rank 5: Mastery - the ability to command 
vast forces in connection with that element 
of reality. By now, the mage knows almost 
everything there is to know about the principles 
of that Sphere and can perform godlike deeds 
with them. 


(Higher degrees of Sphere mastery might exist, but those 
are rare and optional so we’re not exploring them in this book.) 


The metaphysical principles behind those Spheres can 
be found in Chapter Two, under A Brief Overview of the 
Spheres and Their Properties, (pp. 67-71). Here, we'll deal 
strictly with the levels of progress and the things you can do 
with each level of expertise. 


For easy in-game reference, each Sphere has been given 
an entry that details the expanding powers of that Sphere. 


To find out what you can do with those Spheres, especially 
when you combine them, see the Common Magickal Effects 
chart in the previous section. 


The Pattern Spheres 


Many entries refer to “the Pattern Spheres” - that is, Spheres 
that govern physical elements and materials. When a mage 
creates a physical force, object, or body from “nothing,” that 
spell combines a Pattern Sphere with the raw creative energy of 
the Prime Sphere. The Pattern Sphere crafts the form, and the 
Prime Sphere supplies the energy that makes that form “real.” 


As noted elsewhere, those physical Pattern Spheres are 
Forces (for energies), Life (organic bodies), and Matter (inorganic 
materials). Spirit is sort of an honorary Pattern Sphere that 
deals only with the metaphysical essence called ephemera. And 
so, when your mage conjures fire (Forces), butterflies (Life), 
stones (Matter), or ephemeral weaponry (Spirit), you combine 
the appropriate Sphere with the Prime Sphere in order to bring 
such things into existence. 


For details, see the entries for each Sphere in question. 


Conjunctional (Combined) 
Sphere-Effects 


As mentioned earlier, Mage’s various Effects come from 
Spheres; some employ a single Sphere, and others use a 
combination of Spheres. Sometimes referred to as conjunctional 
Effects, these combinations expand the potential of a single 
Sphere into Effects that no single Sphere could accomplish 
on its own. 


As an example, let’s say that Malcolm wants to influence 
someone’s mood. Mind 2 alone will do that. If he wants to 
alter a person’s body chemistry in order to induce euphoria, 
however, he’d need to use Life 3/ Mind 2... and if he wanted to 
set things up so that the body chemistry changed several hours 
from now, he’d need to add Time 4 to that Effect. 


Again, the Common Magickal Effects chart shows you 
how different Spheres and their Effects can be combined to 
create even greater or more expansive Effects. 


Locking an Effect 


Normally, a lasting magickal Effect remains in the location 
where it was originally cast. The mage has essentially transformed 
that localized reality to suit his desires. Certain Effects, of course, 
travel because of the nature of the things they do; rumors 
circulate, winds and fires move, a shape-shifted character can 
run around, a gate leads to some other location, and so forth. 


If, however, you want to cast a lingering, mobile Effect that 
has been integrated into a specific Pattern and which involves a 
Sphere that is not normally related to that sort of Pattern, then the 
Effect must be “locked” into the target’s Pattern by a Sphere 
that does apply to that Pattern. 


Chapter Ten: The Book of Magick 


TN Al 
NN ri 


? 


| Ñ N 


AE ai 


What does that mean? It's very simple: if you want to alter 
someone's mind, use the Mind Sphere; if you want to alter 
her physical body, use the Life Sphere. But if you want to use 
magick to build inorganic material into her body's Pattern, 
then you must use both Life and Matter; if you want to make 
her Pattern invisible by warping light around her body, then 
you must lock the Effect by using both Life and Forces. 


Locking the Effect combines the necessary Spheres so that 
the magick is essentially integrated into a Pattern. And as noted 
earlier, the Patten Spheres are Forces, Life, and Matter. Spirit is 
sort of an honorary Pattern Sphere because although it deals in 
non-physical elements, those elements have their own kind of 
Pattern when they become ephemera. (See Chapter Nine, p. 475.) 


Unless the subject of a locked Effect has been turned into 
a Wonder (see Crafting Wonders, pp. 652-653, and the rules 
given in Appendix II), that Effect still expires when the Duration 
runs out. The lock in itself does not make an Effect permanent. 


Sphere Specialties 

Each of the following entries also features a selection of 
specialties. You can choose a Sphere specialty when your mage 
accumulates four dots in that Sphere. As with the specialties 
granted to Attributes and Abilities, a Sphere specialty allows 
you to count each 10 you roll as two successes, not just one. 
(For details, see Chapter Six, p. 274.) 


At four dots, a player gets to choose one specialty, based 
upon the things the mage does most often with the Sphere 
in question. At the Storyteller's discretion, additional specialties 
can be purchased for four experience points each, assuming 
that the character has spent time and effort training herself in that 
specialty. You can't suddenly specialize in Shapeshifting, after 
all, if your character hasn't spent lots of time learning how to 
change her shape. 


Spheres By Rote 

Longtime Mage fans know that the previous Sphere entries 
ran on for four to six pages per Sphere, covering 36 pages or 
more. During games, those long entries could get very hard to 
follow, and they featured an array of Effects that were essentially 
one-Sphere rotes. Those Effects, in turn, proved difficult to 
track down, especially in the heat of a game. And so, in the 
interest of clarity, we're sticking to basic functionality in this 
20% Anniversary Edition. 


A full presentation of the Spheres and their Effects and 
permutations would be far larger than any other chapter in this 
book. Mostfolks won't need such an extensive catalog of spells, 
especially given this book's Common Magickal Effects chart. 
Fora detailed breakdown of the many potential applications of 
the Spheres see the Mage 20th Anniversary Edition sourcebook 
How Do You DOThat? A Practical Guide to Sphere Magick, 
which presents a comprehensive look at the Spheres and their 
associated Effects, rotes, Procedures, and so forth. 


A small selection of rotes and Effects can be found in 
this chapter, in Section VIII: Adjustments, Procedures, and 
Rotes, (pp. 601-611). 


Mage: The Ascension 20" Anniversary Edition 


For more about the use of Spheres and the way in which 
they fit into the step-by-step process of casting magick, see 
Spheres: The Foundation of Each Effect, (pp. 528-529). 


Optional Rule: 
Technocratic Alternative Spheres 

Three optional Spheres at the end of this section reflect the 
Technocratic refinements of three of the nine mystic Spheres, 
as presented in the Revised Convention Books for the New 
World Order (the Data Sphere, an analog of Correspondence), 
the Syndicate (Primal Utility, the hypereconomic applications 
of Prime), and the Void Engineers (Dimensional Science, the 
scientific perspective on Spirit). 

For the most part, these optional Spheres may be purchased 
ONLY by Technocratic operatives, as these disciplines reflect 
the training, research, and conditioning of the Technocratic 
Union. The exception, Data, is based on innovations by the 
Virtual Adepts and has since been adopted by technomancers 
from all over the spectrum. 


In most respects, a Technocratic Sphere functions like a mystic 
one. These three variants, however, have a few noticeable bonuses 
and limitations, which get covered in the individual entries. 


A character cannot possess both a Technocratic Sphere and 
the corresponding mystic Sphere. Doing so would essentially 
reflect a divided perspective on Reality - believing two related 
yet opposed beliefs about the same thing. 


Thatsaid, a character may transition from one to the other 
if thestory supports that transition. In such cases, the character 
temporarily loses a dot in that Sphere until she has a chance to 
add one point of Arete, essentially experiencinga revelation that 
allows her to adapt her old expertise to her new understanding. 
At that point, the Sphere returns to its previous rating. The 
player does not have to spend extra experience points to return 
that Sphere to its old level, although raising it, of course, costs 
the usual amount of experience points. 


The other Spheres - Entropy, Forces, Life, Matter, Mind, 
and Time - follow the same rules, regardless of a mage’s 
affiliation. A NWO Black Suit would refer to his approach 
to the Mind Sphere as Psychodynamics, but Psychodynamics 
still functions, in system terms, the same way that the Mind 
Sphere does. 


Correspondence 


Connections 
and Dimensions 
Specialties: Conjuration, Scrying, 
Gates, Warding, Teleportation 


By manipulating the ties between places, objects, and 
people, the Correspondence Sphere allows a mage to sidestep 
distances, sense things that would normally be out of range, pull 
objects out of thin air, levitate or fly, or connect an Effect to 
some other place or character. Some mages proclaim this Sphere 


is proof that distance is an illusion, whereas others view it as 
the Art of pulling strings between different places and people. 


Because this Sphere deals with space and relationships, 
its Effects use a special Correspondence Sphere Ranges chart, 
found on (p. 504). Most Effects require touch or close contact, 
but Correspondence lets the mage reach across distances and 
affect hidden or faraway targets. When adding Correspondence 
toan Effect, use that Correspondence Sphere Ranges chart to 
find the connection and then exploit it. Tenuous connections 
require several successes, butspanning close connections is easy 
for a mage who understands this Art. 


On its own, Correspondence allows the mage to reach 
across distances, even to places she cannot see or touch. At 
Rank 2 or higher, she can grasp items and work with them 
from a distance. To manipulate other objects or beings in ways 
other than physical contact, however, that mage must combine 
Correspondence with another Sphere - typically a Pattern 
Sphere (Forces, Life, or Matter). 


When combining Correspondence with other Spheres, 
however, the Effect is limited - in game terms - to the mage's 
Rank in the Correspondence Sphere, not to the Rank of the other Spheres 
involved. A mage, for instance, who has only Correspondence 2 
tries to use a Forces 3/ Correspondence 2/ Prime 2 Effect to try 
to start fires at a distance... except that she is limited to Forces 2, 
a Rank that's too low to conjure fire. In order to boost that 
effect, she'd need to raise her Correspondence to at least 3. 


Despite its ability to warp space and distance, 
Correspondence deals only with whole Patterns, unless a target 
has been altered by another Pattern Sphere; Correspondence 
alone, for example, cannot teleport someone's head off - the 
mage would need to use Life magick to separate the head from 
its body. A gun, on the other hand, could be snatched away by 
Correspondence alone. 


Mages who specialize in Correspondence tend to have a 
faraway look. To them, the separations of space and form are 
meaningless illusions that disappear when you understand how 
the universe truly fits together. 


Foranoptional Technocratic approach to Correspondence, 
see Data, (pp. 524-525). 


. Immediate Spatial Perceptions/ 
Landscape of the Mind 

Basic spatial understanding allows a mage to sense things 
in her immediate vicinity even if she can’t perceive them with 
her normal senses. Using that perception, she can estimate the 
distances between objects; intuitively find a direction (North, 
South, East, West); notice hidden objects or characters; and 
spot spatial instabilities - warps, anomalies, wormholes, etc. 
- especially the ones caused by other Correspondence Effects. 


ee Sense, Touch, Thicken & Reach 
Through Space/ Correspondence Sensing 
That mage can now extend her senses across intervening 
space, sensing things in other locations. Such extensions, 
however, leave minor ripples in space... the kind noticed by 


Sam ds 7A 


Rank 1 Correspondence. Fortunately, she can also thicken space 
to cover her tracks; each success used in doing so deducts one 
success from the roll of a character who's trying to spy on her 
or notice her sensory Effects. 


By adding Life or Matter to Rank 2 Correspondence, the 
mage can grasp small items or organisms (housecatsized or 
smaller) and then pull them through tiny holes in space. This 
lets her snatch business cards, guns, rabbits, and such from 
another location, apparently pulling them out of nowhere. 


Pierce Space/ Open or Close Gates/ 

Co-locality Perceptions 
Now the mage can tear holes in space, large enough for her 
to step through. These minor gates are small and temporary, but 
they allow that character to step from one place to another, so 
long as she’s alone and lightly encumbered. (Teleporting large 
items, or while carrying heavy loads, demands Correspondence 
4.) Scoping out the new location is a good idea, of course. 
A close, familiar destination requires fewer successes than a 
distant, unfamiliar one. 


Using the Co-locality Perceptions Effect, the mage can 
also perceive several places at once. Those locations all appear 
as ghosts overlapping each other, as if they'd been layered on 
top of the closest location. 


Also, by combining Correspondence 3 with Forces, Life, 
or Matter, the mage can move things around from a distance, 
levitating, manipulating or teleporting them without physical 
contact. 


Rend Space/ Ward/ Co-locate Self 
Creating larger holes in space, the mage can now open 
permanent gates between locations (10 or more successes); 
isolate forces, spaces, objects, or people into their own tiny 
realms (by combining Correspondence 4 with Forces, Life, 
Mind, or Matter); and ward certain locations against specific 
Patterns (again, combining Forces, Life, Mind, or Matter with 
Correspondence) or Resonance energies (combining this Sphere 
with Prime 4). This warding effect can impede or even block the 
forbidden elements from crossing into, or out of, the protected 


space. (For extensive details about wards, see the sourcebook 
How Do You DO That?) 


Using the Co-location Effect, that mage can also appear 
in several different places at once. To function, however, she 
must add Mind 1 to that Effect. Each self mirrors the original’s 
actions unless she also adds Life 2 to that Effect, granting 
independence to every self. 


«eese Spatial Mutation / Co-Location 

Distance and dimensions become child’s play to a mage 
at this Rank. She can distort space; alter sizes and stretch or 
compress objects (Matter), bodies (Life), or forces (Forces); 
connect different Patterns to one another across intervening 
space; or even superimpose places or objects on top of one 
another (extremely vulgar). Combining this Rank with Life 3, 
the mage may also expand her senses to perceive many different 
places at once. 


513 


Chapter Ten: The Book of Magick 


| 


Entropy 


Chance and Mortality 
Specialties: Fate, Fortune, 
Decay, Order, Chaos, Necromancy 


Everything is mortal. Objects, people, even concepts decay 


| n over time. When you truly understand that principle - and 


| 


more, when you can influence it yourself - such knowledge 
brings with it a sense of liberation... a bit of sadness, of course, 
but also the comfort of letting go. 


Controlling the energies of probability and decay, an 
Entropy-schooled mage can manipulate random factors, observe 
and influence flaws within a system, tap into the energies of 
the Low Umbra, induce or remove corruption, and otherwise 
exert his Will through the inexorable process of mortality. 


This is no easy discipline. The Entropic mage assumes 
some of the Resonance of decay within his own Pattern, and 
bears the weight of mortality within his mind and soul. Still, 
the powers of this Sphere - though less obviously destructive 
than those of other Arts - give that mage subtle but pervasive 
control over Creation as a whole. 


Unlike most other Spheres, Entropy spells don't inflict 
damage until Rank 4; after that, such damage is aggravated, 


54 Ma$e: The Ascension 20^ Anniversary Edition 


as it breaks down the very Patterns of existence. Up until 
that point, Entropy helps a mage exploit or defer the effects 
of decay and probability... a gift that helps him use an 
opponent’s surroundings against her even when he doesn't 
attack directly. 


For obvious reasons, Entropy-schooled mages tend to be 
fatalistic, disassociated, or uncannily cheerful. To them, the 
saying "all things must pass" is no simple sentiment but an 
intrinsic fact of life. 


° Sense Flaws, Fate & Fortune/ 
Ring of Truth 

Basic Entropic understanding allows a mage to see the 
currents of probability, spot flaws in Patterns, and note the 
subtle yet telling details in a person’s speech and behavior that 
suggest whether or not she’s telling what she believes to be 
the truth. Although he cannot yet control such phenomena, 
the mage can predict dice throws, card draws, and other 
apparently random events; spot weak spots in objects, people, 
or arguments; and use those imperfect yet profound insights 
to his advantage. 


ee Control Probability 
Now the mage can control the factors he could only 
sense before. Pulling the strings of apparently random events, 


he can influence activities and results - directing the fall of 
dice or cards, repeatedly hitting weak spots, and directing 
people and things toward a conclusion of his choice. Of 
course, it's easier to control small events (the winner of 
a horse race) than large ones (causing a six-car pileup). In 
game terms, large alterations demand more successes than 
small ones do. 


Affect Predictable Patterns 


Things eventually break down. At this Rank, the mage can 
control the speed at which material objects fail or decay. That’s 
easier to do with complex machines (cars, computers) than it 
is with simple ones (walls, stones) - after all, more things can 
go wrong with complicated things. 


At this Rank, the mage can also start controlling the fate 
and fortune of objects and people, giving them good or bad 
luck by controlling the probability of events around them. 
Again, large feats demand more successes than smaller ones. 


Affect Living Things 

At this Rank, the mage assumes the awesome power of 
blessing, cursing, and conferring outright health or decay. By 
influencing the flow of entropy within a living body, that mage 
can grant outstanding vitality to, or inflict sudden disease upon, 
his subject. Such influence, as noted above, inflicts or heals 
aggravated damage and may grant long-term luck or misfortune. 
(Storyteller’s option as to how this manifests.) 


ecceee Affect Thought/ Shape Memes/ 
Binding Oath 

The most esoteric applications of Entropy allow 
the mage to alter ideas, strengthening or breaking down 
concepts. Although he does not affect the actual workings of 
consciousness, he can cause synapses to misfire (thus confusing 
perceptions and mental processing, inflicting penalties on 
an enemy’s dice rolls), bind someone to an oath, or degrade 
the patterns of thought. By doing so, that Entropic Master 
can craft, perpetrate, reinforce, and undermine arguments, 
beliefs, and even memories. 


To do such things, the Master merely speaks to, or glances 
at, the subject of his attention. Chaos Masters can scramble 
someone's perceptions with a few weird utterances, and Masters 
of Order can present arguments with apparently perfect logic. 
By offering compelling statements, the Master can create or 
destroy memes (see p. 594), thus influencing whole patterns of 
belief. An oath, meanwhile, ties the subject's fate to her loyalty; 
if she breaks the oath, then her luck goes really, really bad. 


In game terms, such feats demand a certain number of 
successes. Inspiring a whim requires only one or two successes, 
sparkinga fancy takes three, setting or undermining a conviction 
takes four or five successes, and setting up obsessions demands 
five successes or more. Such activities are usually coincidental 
and are typically rolled against a difficulty of the subject’s 
Willpower, with a minimum difficulty of 4. 


ET Forces X 


Raising Storms 
Specialties: Alchemy, Motion, Elements 
(any or all), Technology, Physics, Weather, Weaponry 


Although modern physics disputes the old lines between 
matter and energy, the venerable study of Forces transcends 
human politics. ThisSphere commands the energies of Creation, 
and its specialists are among the most powerful mages alive. 


On a metaphysical level, the Forces Sphere commands 
energetic Patterns: fire, air, momentum, gravity, radiation, 
light, sound, and radio waves... the kinetic elements that shape 
and channel Earthly forces. Quintessence flows within such 
Patterns, so a mage can conjure new forces simply by adding 
some Quintessence to "empty space." Different practices view 
such powers differently. Are they elemental spirits? Gods? 
Particles? Waves? Every Master has his or her own pet theory. 
In practical terms, however, this Sphere controls the Patterns of 
such forces - directing, transmuting, enhancing, or banishing 
their effects upon this world. 


In game terms, Forces-based attacks inflict an additional 
success of damage. The nature of that damage depends upon the 
energies in question - see the Magickal Damage or Duration 
chart. Simple manifestations and manipulations are limited 
to the lower Sphere Ranks, whereas large-scale Effects demand 
higher levels of expertise. Mostlarge Effects also demand plenty 
of successes and can become Paradox magnets for careless 
mages. Masters of Forces tend to carry a palpable aura of 
energetic command, with a Resonance that often alters their 
environments in uncanny, elemental ways. 


° Perceive Forces 

Unlocking basic perceptions of the elements, a Forces- 
savvy mage can sense the flow of forces in her environment. 
She can boost her perceptions into the infrared or ultraviolet 
spectrums, notice electrons, see in the dark, view X-rays, discern 
the flow of sound or radio waves, spot kinetic energies, and 
hear frequencies beyond the normal human range. 


ee Manipulate Forces/ Elemental Touch 

Although she cannot conjure energies just yet, the mage 
may now alter the flow of existing forces. Sound can be muted 
or amplified; shadows can be gathered, shaped, or dispelled. 
The mage can warp light to make things invisible, change their 
colors by altering the spectrum of localized light, or render them 
silent by bending sound waves in their vicinity. With a wave of 
her hand, she can disrupt electrical currents; flare flames; or 
direct the course of winds, momentum, or gravity. 


Combining this Rank with other Spheres, that mage 
could also make an object (Matter) or organism (Life) attract 
or repel forces. Thus, she could weave minor protection spells 
or force-fields... or, conversely, turn that target into a magnet 
(perhaps literally) for the forces in question. 


Chapter Ten: The Book of Magick 515 


IASA 


Despite its powers, this Rank is limited in scale. Assume 
that the mage can command energies around a single human- 
sized character or within a small area (20’ or less). To affect a 
larger area, you need a higher Rank in Forces. 


coo Transmute Minor Forces/ Telekinetics/ 


The Dragon’s Touch 

Now the mage can alter and invoke the energies she could 
only touch before. By adding Prime 2, she may conjure winds, 
fire, electricity, gravitational wells, and so forth. Combining 
this Rank with Life or Matter, she can transform people into 
electricity (Life 5/ Forces 3); change water into air (Forces 3/ 
Matter 3), or attach elemental force to material forms - making 
them fly, pinning them to the ground, and having other, similar 
effects (generally with Life or Matter 3). And by adding an 
ephemeral Sphere to this Rank, she might erode or enhance 
energies (Entropy 3); manifest thoughts into energies (Mind 3); 
transmute spirit-stuff into physical energies (Spirit 3); or set 
triggers for energy fluctuations at some later interval (Time 4). 


At this Rank, the scale of effect grows larger, now 
encompassing several dozen yards or a handful of characters. 


Control Major Forces/ Gift of Zeus/ 
Weather-Witching 


Larger Effects become possible. Our mage may now use the 
lower-Rank Effects over larger areas - a mile or more - to change 
weather patterns; conjure darkness; drop or raise temperatures; 
protect locations... or destroy them; and otherwise employ the 
previous levels on a much greater scale. For obvious reasons, 
such Effects tend to be vulgar and demand many successes to 
achieve. 


eeso Transmute Major Forces/ 
Conjuring Infernos 

With godlike power, a Forces Master works her Will upon 
vast areas. She can conjure tornados on a clear day, calm tides, 
and ignite the very air into a firestorm. Such mages earn the 
title "Nuke," though few of them survive long enough to enjoy 
it. It’s easier to invoke such forces under the right conditions, 
of course - a cold snap comes more easily in winter than in 
summer - and such radical alterations have repercussions that 
often outlast the original Effect. In game terms, massive Forces 
spells should disrupt the weather and leave massive Resonance 


echoes behind. 
Life 
The Living Form 


Specialties: Transformation, Shapeshifting, Healing, 
Improvement, Creation, Cloning, Evolution, Injury 


Life grows, transforming over time until some final 
incident renders it into inert matter. Mages who specialize 
in Life, therefore, master the complex principles of organic 
transformation. Beginning with the simplest Patterns, he 
evolves his understanding toward godlike ends. A true Master, 


516 Mage: The Ascension 20" Anniversary Edition 


therefore, may end life, but he may also create it from pure 
energy (that is, from Quintessence) or turn it, literally, to dust. 


Whereas other Spheres grapple with abstract theories, 
Life focuses on literally bone-deep facts. As a Life mage 
knows, however, those facts remain susceptible to change. In 
conjunction with other Pattern Spheres (Forces, Matter), life- 
forms can be changed into elements, turned to stone or metal, 
or else created from such substances. Even without additional 
Spheres, however, Life allows a mage to transmute those life- 
forms in startling, even apparently impossible ways. 


Asawhole, this Sphere embraces everything that has living 
cells within itself, even if that object is technically dead. As a 
general rule, assume that anything that’s still alive enough to 
transplant, preserve, or cultivate is governed by Life Arts. If 
it's inert enough to be irrevocably dead, then it's governed by 
Matter. Thus, preserved blood and organs, still-living plants, 
live-culture cheese, and so forth contain Life, but corpses, 
cotton fibers, withered organs, or cut wood become Matter. 


When used to inflict or repair damage, Life deals out 
aggravated damage because it works directly upon the Patterns 
of living things. As a result, an organism that has been radically 
altered by Life magick (given new limbs or other characteristics 
thatare not partofthe creature's original Pattern) suffers Pattern 
bleeding: an inexorable Quintessence leak that inflicts one level 
of lethal damage per day. Unless the caster uses Prime magick 
to refill that Pattern with fresh energy, or alters that Pattern 
permanently, the damage continues until the subject dies. 


Given their ability to heal illness, age, and harm, Life-skilled 
mages enjoy great health and vibrant beauty. Truly accomplished 
ones understand the mutable potential of organic existence and 
work to correct - or exploit - its ever-changing states. 


° Sense Life 

Basic Life knowledge allows a person to read the presence 
and health of nearby lifeforms. With such knowledge, the 
mage can discern a living being’s age, sex, and overall health. 
By combining those perceptions with other Spheres, he can 
also sense distant organisms (Correspondence 2), guess their 
potential for sickness or misfortune (Entropy 1), perceive them 
through past or future states (Time 2), or read the streams of 
Quintessence that bind them to the universe (Prime 1). 


ee Alter Simple Life-Forms/ Heal Self 

Simple organisms - viruses, mollusks, insects, plants, etc. 
- become clay in the mage's hands. He learns to adjust their 
Patterns (giving a crab wings, for example), and heal or kill 
them. Although he can't yet transmute them into other states 
of being, he can cause flowers to bloom or wither, help trees 
bear fruit, and so on. Focusing on his own Pattern, he can also 
heal himself or perform small alterations (hair color, skin tone, 
height, weight, and so on) to his basic form. 


Transform Simple Life-Forms/ 

Alter Self/ Heal Others 
Advanced understanding allows the mage to radically 
alter simple organisms (turning a tree inside-out); transform 


one into another (changing fruit into insects); or - with Prime 2 - conjure 
them from raw energy. 


Workingwith his own Pattern, that mage can work substantial alterations 
on himself, growing gills, claws, armor and so forth. He remains essentially 
human, but begins to master the definition of "human." Meanwhile, he 
also gains the ability to heal damage to other complex organisms, put 
them to sleep, or inflict harm upon their living Pattern forms. 


eseo Alter Complex Life-Forms/ Transform Self 

Atthis Rank, the mage may enact radical changes on any complex 
organism - people, dogs, horses, and so forth. He can uplift other 
species with new limbs, opposable thumbs, increased brain capacity, 
etc., so long as he doesn't change their intrinsic nature. 


Working with his own Pattern, that mage can transform himself 
into other life-forms of similar size and mass; he could become a Great 
Dane, for example, but not a hummingbird. Special abilities of that 
form (flight, water breathing, and the like) do not carry over, however, 
unless he builds them into that new form with additional Life Effects, 
and the new body might require an adjustment period before the mind 
and reflexes reflect the new form. 


ecoee Transform & Create Complex Life-Forms/ 
Perfect Metamorphosis 

Now the Master of Life may adopt any form he wishes to achieve 
and may transform other complex organisms the same way. His 
expertise allows him to make permanent changes to life-Patterns, create 
complex life-forms from energy (with Prime 2), give them consciousness 
(with Mind 5), transmute them into other elements (Forces or Matter 3) 
or raw energy (Prime 5), radically age or de-age them (Entropy * 
4 or Time 3), or instill them with spirits (Spirit 3 or 5). : «y » 
Without such measures, however, his creations remain <> 
mindless, soulless sacks of life - alive, but nothing 
more. 


Matter 


Shaping the Materials 


Specialties: Transmutation, Shaping, 
Conjuration, Refinement, Complex Patterns 


To a mystic, nothing is truly inert. Still, the Sphere of 
Matter deals with substances that possess no active agency 
of their own - materials, not life-forms or energies. The 
third aspect of the Pattern Trinity, Matter works best 
when combined with other Spheres. Prime and Matter 
create solid forms from energy; Correspondence and 
Matter connect objects across space; Entropy erodes 
or reinforces Matter; Forces transmutes inert elements 
into active ones. Life plus Matter bridges the gap between 
living and dead materials - an essential combination when 
dealing with vampires - and Spirit plus Matter renders ephemera 
into matter or matter into ephemera. Time alters the temporal state 
of Matter, and high-Rank Mind Effects (Rank 5) imbue inanimate 
materials with consciousness. Although Forces, Prime, and Spirit 
reflect primal energies and Life addresses organic animation, Matter 
represents the base of the physical world. 


36obb 
Chapler Ten: The Book of Magick 5I 


518 


Ma$e: The Ascension 20^ Anniversary Edition 


Matter-wise mages tend to share a literally hands-on 
approach to their Art. Solid workers of their practice, 
they favor practical results with even the most theoretical 
applications. Sometimes regarded as dull and simple by more 
esoteric peers, these artisans merge quality and integrity with 
surprising levels of ingenuity. 


. Matter Perceptions 

A Primary understanding of Matter allows the initiate 
to perceive the intrinsic properties of base materials - their 
underlying structure, innate properties, and integral stability 
or lack thereof. With that knowledge, she can view the 
material composition of an object, note its less-obvious 
structures, find its hidden layers or - when combining this 
perception with Entropy - spot its weak points. Combined 
with Life, this Sphere detects implants, enhancements, and 
other integrations of living tissue and inert materials. 


ee Basic Transmutation 

With advanced knowledge, the mage can transmute 
one substance into another, so long as she doesn't alter its 
essential shape, temperature, or basic state (gas, liquid, solid). 
Depending upon that mage's practice, she might reshape 
lead into gold through alchemy, wood into stone through a 
hyperpetrification process, or water into wine (and, with Life 
3, wine into blood) through a sacred miracle. Rare and/ or 
complex materials are more difficult to fabricate than simple 
ones; it's easier to turn stone into iron, for example, than 
into gold. To reflect that challenge, such refinement requires 
a greater number of successes than a transmutation into a 
common material. 


(On a related note, the mage cannot yet fabricate 
radioactive materials. Such elements merge their essence 
into the Sphere of Forces, and thus demand a greater level 
of expertise.) 


When combined with other Spheres, this basic level 
of understanding allows a mage to conjure base materials 
from energy or dissolve them into Quintessence (Prime 2), 
transmute matter into living tissue (Life 4 or higher), move 
an object through space (Correspondence 2 or higher) or 
time (Time 3 or higher), change ephemera into matter and 
matter into ephemera, or awaken the slumbering spiritwithin 
material objects (Spirit 3 or higher). In all cases, Matter 2 
allows the mage to work with simple, homogenous, non-living 
substances. Complex mixtures of various elements usually 
require Rank 3 or higher, although simple combinations 
(like those found in bread, milk, paper, or gunpowder) are 
possible if the player rolls plenty of successes. 


eee Alter Form 

Atthis Rank, the mage can alter theshape of materials in 
whatever ways she desires, and she can temporarily transform 
their essential state into a different one - steel, for example, 
into fog or water into glass. (Permanent changes require 
Matter 5.) That crafter may change an item's density, fuse 
broken pieces together, or rip solid ones apart. 


By mixing Matter 3 with other Spheres, the mage can 
join inert matter with living tissue, disintegrate it into dust, 
shift objects with the power of thought, or otherwise perform 
amazing transformations upon apparently solid materials. 


esee Complex Transmutation 


Complexand radical transformations now become possible, 
especially with the addition of other Spheres. Pumpkins can 
be changed into carriages (Life 2), people into thrones (Life 5), 
cars into robots (combinations of Forces and Prime), or thin 
air into banquets, so long as the mage doesn't mind racking 
up a little (or a lot...) of Paradox. Different principles can be 
combined in complicated ways, creating cybernetic machines 
orelectrified gold. Complicated devices (guns, cars, computers) 
may be conjured out of empty space if the mage understands 
the principles behind such things (in game terms, possesses 
the proper Abilities). As usual, though, complicated creations 
demand extended rituals and many successes. 


eceee Alter Properties 

With Mastery, the crafter can create substances that 
transcend the limitations of scientific possibility, conjure 
materials unknown to Earthly reality, or share the deadly legacies 
of radioactive matter. Such Masters can shape armor out of air 
(with Prime 2), turn vampires into lawn furniture (Life 5), or 
melt steel with a thought (Mind 3). Again, such deeds remain 
incredibly vulgar, but they recall the godlike feats of legendry. 


Mind 


— O) Art of Consciousness 


Specialties: Communication, Illusion, 
Emotion, Social Programming, Self-Empowerment, 
Astral Travel, Mind-Shielding, Psychodynamics, 
Psychic Combat 


Re 


Human beings perceive reality through complex interplays 
of consciousness. The Mind-mage, therefore, alters the realities 
of his fellow beings. Skillfully applied, such Arts can make a 
sane man mad, soothe demented minds, or even shuck the 
boundaries of flesh. 


Though limited in its physical capacities (Mind Sphere 
attacks inflict bashing damage unless otherwise noted), Mind 
is the ultimate coincidental Art. Its Effects remain essentially 
invisible unless they're combined with other Spheres. And 
although Mind Adepts can leave their physical bodies behind, 
such abilities remain unseen by mortal eyes. 


In many cases, offensive Mind effects - that is, ones that 
read or influence another character's mental state - base 
their difficulties on the target's Willpower Trait rather than 
againstthe usual coincidental/ vulgar spectrum. (Ifthe target's 
Willpower is less than 4, the base difficulty is 4.) Drastic acts of 
mind control (suicide, for instance) go against the Willpower 
+3, as do Mind-based attacks against Night-Folk and other 
mages. An unwilling character can also try to oppose such 
Effects with a resisted Willpower roll, using her successes 


like a mental dodge maneuver. And so, though weak-willed 
people may be influenced easily, determined folks can shrug 
aside the influence of all but the most dedicated Will-workers. 
(For details, see Resisting Psychic Assaults, pp. 544-545.) 


For attacks against multiple targets, the difficulty for a 
Mind-based Effect depends upon the usual coincidental, vulgar, 
or vulgar with witnesses situations. Such Mind-based Effects are 
generally coincidental, although especially flamboyant feats 
might be vulgar instead. 


Literally “thought-full,” Mind-savvy mages possess mental 
clarity and unnerving perceptiveness. Some appear to drift in 
a sea of distractions, but the majority of them view the world 
with laser-focus intensity that penetrates illusions to reach 
their deeper truth. 


° Sense Thoughts & Emotions/ 
Mind Shield/ Empower Self 


With basic mental magick, the mage learns to sense the 
emotions and surface impulses of other people. Although he 
cannot read specific thoughts, he's able to perceive psychic 
impressions abouta person or (with Matter 1) a place or object. 
Through this perception, he can guess at the nature of weak 
Resonance signatures and read the stronger ones outright. 
Even without Resonance, that mage can scan auras, note mood 
shifts, discern truth from lies, or grasp someone's overall state 
of mind by way of a successful Arete roll. 


Meanwhile, the mage also learns to shield his own mind 
from the thoughts and emotions of other people, constructing 
mental barriers around his aura, emotions, and consciousness. 
Each success on a coincidental Arete roll removes one success 
from any other character's attempt to read those psychic 
elements. 


On a related note, he also learns how to multitask and 
absorb data with startling acuity. Each success he rolls allows 
him to either consider an additional subject or speed the 
processing time that a normal person might require. For a 
scene or two, he can even raise one of his Mental Traits by 
one dot per success, thanks to a Mind Empowerment Effect 
that concentrates his mental faculties. 


ee Read Surface Thoughts/ Empathic Bond/ 
Create Impressions/ Mental Impulse 

Now the mage begins to skim the contents of unshielded 
minds, discern emotional states, read memories that have been 
left behind on objects or places, and project single words or 
emotional impulses to other people. The simpler the emotional 
content, the easier it is to send or read; a flash of rage, for 
instance, is easy to project or receive, but the complex stew of 
reflective melancholy presents a challenge to inexperienced 
Mind-mages. (Game-wise, such complex feats demand more 
successes than a simple feat does.) 


Mental Link/ Project Illusions/ 
Dreamwalk/ Psychic Blast 
With increasing skill, the mage learns to link minds, 
forge telepathic communications, read or influence another 


Chapter Ten: The Book of Magick 519 


INS I 


person's thoughts, craft mental illusions, enter someone's 
dreams and explore dream Realms, and blast psychic assaults 
into an unwilling rival's consciousness. At this stage, Mind 
attacks can inflict painful - though rarely fatal - damage. 
Combined with Correspondence, Forces, Matter, or Life, he 
is able to employ telekinesis, pyrokinetics, and psychophysical 
assault, influencing objects, elements, or people with the power 
of his mind. Unlike most other Effects, this sort of thing is 
not coincidental, although such talents do have a place within 
popular culture. 


Control Conscious Mind/ 
Alter Consciousness/ Astral Projection 

The fearsome power of Black Suits and psychic assailants 
allows the mage to command another person's actions as well as 
her thoughts, alter her perceptions or mental state, and project 
his own mind from his physical form. At this Rank, a mage can 
change someone's memories, drive her crazy (or sane), overlay 
her aura with a desired impression, and set up posthypnotic 
suggestions and commands. (See Social Conditioning and 
Reprogramming, pp. 605-607.) And by using internal rather 
than external powers, he can also project his astral form, as 
detailed in Chapter Nine, pp. 476-478. 


eeeee Control Subconscious/ Forge Psyche/ Un- 
tether Consciousness 

Atrue Mind Master commands not only his own conscious 
but other minds as well. He may alter someone’s mind forever, 
raising (or lowering) her Traits, rewriting her personality, 
changing her Nature Trait, or (with Life 4) switching her mind 
into another body. He can do the same things to his own mind 
as well, and he can untether that mind to explore the deeper 
reaches of astral space for hours or even days ata time. His greatest 
power, though, is the ability to fabricate entire consciousnesses, 
creating minds where no mind had been before. 


Prime 


Essence of all Things 
Specialties: Resonance, Artifice, 
Perceptions, Channeling, Creation, Destruction 


By studying the raw energy of Creation, a student of the 
Prime Sphere learns to understand, manipulate, and absorb 
the Fifth Essence within all things. Also known as Odyllic Force, 
Primal Energy, and Quintessence, this baseline energy fuels the 
Patterns of other forms - Forces, Life, Matter - and flows 
through the sublime essence of Spirit. A Prime-skilled mage, 
therefore, can create and destroy things at their essential level, 
power items of enchanted or Enlightened creation, and sustain 
her own life essence through her understanding of Primal Force. 


Ripe with such energies, a Prime Sphere specialist pulsates 
with Primal Force. Unless she’s working to suppress it (or has 
wiped her aura clean with high-Rank magicks), her Resonance 
bears strong signatures from her deeds. (See Resonance and 
Synergy, (pp. 560-561). For better and worse, such a person 


520 Mage: The Ascension 20" Anniversary Edition 


embodies the primal Otherness that most mages possess - the 
sense of being something more than most people ever dream 
of being. 


For an optional Technocratic approach to Prime, see 
Primal Utility, (pp. 526-527). 


. Etheric Senses/ Consecration/ 
Infuse Personal Quintessence 

A beginning study of Prime allows the mage to perceive and 
channel Quintessence from Nodes, Tass, Wonders, and magickal 
Effects. She may spot energetic ebbs and flows, can sense and at 
least try to read Resonance and Synergy signatures, and could 
also absorb Quintessence into her personal Pattern. Mages 
without at least one dot in Prime cannot absorb Quintessence 
beyond their Avatar Background rating. A Prime-skilled mage, 
however, may do so. 


When infusing her Quintessence into an object, that 
mage may also consecrate the object with her personal energy. 
When she shapeshifts, steps sideways, or otherwise alters her 
Pattern's metaphysical nature, that consecrated object will then 
change with her. In the process, it also picks up her personal 
Resonance... which, because it both identifies her and becomes 
essentially connected to her, is not always a good thing. 


ec Fuel Pattern/ Construct Patterns/ 
Enchant Patterns/ Body of Light 

Attaining a degree of control over Prime energies, the mage 
may divert Quintessence into new or existing forms. Combined 
with other Spheres, this allows that mage to create new Forces, 
Life, or Matter Patterns (conjuring them from thin air), and to 
infuse existing items with Primal Force to strengthen them or 
enhance their protective or destructive power. 


Weapons or attacks infused with Quintessence through 
Prime 2 Effects may hurt spirits or inflict aggravated damage, 
and substances infused the same way may protect against such 
harm. (See Chapter Nine’s Combat section for details.) Ona 
related note, she may also - with Life 2 for simple organisms, 
or Life 3 for complex ones - consecrate a living thing at this 
Rank, as if that life-form were an object described above. 


Through similar applications of energy, the mage can also 
conjure a simple Body of Light: an idealized self projected 
from ephemeral energy. Although this Body of Light has no 
substance or special properties (unlike the astral form described 
in Chapter Nine, p. 477), it presents a glowing holograph of 
the mage herself. 


eee = Channel Quintessence/ Enchant Life/ 

Energy Weapon Craft Periapts & 

Temporary Wonders 

By tapping into the flow of Quintessence around her, the 

Prime-skilled mage can draw both free and raw Quintessence 
from Nodes, Junctures (special times), and Tass (solidified 
Quintessence)... and she may also channel that energy into new 
and existing Patterns as well. With such powers, she could (with 
Life 3) enchant a living thing so that it could inflict or endure 
aggravated damage; inflict aggravated damage by shaking up 


that organism's life force; pull small amounts of life force from 
a living sacrifice or (with Matter 2) from inert objects; instill 
Quintessence into a vessel called a Periapt; or - with other 
Spheres - craft temporary Talismans or Devices by infusing 
them with Primal Force. (Permanent enchantments require 
Prime 4 - see Crafting Wonders on p. 508, and Quintessence 
Amounts on p. 507.) 


In desperate circumstances, a Prime-schooled mage can also 
create temporary weapons out of pure concentrated energy - 
blasts of Quintessence or swords of light. Such weapons inflict 
aggravated damage (as per the Base Damage or Duration chart) 
and cost one point of Quintessence per use... or, for weapons 
that last for a length of time, one point per turn. When the 
mage runs of out Quintessence, the weapon disappears. Unless 
channeled through energy-guns or conjured as miracles among 
the faithful, such attacks are inevitably vulgar. 


Expel or Infuse Energy/ Tap Wellspring/ 
Craft Tass & Permanent Wonders 

The terrible power of draining Quintessence from objects 
or forces (though not yet from living things) can disintegrate 
those targets, consume them in Primal flames, or decay them 
almost instantly. Reversing that flow, the mage can craft objects 
that cannot be broken, or bond organic and inorganic materials 
together to create cybernetic implants, nanotech, and other 
Wonders. Atthis stage, she isableto enchantitems permanently 
and draw Quintessence from the energetic Wellsprings of exciting 
events. By infusing her personal Quintessence into a Periapt, 
the mage might use Matter 4 to craft a Soulgem: a portable vessel 
that's filled with her own Resonance and energy. 


eeeec Infuse or Withdraw Life Force/ 
Create Node & Soulflower/ 
Nullify Paradox 


A Prime Master can draw Quintessence from anywhere, 
at any time, and channel it into other vessels as well. A dark, 
vulgar aspect of that power allows her to obliterate a living 
being by consuming all of his life force, whereas the reverse 
of that power infuses him with life force so strong that he’s 
essentially blessed. Combining that ability with Life 5, she 
may turn complex organisms into Soulflowers: living Periapts 
who become walking batteries of boosted Quintessence. Such 
Mastery also allows the mage to create Nodes in significant 
places, and to nullify Paradox as described under Nullifying 
Paradox, p. 549. 


Spirit 
Art of the Otherworlds 


Specialties: Umbral Travel, Spirit Dealings, 
Gauntlet Manipulation, Primal Spirits, Tech Spirits, 
Celestials, Infernals, Possession 


Reaching into the essence beyond Earthly life and matter, 
the Spirit mage explores the Otherworlds and deals with 
creatures beyond mortal understanding. One of the most 


primal forms of the mystic Arts, Spirit Sphere magick traffics 
in the hidden side of the natural realm. As a result, its Effects 
typically use the Gauntlet Ratings chart to determine the 
difficulty of their associated rolls. 


Often affiliated with the shaman, Spirit magick is more 
eclectic than it often appears. A mage who specializes in this 
Sphere could be a primal devotee, a sophisticated theologian, 
a medicine-worker deeply versed in cultural traditions, an 
eclectic metaphysician, a modern Pagan, or anyone else who 
comprehends the rich world beyond material physics. Almost 
inevitably, he’ll look deeper than most modern people do, 
grasping for the spiritual forces behind apparently mundane 
events. 


For an optional Technocratic approach to Spirit, see 
Dimensional Science, pp. 525-526. 


. Spirit Sight/ Spirit Sense 

To most of humanity, the spirit world remains invisible. 
Not to a mage who knows the Spirit Sphere. Although he'll be 
most attuned to spirits with Resonance similar to his own, that 
mage can read the local Gauntlet's thickness, discern auras, 
sense spirits of all types, peek into the Penumbra through the 
Vidare (see Chapters Three and Four), and determine whether 


or not a material object has a spiritual component (as mystic 
Fetishes do). 


Combined with other Spheres, that mage can spot forces, 
places, or items with unusual ties to the spirit world, such as 
Awakened objects, elemental spirits, possessed organisms, 
Shallowings, Nodes, and so forth. 


ee Touch Spirit/ Manipulate Gauntlet 
Perception moves to contact. The Spiritsavvy mage can 
now reach through the Gauntlet for a turn or two; call across 
the Gauntlet; speak to spirit entities, or touch them for a brief 
moment; and thin or thicken the local Gauntlet. In the latter 
case, each success lowers or raises the Gauntlet rating by +1 
for each success rolled. (Four successes would raise or lower it 
by four levels, for example.) That said, a human mage cannot 
lower the Gauntlet to less than 4 within the mortal world. 


By adding other Spheres, that mage could project thoughts 
across the barrier (Mind 4 or 5); stir up elemental disturbances 
within the Otherworlds (Forces 2 or higher); imbue material 
objects with ephemeral power (Matter 2); drain Essence froma 
spirit (Prime 3); or help other living creatures sense or contact 
the spirit realms (Life 2). 


Pierce Gauntlet/ Step Sideways/ 
Rouse & Lull Spirit 


Now the mage can cross over, transmuting his living 
tissue to ephemera. He may carry a few material possessions, 
although transmuting them as well raises both the difficulty 
of the roll and the number of successes required for the trip. 
(Normal clothing and items raise both factors by +1; bulky 
clothing and items raise them by +2.) That traveler must step 
sideways on his own; bringing large items or other people 
across demands a higher Spirit Rank. Meanwhile, a combined 


Chapter Ten: The Book of Magick 52l 


IA 7 


M 


PW. 


br 


—— m 


Spirit 3/ Mind 2 Effect allows the mage to read Resonance, 
Synergy, and other spiritual energies (Essence, a spirit's place 
within a hierarchy, etc.). 


At this Rank, a mortal mage can also harm an Umbral 
entity as if he was using Life 3 against that entity. While Spirit 
2 allows the mage to touch that entity, Spirit 3 lets him actually 
damage its ephemeral Pattern's integrity the way that Life 3 
damages a physical creature's form. 


By combining this Rank with Matter 3 and Prime 2, the 
mage can also create short-lived objects from ephemera; such 
creations must be constructed as if they were material things, 
and they fade away at the end of the Effect's duration. 


Finally, this Rank helps the mage rouse the slumbering 
spirits within objects or places, or else put active spirits to 
sleep. (See Awakening Substances in Chapter Nine, p. 443). 


Rend Gauntlet/ Seal Breach/ Bind Spirit 


As the mage approaches Mastery, he can tear Gateways in 
the Gauntlet, allowing groups or large objects to pass through... 
or close such breaches, too. Both applications, of course, are 
deeply vulgar. 

Atthis Rank, the mage may also compel spirits to appear, bind 
them into Fetish objects, or tie them to certain spots or prisons. 
For obvious reasons, such bondage is risky, especially if the spirit 
is powerful. A brave or foolish Spirit mage can even turn himself 
into a temporary Fetish, channeling a spirit entity into his mortal 
body; in such cases, he loses his ability to use true magick, but 
he may employ the capabilities of the spirit inside him. On the 
flipside, he can also exorcise a spirit that has possessed a mortal 
host. In all cases, the mage enters a series of resisted rolls against 
the spirit, pitting his Willpower against that spirits own. 


ececeee Forge Ephemera/ Gilgul/ 
Break the Dreamshell 


The Spirit Master is now able to command ephemera itself, 
creating, challenging, and destroying spirit matter as he Wills. 
With such power, he may craft Realms, imbue or drain a spirit 
of Essence, instill a soul within an empty shell of Life or Matter, 
and bestow the awful sentence of Gilgul - the destruction of 
a mage’s Avatar. Such powers are always vulgar and feature 
devastating consequences even when the mage succeeds. 


This power also allows the mage to break the Dreamshell 
and venture beyond the Horizons, wandering into the Deepest 
of Umbrae. Such tasks demand at least 10 successes, but a 
courageous Master can travel as far as his soul wants to go. 


Time 


Tricking the Flow 


Specialties: Perceptions, Prophecy, Triggers, 
Time Travel, Temporal Control 


The esoteric Arts of Time demand a flexible mindset. 
Possibly the most confounding Sphere, Time involves dizzying 
temporal metaphysics that defy the most apparently determined 


522 Mage: The Ascension 20" Anniversary Edition 


aspect of reality: time itself. And yet, initiates of this Sphere 
understand that time is fluid... difficult to manipulate, but not 
as rigid as it might appear. 


In conjunction with other Spheres, Time allows a mage 
to set triggers on other Effects, stretch out their duration, see 
into other times and places, or otherwise warp the threads 
of time. When employing the Time Sphere to look or reach 
through time, a player checks the Time Sphere Timelines chart; 
when prolonging an Effect, she could either spend successes 
on increased Duration (see the Optional Dividing Successes 
Rule chart), or else add Entropy 3 in order to hold the Effect 
until a certain circumstance occurs. 


It’s been said that time travel is impossible; however, that’s 
notentirely true... it’s just extremely difficult. Effects that involve 
going backwards in time add +3 to their difficulty, are always 
vulgar, and stack the effects of Paradox. A character who rewinds 
time by turns adds one layer of Paradox per turn; going back 
three turns, for instance, incurs three times the usual Paradox 
- three points for each point that might otherwise be earned 
by an Effect at that Rank. And a mage who travels backward 
according to the Time Sphere Timelines chart gets two layers 
of Paradox for each interval on that chart; going back 50 years 
(or four intervals), for example, nets eight times the usual amount 
of Paradox - eight points for each point normally earned. No 
wonder people who go back in time rarely return to speak of it! 


As one might expect, a mage who manipulates the Time 
Sphere tends to appear distant from the moment at hand. 
Although she might have excellent timing, her sense of the 
importance of past/ present/ future events seems to be a bit 
more... fluid than usual for a person living by the clock in 
today’s world. 


° Time Sense 

Temporal understanding begins with the mage’s own 
perceptions of time. At this stage, she develops a precise 
internal clock and can spot the temporal ripples left behind 
by (or, in many cases, developing ahead of) Time Effects. Other 
phenomena, too, leave disturbances in the time-stream, and 
the mage can notice them as well. Combined with additional 
Spheres, this Rank allows the mage to detect the influence of 
the Time Sphere on other spells or Patterns too. 


ee Past & Future Sight 
Thicken the Walls of Time 


Now the mage can look forward or backward through 
time. Although those impressions are fleeting, hazy, not entirely 
accurate, and bound by the limitations of that time and place 
(that is, what a bystander in that specific time and location 
could sense under the circumstances), they allow the Time-seer 
to catch glimpses of the past or future. 


By itself, this Effect allows the mage to see in her present 
location only. By combining Past/ Future Sight with other 
Spheres, however, she could read the probable past or future 
impressions of objects or places (Matter), living things (Life), 
and alternate locations (Correspondence). Entropy 2 even 


allows her to glimpse multiple futures and pick out the one 
most likely to occur. 


Reversing her powers of perception, that same mage can 
thicken the walls of time, which makes other Time Effects more 
difficult. Each success she rolls deducts one success from the 
attempts of other Time-sawvy characters. 


Time Contraction or Dilation/ 

"Bullet Time"/ Rewind Time 
Speeding or slowing her relationship with time, the 
mage can now gain multiple actions, slow other characters or 
phenomena, or rewind small snatches of time. In game terms, 
every two successes allow the character to take one additional 
action that does not involve casting magick (only one Arete roll 
may be made per turn); or else slow another character, object, 
or even herself down by one increment per success. (Four 
successes, for example, would slow a person down to a quarter 
of his normal speed.) 


By rewinding time, the mage can also move her immdiate 
surroundings back one turn for every two successes - an Effect 
that pulls her out of the normal flow of time and allows her 
to retcon an action or two. (See above.) 

Combining this Rank with other Spheres, the mage can 
affect other Patterns (Forces, Life, or Matter 2), cast Effects 
across distance and time (Correspondence 3), move back in 


time while recalling events from the future she just left (Life 3/ 
Mind 1), or even invoke multiple probabilities (Entropy 3). 
Again, such attempts are Paradox magnets with awful long- 
term consequences. 


Time Determinism/ Trigger Effect/ 
Time Bubble/ Anchor Point 

Now the mage learns to withdraw herself from the normal 
flow of time, hold Effects until they get triggered by events, 
or - by adding in Correspondence, Forces, Life, Matter, and/ 
or Spirit - capture other beings or phenomena in bubbles of 
time. Thus, a mighty (vulgar) Time/ Forces/ Entropy Effect 
could capture a tornado and shunt it off into no-time space 
until some trigger sets it free. At this level of expertise, the mage 
can also set a temporal anchor point for herself for when she 
dares to travel through time at Rank 5. 


eceeee Temporal Travel/ Time Immunity 

The “Dr. Who Effect” allows the mage to exist outside of 
time; immunize people, places or things from time’s passage; 
or travel forward or backward through time. Such godlike 
feats... feats that often cause a mage to become forever lost 
to history... are often best left to the Storyteller’s discretion. 
Even for Masters, Time travel is a mysterious and maddeningly 


imprecise art. For extensive details about such things, see the 
sourcebook How Do You DO That? 


Chapter Ten: The Book of Magick — 523 


\ 
b, 


» m 


^ 


L3 


ay 
P 
rh 


——— 0 


f 
A Data 
e (Correspondence) 


Accessing Reality Metacode 
Specialties: Co-location, Encryption, Fabrication, 
Firewalling, Surveillance/ Sousveillance 


Data is reality. Anyone who thinks otherwise is fooling 
themselves. Although this reality extends only about as far as 
electronic data or media, that reach is damned near worldwide 
these days. And through that connection, Data Sphere specialists 
can find, contact, and reach out to anyone on the grid. All it 
takes is time and a little bit of information, plus the knowledge 
and the Will to work it properly. 


A Technocratic refinement of the Correspondence Sphere, 
Data remains the province of the Virtual Adepts, the New World 
Order, and the various allies they choose to share it with. Like all 
Spheres, its properties are meta-physical, extending beyond the 
realms of conventional reality. Although the Data specialist is, 
theoretically, just using the tools at his disposal, the greater reaches 
of this Sphere extend beyond the bounds of what should be 
possible, according to the Masses. It's not “magick,” of course - stop 
thinkingsuch unmutual thoughts! Itdoes, however, pull the strands 
of Information-Age technology in some pretty impressive ways. 


In most regards, Data functions like Correspondence with 
regards to the powers at its disposal. The primary differences 
come through the elements of connection (see the chart below) 
and the methods of its employment. To use Data-based Effects, 
the technomancer must collate data about the person or location 
he’s trying to reach, and then have gear in place that can reach 
the subject of his attention. The more expertise that specialist 
brings to bear on the situation (that is, the more dots he has in 
this Sphere), the easier it is for him to establish a connection 
with minimal amounts of data. 


For this Sphere’s associated paradigm, see Everything is 
Data, (p. 570). 


Because Data depends upon technological methods of 
information and connection, a target who’s not on the grid 
cannot be affected by this Sphere. Given the current (and 
growing) extent of information technology, however, the 
Data can reach most people within the industrialized world... 


especially if they participate in social media, modern banking, 
or government processes. 


A Data specialist knows his way around the technology of 
our age. Though he might not be the humorless grunt so often 
associated with number-crunching disciplines, he’s certainly 
got intense focus, an eye for detail, and a ruthless capacity for 
exploiting the bounds and bindings of information technologies. 


° On the Ones and Zeros 

Through a haze of code, the Data initiate begins to see 
the interconnectedness of all things. Bringing that esoteric 
level of comprehension to the world beyond his keyboard, the 
specialist can determine the exact distance between points or 
the connections between visible objects. His understanding 
allows him to work on base-level projects without instruments, 
thanks to a growing familiarity with relationship information. 


The Reach and the View 
With a few quick calculations, the specialist can assess 
theoretical and practical space - assessments that allow him to 
perceive what’s happening elsewhere. Expanding the metaphysical 
elements of this discipline, this understanding allows the agent 
to see and touch places in other areas of the world, so long as 
he has instruments that allow him access to distant locations. 


Combining Data with other Spheres, thespecialist can extend 
the practical range of Technocratic Effects. Matter allows him to 
modify Union tech from a distance; Mind lets him communicate 
with agents or targets worldwide; Forces lets him attack distant 
targets; and Entropy allows him to predict and alter probability 
patterns and spot flaws in objects that he can perceive. As with 
regular Correspondence, the operator’s Data Rank must be equal 
to, or higher than, the highest Rank in a connected Effect. 


Quantum Teleportation/ Firewalling/ 

Surveillance Hub 
Advanced Data transfer techniques allow the specialist to 
more or less sidestep conventional physics of spatial dimensions. 
In practical terms, this allows him to download himself into 
quantum teleportation mode; erect firewalls of particle physics 
that effectively ward objects, places, or people; and divide 
his perceptions across a multilocational surveillance hub. 
Combined with other Spheres, this expertise helps the agent 
move things, forces, and living beings through intervening space. 


Data Connections 


Operator/ Subject Connection 


Subject's presence or body sample; source code; government ID 


database information 


A treasured possession or intimate companion; sample code; personal 


email or social media account 


Casual possession or associate; legacy code; Internet sock puppet; 


throwaway email or media account 


Acquaintance of or item from subject; derivative code; IP address 


Operator briefly touched or met subject; code from same language; 


rerouted IP string 


Data Mastery Successes Time Per Roll 
One dot 8 Four hours 
Two dots 6 Two hours 
Three dots 4 One hour 
Four dots 3 One minute 
Five dots One minute 
Mage: The Ascension 20" Anniversary Edition 


524 


EB 
.,<« = 


Again, however, these Procedures demand the appropriate gear 
on either side of the Effect. Such violations of conventional 
physics demand the proper technology. 


Between Space/ 
Dimensional Cohabitation/ 
Multilocation Access 

With such technology in place, the expert specialist can 
open quantum gateways between locations, create pocket 
dimensions between conventional spacetime continuums, 
and disperse holographic manifestations of himself into several 
concurrent locations. With the appropriate Life, Mind, and 
Primal Force Procedures, those manifestations can even become 
as solid as the agent himself and perform different tasks in the 
finest Agent Smith tradition. 


ecooe Redistribute Physical Properties 
Fold Space/ Hyperdispersed Perceptions 

Data Mastery merges conventional physics with 
sophisticated hypermath. The few specialists at this level can 
stack physical locations into the same space, alter the spatial 
dimensions and properties of a target, or disperse their 
perceptions into so many concurrent locations that a specialist 
may truthfully be said to have eyes and ears everywhere. 


Dimensional 
Science 
(SpiriD 


Parsing Alternate Reality Spectrums 
Specialties: Subdimensions, Anthropic Principle 
Applications, EDE Relations, Mapping, 
Applied Theory, Dimensional Anomaly 


Based upon the Tychoidian cosmology theories of the Void 
Engineers (see Chapter Four, pp. 93-94), Dimensional Science 
posits an Anthropic Principle Field in which the conscious human 
mind exerts a degree of control over its metaphysical reality space. 
Because of that Principle, lesser subdimensions have collected 
outside of Earthly space, losers in some contest of metaphysical 
Darwinism. The entities native to those subdimensions - 
extradimensional entities, or EDEs - strive to pass the Earthly barriers 
and infect the human world. And that's where Dimensional Science 
comes in, a method of asserting the Enlightened elements of the 
Anthropic Principle and keeping those EDEs out of human space. 


In game terms, Dimensional Science is largely the same 
as the Spirit Sphere. Like other Technocratic Spheres of 
Influence, however, its Effects are bound to technological 
gear and viewed through a lens of science, not mysticism. 
Although Void Engineers still apply the term Umbrae to these 
subdimensions (considering them mathematical shadows of 
the human Consensus), the Dimensional Specialist’s approach 
lacks animistic reverence, even though it features scientific awe. 


Unlike Data, Dimensional Science remains largely exclusive 
to a single Convention: the Void Engineers. In many regards, 


it’s a well-kept secret, propagated only through intense training 
at VE facilities. The Dimensional Specialist, then, is a man 
or woman of intense focus within a multilevel framework of 
thinking and perception. By outside standards, she appears 
paranoid... but of course, if you knew the things she knows 
about the pervasive nature of subdimensions and EDEs, you’d 
be paranoid too... 


. EDE Scan/ Evaluate Gauntlet/ 
Map Dimensional Region 

Through applied principles and technologies, the specialist 
learns to perceive EDE presence and potential incursions, 
evaluate the characteristics of alternate dimensions and 
thickness of the barrier that keeps them outside the Consensus, 
and perceive the essential terrain in the pocket dimensions on 
the other side of that Gauntlet. 


ee Dimensional Vibration/ 

Modify Dimensional Gauntlet/ 

Transdimensional Field 

At this level of expertise, the specialist can use radiation 

pulses, hypermath, and samples of transdimensional matter to 
grant access to those alternate dimensions. With the correct 
instruments, that specialist can send out artificial ripples into 
nearby subdimensions in order to attract EDEs and leave signals 
for other Dimensional Specialists. 


Thanks to the hypermathematical models and recordings 
involved in Dimensional Science, aspecialist can also manipulate 
the Gauntlet, raising or lowering it, even as low as O - a feat 
mystic mages cannot duplicate. The Gauntlet O Effect lasts 
for only one scene, but it counters the punishment of the 
Dimensional Anomaly (that is, the Avatar Storm) if that 
phenomenon is still in play. However, the specialist herself 
still suffers feedback damage as she works the Effect. (In game 
terms, she takes the usual Avatar Storm damage, though she 
prevents other characters from taking it during that scene.) 


On a related note, the specialist learns to also surround 
herself (or, with the appropriate Spheres, other people or 
objects) with a transdimensional field; this, in turn, allows her 
to interact with subdimensions on a limited level (brief touch) 
without suffering harm from the Dimensional Anomaly. 


eee Dimensional Shift/ 

Manipulate Paraphysical Phenomena/ 

Phase Disruption Field 

Increased understanding allows the specialist to step 

sideways into alternate dimensions, manipulate the paraphysical 
matter (that is, ephemera) of those dimensions, and - with the 
correct weaponry - send out destructive phase disruption fields 
of vibrations that disorient, injure, or disintegrate EDEs. (In 
short, her attacks can harm spirit entities.) Thanks to the Stun/ 
Kill/ Disintegrate settings on those weapons, she can choose 
whether to inflict bashing, lethal, or aggravated damage on 
Umbral targets... and although EDE's experience all forms of 
damage thesame way, dimension-hopping humans and Deviant 
werebeasts do not. 


Chapter Ten: The Book of Magick — 525 


E^ ins 


D 


AZ 1 


Zi 


Alter Dimensional Topography/ 
Dimensional Gateway/ 
Stabilize Dimensional Field 

Increased understanding and appropriate technologies help 
the specialist make lasting changes to alternate dimensions. 
Reworking the paraphysical constraints of a given space, she 
may craft pocket domains and dimensional walls in order to 
block or catch EDEs. A skilled specialist can do this even from 
the Earthly side of the Gauntlet, thus avoiding the effects of the 
Dimensional Anomaly. Using similar techniques, the specialist 
can also carve out rapid-transit paths; in game terms, this Effect 
cuts down the specialist’s travel time within the Otherworlds 
by (normal travel time divided by successes +1). 


The specialist can also open large gateways into the 
subdimensions, although the people passing through those 
gates suffer the effects of the Anomaly unless the Gauntlet has 
already been lowered to 0 by a Dimension Science 2 Procedure. 


Channeling Primal Energy(Quintessence) through appropriate 
technology, the specialist can also strengthen the Enlightened 
Anthropic Principle enough to prevent Void Adaptation (that is, 
disconnection and disembodiment; see Disembodiment in 
Chapter Four, pp. 88-89; and Disconnectionand Disembodiment 
in Chapter Nine, p. 483.) Each point of Quintessence allows one 
character to resist Void Adaptation for one week. 


eeeee Anthropic Field/ Breach Spatial Horizon/ 
Cosmogenesis 

Utilizing the ultimate applications of Anthropic Principle 
Fields, the specialist can generate her own Anthropic Field (with 
the right instruments, of course) that allows her to venture 
beyond both Horizons and venture into the Deep Universe. By 
crafting a reality bubble around herself, that specialist can keep 
other Earthly beings alive with her as well (two passengers per 
additional success beyond the second) and can engineer and pilot 
vehicles for Deep Universe travel. For design and construction 
systems, see Inventing, Modifying, and Improving Technology 
in Chapter Nine, (pp. 463-464). 


Employing the arcane technologies of Cosmogenesis, 
that Master Specialist may also engineer and create Horizon 
Constructs and custom-designed and constructed EDE 
organisms. She must employ Primal Utility energies as well 
(often including Life and Matter if the EDE construct is to 
survive outside the subdimensions... that is, if it’s going to be 
more than simple ephemera), but these cosmic computations 
allow Void Engineers to harness powers not unlike those of 


legendary gods. 
Investing Essential Energies 


Specialties: Assessment, Investment, 


Wellsprings, Personal Value, Primal Ventures, 
Generating Energetic Capital 


Primal Otility 
(Prime) 


526 Mage: The Ascension 20" Anniversary Edition 


To the Enlightened Hypereconomist, Prime is not some 
ephemeral energy bubbling up from the cracks of the world. 
Instead, it’s an energy field generated by Homo economicus: the 
ambitiously conscious human being who acts to further his 
or her self-interest. Related to the VE theory of Enlightened 
Anthropic Principle Fields (although they don’t know it by that 
name), the Syndicate’s hypereconomic theories see Quintessence 
energy rising from human interest and activity. People literally 
invest themselves in such ventures, and although they might 
not see the energy they create through such transactions, they 
can feel it... hence the sensations involved in feeling valued or 
worthless. 


Whereas other Technocratic Conventions stick close 
to the “essential energies” model of Prime, the Syndicate’s 
Primal Utility specialists understand the Sphere differently. In 
game terms, the applications are more or less the same. For a 
Syndicate character, however, Prime flows through investing 
and withdrawing energetic currency through Ventures (value- 
generating Nodes - see the chart below) that manipulate the 
metaphysical economies of human value. By accessing what they 
call “creation’s credit rating,” the hypereconomist controls that 
currency, investing it where it does the most good... for him. 


Perhaps the greatest edge granted to those who understand 
Primal Utility comes from the aforementioned Ventures. By 
investing in a Venture, the hypereconomist can draw Primal 
Energy (Quintessence) from a mundane business. In game 
terms, that business becomes a Node; if the character has a 
lasting personal connection with that Venture, then he’s got 
access to that Node as well. Only a character with at least one 
dot in Primal Utility can access the Quintessence from that 
Venture; another mage might sense the energies but remain 
unable to access their power. 


Prime-savvy hypereconomists always watch for invisible 
bottom lines. Attuned to the effects of Market Correction 
(Paradox) and the perpetual exchange of energies conducted 
through human intercourse (sexual and otherwise), he can spot 
value - or the lack of it - in the least obvious situations, and 
he knows how to get the most for his investments in whatever 
form they might manifest. 


° Assess Primal Otility/ 
Deposit Primal Otility/ Exploit Primal Ven- 
ture 
Assessment analysis gives the hypereconomist a view of 
Prime flows, Resonance signatures, and applied metaphysical 
processes (that is, magick) in his vicinity. As with all other 
Technocratic Sphere Effects, this demands the correct 
instruments and training, although certain practices and 
instruments (especially dominion and hypereconomics) simply 
give the specialist a hunch about the energies in play. Some 
specialists see colorful flows of energy but dismiss such visions 
as simply mental constructs for an otherwise invisible process. 


As with Prime 1, the hypereconomist can also invest such 
energies and can utilize the Prime Force generated by Ventures 
as well as other, more mystical sources of Quintessence. 


NS | 


Primal Ventures 


Venture Scale 


Successful local business/ small factory/ — * 
large farm/ street gang 


City-wide marketplace/ city mob/ ae 
medium-sized factory/ agribusiness 

facility/ common resource-extraction 
company (coal, iron, oil, etc.) 


Regional market leader/ organized crime — *** 


council/ rare resource extraction (gold, 
silver, diamonds, etc.) 


National market leader/ major crime sree 


syndicate/ ultra-rare resources extraction 
(iridium, tanzanite, etc.) 


International leader or crime cartel eccce 


Equivalent Node Rating 


Required Connection* 


Visit facilities, befriend gang, make purchase, or 
invest * Resources 


Entry-level position, gang affiliation, establish 
contract, become stockholder, or invest e* 
Resources 


Lower management, made man, consultant, 
invest ©®® Resources 


Middle management, senior consultant, 
mob enforcer or senior brother, invest eee 
Resources 


Executive, board member, or mob kingpin, 
invest ee eee Resources 


* Each dot in Primal Utility reduces the specialists required connection by one step for each dot over the first. A specialist with 
three dots, for instance, could simply visit (one dot's worth of mdi i large factory (a three-dot Venture) in order to draw 


upon its energy. 


ee Create Gadgets/ 

Perfect Material Exploitation/ 

Primal Innovation 

Through sophisticated uses of instruments and principles, 

the hypereconomist can modify existing materials with an 
energized-value buzz; he can even create something from 
nothing, thanks to the principle of increased worth. In game 
terms, this allows him to use the normal Prime 2 Effects, 
although the character still needs to have some technological 
source to facilitate his conjurations. 


Create Stable Extraordinary Devices/ Liv- 

ing-Asset Exploitation/ 

Use Currency & Primal Storage 
Utilizing energetic manifestations called Currency (in 
mystic terms, Tass), plus efficient managerial skills (see the 
Management and Human Resources sidebar, p. 595), the 
specialist can employ a team to create permanent Devices with 
his Currency, restore his personal stock (Pattern) with Currency, 
and drain or refill Devices and storage batteries called Matrices 
(that is, Periapts) with his available Currency. 


Create Tass/ Exploit Opportunity/ 
Liquidate Assets 

Skillful use of hypereconomics now allows the specialist 
to create Currency from free-flowing energy. Typically, this 
Tass involves precious materials, paper money, credit cards, 
or other items of value (paintings, stock certificates, bearer 
bonds, drugs, etc.). Unlike mystic mages (or other Technocrats), 
however, he can use only the energy generated by Primal Utility 
activities... and not, for example, charge up his Platinum card 
at the nearest Node. 


Byexploiting the Primal Opportunities called ^wellsprings" 
in superstitionist jargon, that hypereconomist can also draw 
energy out of an exciting event rather than a consistent source. 


On the flipside, he can also destroy material objects while 
divesting them of their value (Quintessence). Although the 
specialist cannot access this energy, he can keep other people 
from utilizing those resources. ("I'd sooner burn this warehouse 
down than let you have it...”) 


ecoee Create Living Assets/ 

Generate Primal Conflux & Ventures/ 

Liquidate Living Assets/ Market Compen- 

sation 

Like Mastery of the mystic Prime, Mastery of this Rank 

allows the specialist to create permanent Devices, open new 
Confluxes (Nodes) and Ventures, liquidate living things 
(typically through vulgar applications of disintegration 
technology - although he could simply shoot someone and then 
burn the body), and negate the effects of Market Correction 
(Paradox) as if he were a Master of Prime Arts... though, of 
course, he has more technological finesse. 


Optional Rule: Wild Talent 


Oncontrolled Paranormal Power 


A sudden burst of uncontrolled (and uncontrollable) 
magick, the wild talent phenomenon manifests through intense 
stress, pain, trauma, or brand-new Enlightenment. Essentially, 
the Avatar screams out an incredible blast of power - one far 
beyond the reach of the average mage. The person at the center 
of that power has no real control over what happens or how it 
occurs; the talent simply appears, changes that person’s world, 
and then fades. 


Unlike the previous entries, wild talent is not a Sphere. 
Rather, it’s a plot device that represents uncontrolled (and 
uncontrollable) currents of Awakened energy. The mage in 
question has awareness without understanding, and the results 
can be as devastating as they are spectacular. 


Chapter Ten: The Book of Magick — 527 


| 
l 
d 


A 


. 


d 


P 
J 


iu 
oa 
- En 
Tu. 
k 


Rules-wise, wild talent allows a character to use powers far 
beyond her usual ability. For a scene or two, she commands an 
Arete dice pool that's one, two, or perhaps three dice higher 
than usual; employs Spheres she might not understand; and 
may access Sphere Ranks 3, 4, or even 5 if the Storyteller so 
desires. That's the catch: the Storyteller, not the player, decides 
what happens, how it happens, and how long it happens for. 
The player can state what she'd like to have happen, but the 
final decisions come from the Storyteller. 


Marauder Wild Talent 

For the most part, wild talent occurs once or twice in a 
mage's life - often at the moment of Awakening, sometimes 
at the point of death. It's always a dramatic event, linked to 
some great moment of crisis. Certain Marauders, however, 
manifest their magicks through a constant state of wild talent, 
unleashing powerful spells whose results they cannot control. 


Such characters rarely have more than a point or two of 
Arete (they are Awakened, after all) but possess Avatars of 4 or 
5. Essentially, the Avatar Background functions as their wild 
talent Arete, adding the Avatar rating to the character's normal 
Arete. This way, the Marauder has access to incredible powers, 
controlled and managed by the Avatar. Given the capricious 
nature of Avatars, however, those powers cannot be counted 


Part Ill: Castin 


upon; the wild talent Arete comes and goes, according to the 
Storyteller’s whims and the dictates of the chronicle. 


Again, such powers remain extremely unpredictable. Given 
the potential for abuse, however, we strongly suggest limiting 
this option to non-player Marauders - mysterious characters, 
run by the Storyteller, who show up, do something impressive, 
and then disappear. 


The Death- Strike 

As an additional option, a dying mage MIGHT be allowed 
a deatlvstrike: a final act of magick that channels his remaining 
life force into an attack or defense more powerful than anything 
he could normally attempt. For this final strike, the player could 
get one or two additional dice for his Arete roll and employ an 
Effect that’s one or two Ranks higher than his usual rating in 
the Spheres. After that point, however, he dies. 


Despite its name, a death-strike doesn’t have to bean attack 
- it could be an act of self-sacrifice to defend another party, 
open a gate, summon a powerful entity, or perform some other 
heroic feat. The death of Porthos Fitz-Empress, who contained 
the implosion of Doissetep, provides a legendary example of 
the death-strike in action. It's also worth noting that the bad 
guys can do such things too... which is something to consider 
if the heroes fight an enemy to the point of his demise. 


Magick, Step By Ste 


Okay, so what do all those charts mean? Here, 
step by step, are the elements of spellcasting 
and the details about what’s involved in each 
element. 


Step One: Effect 


Before you check Traits and roll dice, ask 
yourself: What do I want to do, and how do I plan 
to accomplish it? The answers for those questions 
come into play during Step One. 


The Effect of What You're Doing 


As mentioned earlier, every magickal act is referred to, in 
game terms, as an Effect. Generally, Effects get described in terms 
of the Spheres you use to perform that Effect. Looking for flaws 
with Entropy? That's an Entropy 1 Effect. Changing your hair 
from brown to blue? That’s a Life 2 Effect if you’ re using Spheres 
instead of hair dye. Firing a hypertech pulse-cannon? That's an 
Effect using Forces 3 (to create the destructive element) + Prime 
2 (to provide the energy that creates that element), Whatever 
a mage does with Arete and the Spheres has an effect upon 
the local reality. And so, when you’re figuring out what you 
want to do, you’re deciding upon the Effect you wish to create. 

For easy reference, see the collection of Common Magickal 
Effects presented on (pp. 508-510). These aren’t necessarily the 
only ways of performing a given feat (although many of them 
are), but they show you how to get a lot of things done. 


Mage: The Ascension 20" Anniversary Edition 


Game Terms vs. Character Terms 

As a roleplaying note, please remember that characters 
NEVER call what they’re doing “Effects.” A witch will cast a 
spell, a Black Suit will activate a Procedure, a scientist will pull 
a lever or punch a command into her keyboard, but you won't 
hear any of them proclaiming “LO, I EMPLOY MY ARETE TO 
CAST A FORCES 3 EFFECT ON YOU!” That’s game talk, not 


character talk. 


Spheres: 
The Foundation of Each Effect 


Practically speaking, a Sphere determines what your 
character can do. In a broader sense, the Spheres reflect your 
character’s knowledge about the metaphysical forces he employs. 
When you're determining what you can do and how you can 
do it, the Spheres provide the foundation of your abilities. To 
command fire, for example, you need to have the Forces Sphere. 


The various Spheres and their capabilities can be found 
in the previous section. 


How Many Effects Can I Ose atf Once? 


A magecan castonly one Effect per turn, even ifshe's using 
Time 3 magick to speed up her activities. She may, however, 
keep any number of Effects running at a time, although it 
becomes more and more difficult for her to do so. 


Gamewise, you add +1 to your difficulty for every two 
Effects you have running at one time - that is, +1 difficulty for 


two Effects, *2 for four Effects, *3 for six Effects, and so on. 
And by "running," we mean an Effect that demands ongoing 
concentration - a summoning, a force field, weather control, 
and so on. 


As an overall note, an Effect that has a Time-based trigger, 
one which has been locked into another Pattern, or one that 
has been cast but whose duration has not yet expired, does not 
count toward that total. If Lee Ann enchants a guy, and if - 
thanks to the number of successes rolled - that enchantment 
lasts for a week after they part company, then Lee Ann does 
not have to concentrate on the Effect in order to keep it going. 
If she wishes to extend the Effect beyond its original duration, 
however, then it counts against the number of Effects that 
character can employ at the same time. 


Instant Effects and Rituals 

Many Effects take place instantly; if you throw a lightning 
bolt, for example, that Effect is over once the bolt hits its target. 
Rituals, on the other hand, demand intense concentration. No 
more than two Effects can be used at once during the casting of 
aritual - see the Rituals entry under Step Three, (pp. 538-542). 


Rotes, Procedures, and Other Prepared Effects 

Mages like to be prepared. Thus, although freeform reality- 
crafting is any mage’s prerogative, many characters employ 
previously prepared Effects - rotes, spells, Procedures, Adjustments, 
and so forth - as part of their mystic or technological bag of 
tricks. For simplicity’s sake, we'll just call such Effects “rotes” 
for now. Certainly, no good Technocrat would be Deviant 
enough to use words like “spell” or “magick” to refer to what 
he does, but the various terms all mean the same thing as far 
as game systems are concerned. 


Knowing and Learning Rotes 

Rules-wise, a rote is simply an Effect that your character 
has used before or learned from someone else. Some groups 
teach rotes as part of basic training, whereas others pass them 
along to their close friends, apprentices, and so on. 


Beyond the story-based opportunities to learn such tricks, 
there’s nothing special about a rote. You do not need to spend 
points to learn one, nor are you limited to a certain number 
of rotes. If your group wants to reflect the process of learning 
rotes from some other character or source, simply roll your 
character’s Intelligence + either Esoterica (for mystic techniques) 
or Science (for technomagickal rotes), with a difficulty based 
upon the highest Sphere in that rote + 5. Learning a Rank 1 rote 
would be difficulty 6, and a Rank 5 rote would be difficulty 10. 


If you want to have characters discover rotes through 
research or mystic/ technological tomes, use a Perception * 
Research roll with the same difficulties given above. This way, 
a hidden library or forbidden codex can present new and 
interesting opportunities for a sharp-witted character. 


Naturally, the mage must share a focus with the rote in question 
before he can use it to his benefit. A Man in Black isn't going 
to get far with a voodoo curse unless he adjusts his thinking 
to accommodate such Deviant ideas! A character who wants 


to adopt a rote from a different practice or paradigm would be 
casting that Effect at *2 difficulty, as if he were working with 
unfamiliar tools... which is, of course, exactly what he's doing. 


Forasmallassortmentofrotes, see Part VIII: Adjustments, 
Procedures, and Rotes, near the end of this chapter. 


Step Two: Ability 


Once you've gone through Step One, you know what your 
mage is planning to do and what he'll use in order to get the 
job done. The first question in Step Two is simple: Can he do 
it, given the things he knows and the things he employs? 


To get your answer, check your character's focus and its 
associated Traits to see whether or not he has what it takes 
to accomplish what you've set out to do. The question of 
Spheres is easy enough; if you've got the appropriate Rank 
in the appropriate Spheres, then in game terms, yes - your 
character can do it. 


Focus: How Your Character Does It 


The second part is a bit trickier: Does your mage BELIEVE 
that he can do such things? Sure, maybe you’ve got Forces 3 and 
Prime 2 on your character sheet. A Black Suit can’t just snap 
her fingers and make fireballs appear, however. Such feats don’t 
fit her focus - they violate her beliefs. She can’t conjure fire 
using someone else's focus, either; if you gave her a rune-carved 
staff, she'd try to hitsomeone with it, notsummon a firestorm. 
That sort of nonsense is Reality Deviance, and so - Spheres 
be damned - the Black Suit could no more conjure fire with a 
staff than she could fart unicorns and shoot them into space. 


So that's where roleplaying comes in. 


Belief, Practice, and Tools 

In Mage's previous iterations, "focus" referred to the 
tools that a mage used to cast her Effects. Now, however, we've 
expanded that term to encompass the beliefs (or paradigm) 
that a mage accepts as the source of her power; the practice 
she uses in order to direct her beliefs toward intentions; and 
the tools that she uses in the course of that practice. Previous 
chapters have shown how those three factors depend upon the 
background of each individual mage. The Focus and the Arts 
section later in this chapter explores the many different options 
your character could use. For right now, simply remember this: 
when you cast an Effect, your character's FOCUS determines what 
she does. And that focus depends upon the character herself. 


As detailed in Chapters One, Two, and Six, mages focus 
their Effects through a combination of paradigm, practice, and 
tools. Step Two involves thinking from your mage's perspective 
- ignoring the dots on your character sheet in favor of whether 
or not your character would believe in what you have in mind. 
If the answer is No, as with the Black Suit mentioned above, 
then think of another way to make things happen. Okay, the 
rune-carved staff won't work... buta lighter and some hairspray 
would! In the story, the agent rushes to the bathroom cabinet, 
grabs the Aqua Net, pulls a lighter out of her pocket, and 
there you go. Now your Black Suit can conjure a fireball with 


Chapter Ten: The Book of Magick — 529 


| 
| 
d 


IAS 7^: 


sai 


ga Pal 


Pulling on Mythic Threads 


Strands of legendry and lore, the Mythic Threads (see Chapter Two, p. 61) tie into the Collective Unconscious and 
reinforce the iconic power of certain mystic and technological symbols. Especially in the current era, symbolic figures 
like witches, wizards, cops, and superheroes exert a literally fantastic pull on the Consensus. Although folks like to claim 
that "magic is dead," the Masses have not yet received that particular memo. 


In game terms, a mage of any faction can manipulate Mythic Threads in order to reduce the difficulty of an Effect 


by - 1. Essentially, he employs potent symbology as part of his focus, drawing on the power of iconic figures and ideas. 
Black robes or leather, religious symbols, arcane glyphs and designs, elemental phenomena (fire, thunder, fog, etc.) 
- used cleverly, such trappings invoke the suspension of disbelief and prime the Masses to accept things that, under 
other circumstances, they might consider irrational. Ideally, such tactics could even make certain Effects coincidental that 
would be considered vulgar otherwise. 


For more details about using Mythic Threads, see the Magickal Difficulty Modifiers chartand the sidebar Optional 


Rule: Significant Instruments, (p. 588). 


a Forces 3/ Prime 2 Effect, using the lighter and the spray can 
as a focus instrument. 


Using Tools If You Don't Need Them 


Even if they've realized that they don't need rituals and 
tools, many mages prefer to use them anyway. As far as the 
character's concerned, he's simply using a familiar method in 
order to direct his intentions - it's a comfortable habit, but 
not a requirement. 


In game terms, the character may have transcended the 
need for a given instrument, but he still uses it anyway to get a 
slight edge. That edge comes through as a -1 reduction on the 
Arete roll difficulty, which for easy reference can be found on 
the Magickal Difficulty Modifiers chart. 


For more details about focus, practices, and tools, see Part 
VII: Focus and the Arts. 


Rituals as a Focus 

Fairly often, a mage’s focus demands a ritual before the 
intentions become an Effect. In story terms, that character 
programs the virus, tosses the bones, performs the dance, 
endures the ordeal, or does whatever else his beliefs and practice 
say he has to do in order to cast his magick. 


Game-wise, a ritual is simply the use of a focus as part of an 
extended action that gathers a necessary number of successes. 
For details, see the section about Rituals, Rolls, and Extended 
Successes, under Step Three. 


Roleplaying the magick puts some limitations on your 
character’s capabilities, requires you to think about your mage’s 
beliefs, and demands some imagination on your part. Really, 
though, isn’t imagination what Storytelling games are all about? 
By thinking through your mage’s perspective, you add a bit of 
real-life magic to the fictional magick within the game. 


Coincidental Magick vs. Vulgar Magick 
Speaking of imagination and magick... 
As Chapter Two points out, the easiest way to perform 


magick is to make it seem like part of the natural landscape. In 
the old days, this meant fitting your spells and practices into the 


530 Mage: The Ascension 20" Anniversary Edition 


local belief system. These days, that’s still true... but technology, 
not magic, is the lay of that land. And so, mages (and Mage 
players) favor coincidental magick over more obvious, vulgar 
applications of the Arts. 


An important element of Steps Two and Three involves 
the question Is what you’re doing coincidental or vulgar? In Step 
Two, the question helps you decide what to do; in Step Three, 
the answer determines the difficulty of your casting roll and 
the results of that roll in the rest of the story. 


Story-wise, the coincidental spell or ritual fits into the 
spectrum of what people believe is possible, whereas the vulgar 
spell or ritual shoves apparently impossible things into the faces 
of Reality and the Masses. The coincidental Effect appears to 
be something that’s more or less ordinary, but the vulgar Effect 
essentially drops “ordinary” off the nearest building. Calling 
your mom ona cell phone is coincidental; waving your hands 
in the air, chanting the names of seven devils, and then having 
Moms face appear in the air in front of you so you can talk 
to her is vulgar. 


Game-wise, you've got three compelling reasons to make 
your Effects coincidental as often as possible: 


* First off, it's easier to cast a coincidental Effect than it 
is to cast a vulgar one - the difficulty is less, and so are 
the risks. Because the difficulty's lower, you're more 
likely to succeed... and to score more successes, too. 


* Secondly, vulgar magick inflicts Paradox points upon 
your character even if she succeeds... and heaps even 
more of them upon her if she fails. 


* Thirdly, various characters and agencies have a vested 
interest in stopping people who use vulgar magick; by 
using it, your mage risks attracting their attention... 
which, in both game and story terms, is not a healthy 
thing to do. 


And yet, there are times when vulgar magick is the only 
option. There's no coincidental way to step sideways or 
download yourself into the Digital Web. A sudden bolt of 
fire from Heaven might be the one thing standing between a 


vampire and a child, so if bringing that fire down violates the 
laws of reality, then that's what you've gotta do. Mages, by their 
nature, are people who dare the impossible. And so - in both 
game and story terms - vulgar magick remains an essential 
part of every mage's life. 


The trick, then, involves fitting your Effects, your focus, 
and your needs in with the boundaries of coincidence and 
vulgarity, making judgment calls between what you do, how 
you do it, and what happens as a result. 


And that takes imagination, cunning, and nerve. 


Witnesses 

Because many mystic practices simply can’t be passed off 
as coincidence, a mage has to be clever about what he does, 
how he does it, and who’s watching when he does it. Even 
technomancers must remain careful about that sort of thing - 
animating dead bodies with a Vita Ray still counts as impossible 
so far as most people are concerned. 


A witness, in game terms, is someone who’s physically 
presentwhen the magick occurs. Cameras, video feeds, YouTube, 
and so forth do not count as witnesses, although a mage still faces 
certain problems if she winds up getting posted on the Internet 
performing obvious magick. 


Despite common preconceptions, a Sleeper can be 
rattled by acts of Enlightened Science as well as by magick, 
especially if that person has accepted the idea that sentient 
robots and functional jetpacks are beyond the reach of current 
technology. Technocrats can and do suffer from the Paradox 
Effect. Although the Masses certainly seem more willing to 
accept the possibilities of hypertech, real science is defined 
not by flash but by limitations. 


As a result, a lot of the choices involved in magick depend 
upon having a clear space to work in - casting Effects in safe 
space rather than out among the Masses, clearing the area of 
potential witnesses, working in secrecy whenever possible, that 
sort of thing. There are practical reasons, after all, for secret 
laboratories, hidden cottages, forbidden temples, and Black Suits 
radiating their Nothing to see here — move alongauras. Such measures 
give mages room to move, far from the eyes of a Sleeper witness. 


The Sleeper Witness, the Consensus, 
and Paradox 

What's a Sleeper witness? As explained below, a Sleeper 
witness issomeone whose beliefs conform to the local ideas about 
what is and is not possible. Such people are not Awakened in 
thesense that mages are, and although they might enjoy movies 
aboutvampires or books about wizards, such things are not part 
of their everyday reality. Sure, a person might accept the idea 
of supernatural forces or paranormal abilities in an abstract 
sort of way. He might pray to the ghost of a Jewish carpenter 
who's supposed to descend in glory from the sky and raise the 
dead for eternal judgment in Heaven or Hell. If, however, that 
person sees a real manifestation of ACTUAL magick — say, his 
neighbor flying through the air on a broom - then his view of 
reality is in for a rude kick in the pants. And so, by extension, 
is the neighbor on her broom. 


As previous chapters have explained, "just plain folks" 
set the momentum of reality as a whole. These people are the 
Consensus. The fact that reality is a lot weirder than they realize 
is an abstract idea for them... one they don't really want to 
think about. When a mage forces the Masses to confront that 
truth, that mage is overriding their Consensus with her own. 
And that's risky. Practically speaking, such override attempts 
are more difficult to accomplish than apparent coincidences 
are, and the price of failure is Paradox. 


From both a story and a game perspective, then, you'll 
probably want your character to avoid Sleeper witnesses as 
often as possible, surround herself with sympathetic allies, and 
keep her Arts and workings on the down-low. Ideally, you'll be 
performing Effects in solitude, Chantries, Sanctums, Nodes, 
and other relatively safe spaces. 


In both life and fiction, of course, safety is an illusion. 
Desperate circumstances often call for desperate measures, and 
even the most circumspect mage can find herself reaching for 
vulgar magick in the middle of a crowd. That's just the way things 
go down in the World of Darkness. If you avoid doing flashy stuff 
around witnesses, however, then you'll have moreleeway to employ 
desperate measures and pull outthe big guns when you need them. 


Drawing the Line 
As a general rule, assume the following line between 
coincidental and vulgar magick: 


* Ifthe average person walking down the street could see 
what your mage is doing and think, “Oh, yeah — human 
beings can TOTALLY do that," then it's a coincidence. 


e Ifthe average person walking down the street could see 
what your mage is doing and think, ^Holy crap - human 
beings can't do THAT!" then it's vulgar. 


There's plenty of gray area on either side of that line, of 
course... a lot of which depends upon that whole "average 
person” thing. But as a quicken-dirty rule, assume that your 
mage should be subtle whenever possible, and be ready to take 
the consequences when she decides not to be. 


Do the Night-Folk Count as Witnesses? 


To be clear: a Sleeper witness is someone whose life does not 
include intimate experience with an active supernatural world. The 
Night-Folk and their various allies and enemies - ghouls, 
kinfolk, kinain, cultists, Infernalists, mummies, hunters, etc. 


- DO NOT COUNT as Sleeper witnesses. Period. 


(We emphasize this answer because it's a topic of constant 


debate.) 


Acolytes and extraordinary citizens are slightly more 
complicated: 


* A Technocratic extraordinary citizen does not count 
as a Sleeper witness with regards to technomagickal 
procedures but does count as one with regards to mystic 
magick. That's because such people have been Socially 
Conditioned to accept hypertech as normal and desirable 
and to reject mystic Arts as unnatural Reality Deviance. 


Chapter Ten: The Book of Magick 53l 


. 


IASA 


A 


P 
J 


/ f 

r = 
à n 

"T^ nm 
k 


PX NP 


e Amysticacolyteorcultistdoes notcountas aSleeperwitness 
at all. Such people accept faith and magick as part of their 
worldview, and yet - with very few exceptions - have also 
been raised in a technological environment, with popular 
media and everyday gadgets that employ advanced (and 
sometime absurdly exaggerated) scientific principles. 


* As a possible exception to that rule, people who've 
been born and raised in one of the very few human 
communities that have totally escaped the influence of modern 
technology would probably countas Sleeper witnesses with 
regards to technomagick. No, the Amish don't count; 
they know that modern tech exists but choose to reject 
it within their society. However, people raised deep in 
the Amazon interior or who've lived their whole lives in 
secluded Horizon Realms might qualify if they've had 
little or no contact with machine-using people. 


On the flipside, though, people who'd had a little bit of 
experience with machines might be even more willing to 
accept the possibilities of hypertech, as they haven't had much 
experience or schooling to contradict the more ridiculous 
applicationsoftechnomagick. In such cases, it's theStoryteller's 
call, based upon the people and situations involved. 


Cultural Perspectives and Reality Zones 

One man's superstition is another man's everyday life. 
And so, in certain cultural traditions, activities and practices 
that may seem impossible on Main Street, USA are perfectly 
acceptable. This isn’t just true only of those developing nations 
that supposedly have flexible ideas about scientific reality. Plenty 
of urban enclaves, rural communities, and specialized cultural 
gatherings (churches, festivals, conventions, etc.) throughout 
the industrialized world are dominated by Sleepers whose 
impressions of reality include certain mystic practices, weird 
technology, and potent martial arts. 


For information about the wiggle room afforded by certain 
cultural perspectives, see Part IX: Reality Zones, at the end 
of this chapter. 


Allies, Assistants, and Cults 

Especially where magick is concerned, there’s safety in 
numbers. And so, many mages nurture allies, assistants, and 
cults - people who, in both story and game terms, make it 
easier to successfully perform magick. 


e Alliesareassociated mages and Night-Folk - members of your 
Tradition or Convention, collaborators from a different 
allied faction (the Council, Technocracy, Disparates, etc.), 
powerful Sleepers (cops, scientists, politicians, etc.), or 
various non-mages (hedge wizards, vampires, werewolves, 
and so forth) who share a common cause with you. These 
allies watch your back, guard your front, and sometimes 
aid your magickal efforts if and when they can. 


Assistants are trained Sleepers who can handle mundane 
tasks, possibly holding down the fort with various self- 


532 . Ma$e: The Ascension 20" Anniversary Edition 


powered Wonders. In Technocracy-speak, these are the 
extraordinary citizens; for the Council, they’ re acolytes. 
Regardless of the terminology, these folks provide backup, 
research, security, companionship, and occasional help 
with Effects whose practices they understand. Rules-wise, 
these folks can provide a sympathetic crowd for your 


magickal Effects... which, in turn, makes those Effects 
easier to cast, provides extra successes for your roll, and 
can even make certain vulgar Effects coincidental. 


e Cults are folks devoted to your cause. Like allies and 
associates, they take care of business and offer help with 
magickal workings. Cultists, however, are dedicated 
specifically to your faction, belief, or Path. Maybe theyview 
you as a prophet or healer, follow the same god(s), or serve 
the faction to which you both belong. Like assistants, these 
cultists (who may also be devotees of technology) benefit 
your Effects in both story and game terms. Unlike more 
casual associates, however, these characters believe deeply 
in what you're doing and can provide bonuses to your dice 
pool when you cast an Effect. See the Cult Background, 
detailed in Chapter Six, for more information. 


Magick’s often easier with a little help from your friends. 
When several characters collaborate on a single Effect, they 
can act in concert to provide more successes and a lowered 
difficulty. For details, see the Acting in Concert section near 
the end of Step Three, (pp. 542-543). 


Mundane Skills and Magickal Effects 


Because magick is an extension of the mage, a magickal 
practice often influences - and also depends upon - that 
mage's mundane skills. A hacker studies computer technology, 
politics, and various social and governmental institutions. A 
shaman learns to live off the land, read people and animals, 
and absorb the culture of his people. A music-focused Ecstatic 
understands musical theory and instruments, whereas a 
hypertech inventor perfects scientific theories and hands-on 
mechanical skill. Such characters typically have at least one 
dotin the Ability Traits thatsuittheir practices and vocations. 
In story terms, these abilities define your character's interests 
and capabilities; in game terms, they help him use a focus 
with greater results. 


If the magickal focus depends upon using a given Ability 
Trait - like channeling magickal Effects through songs, for 
example - then the Storyteller may insist that the Trait has to 
be at least equal to the highest Sphere Rank that gets focused 
through that Ability, as described in Chapter Six under 
Minimum Abilities, (p.276). 


As shown in Chapter Nine's Magick and Violencesection, 
your character’s Abilities can lower the difficulty of a magick 
casting roll, and his magick can lower the difficulty of his Ability 
rolls. Most tools and rituals depend upon the successful use of 
an Ability too - after all, you can't blast an enemy with your 
force cannon if you don't know how to shoot that force cannon, 
or can't hit your target with a shot! 


M: 


PW 


M -— — 


br 


Naturally, you need to have a suitable Ability on your 
character sheet in order to use it. Later in this chapter, the 
Practices section of Focus and the Arts provides lists of the 
Abilities associated with certain mystic and technological 
practices. Assuming that you do have the Ability in question, 
you can employ it in one of two ways: 


Abilities Enhancing Magick 

When a character uses an appropriate Ability just before 
working a magickal Effect - and, in game terms, takes at least 
a turn or two to do so - make a roll to reflect your success 
with that activity. The difficulty for that roll depends upon 
the circumstances for the feat in question; for details, see 


pp. 403-405. 


If you’re using an activity to enhance your magick, you 
cannot spend Willpower to get an automatic success, or use 
other modifiers to lower the difficulty of that activity roll. In 
Jinx’s case, the Tarot reading’s difficulty is 5, period. Each 
success on the Attribute + Ability roll reduces the difficulty 


on the associated Effect by -1, to a maximum reduction of 
-3. If Jinx gets two successes, then her casting roll’s difficulty 
drops by -2. 


Magick Enhancing Abilities 

The right spell or Procedure can make certain mundane 
tasks easier, too. A little Mind-magick push, for example, can 
beef up a facedown or debate. In this case, you cast the magick 
just before the task and either keep it running throughout the 
task (see below), or else get the ball rolling with magick and 
then follow through with straight-up skill. 


Game-wise, use the same system as you’d employ when 
enhancing magick with Abilities: a successful Arete roll lowers 
the difficulty of the Attribute + Ability roll by a factor of -1 
difficulty for each success rolled with your Arete, toa maximum 
reduction of -3. 

In this case, however, you could lower the difficulty of that 


Arete roll. Let’s say that Jinx spends a point of Quintessence 
to lower her difficulty from 5 to 4. If she’s using the magick to 


Axis of Coincidence 


Various examples of coincidence throughout Mage's history have muddied the waters considerably. Correspondence 
magick, for example, does not summon taxi cabs, nor do whiskey flasks materialize in a person's pocket without a Matter 
2/ Prime 2 Effect and several successes rolled to create one from thin air (or a similar, Correspondence-based Effect to 
move the flask from its location to the pocket). The gray areas between coincidental and vulgar magick might be Mage's 
most controversial element; with absolutely zero help from Mage 1* Edition, arguments about vampiric soap bubbles 
and taxis from nowhere have surrounded the game for over 20 years. And though no sidebar can conclusively end all 


arguments, we can present a few guidelines here. 


As a general rule, please assume that if a Hypothetical Average Bystander (HAB) saw you doing something and that 
something looked possible under his or her worldview, then your Effect is coincidental. Yes, you could pull a gun or 
business card from your pocket and have it appear to be coincidence even if there hadn't been one there beforehand. 
(This, of course, assumes that no one has gone through your pockets or otherwise proved them to be empty. If you've 
just taken your pants out of the laundry, you can't pull a gun from the front pocket. Also, that gun would still have to be 
small enough to fit in a pants pocket in the first place; yanking a Desert Eagle from a pair of Daisy Dukes is not gonna 
fly.) Any conjured object, however, has to either come from somewhere via a Correspondence/ Matter Effect or else be 
created from Matter and Prime Effects... and such acts are often more difficult than carrying that object in the first place 
- see the Chapter Nine section regarding The Technological World and the creation or invention of sophisticated 


working objects. 


On a related note, conjured objects do need to come from somewhere — not-so-random chance will not simply place 
them in your pocket at the proper time. As an overall guideline, Mage 20 assumes a Process-Based Determinism (PBD), 
which means that the process you follow determines the results you get. 


Returning to the summoned taxi example, a mage would have to: 


* Employ the Spheres necessary to grab an existing taxi (maybe Correspondence 3 to find a taxi, Mind 2 to nudge the 
driver in your direction, and Entropy 2 to tilt the odds of finding a taxi in your favor); 


Employ the Spheres necessary to create a taxi and driver from thin air (Matter 4 to conjure the complicated mix of 
materials; Forces 3 to propel them using internal combustion and electrical currents and to conjure them from nothing; 
Life 5/ Mind 5 to create a capable driver; Prime 2 to fuel the entire mess; several dots in various Crafts and Science 
En specialties in Biology and Human Anatomy; and a metric shit-ton of successes scored on an incredibly vulgar 
Effect]; or... 


Employ Entropy 2 to tilt the odds in your favor; score a LOT of successes unless yov're in a busy urban area; and 
expect to be waiting a while before getting whatever happens to arrive. 


Merely tossing out a Correspondence 3 teleportation Effect and then hailing a taxi as the coincidence that happens to 
manifest in time to transport you to your destination will not do the job. (Yes, we know that Mage 1*' Edition used some 
really wild examples as coincidences. Mage 1*’s magick rules are broken. Please ignore them. Thanks.) 


Chapter Ten: The Book of Magick — 533 


A popular analogy on the Mage forums involves the double axis of HAB/ HOO/ HYP on one spectrum, and RBD/ PBD 
on the other. HAB and PBD just got covered above. HOO stands for Hypothetical Omniscient Observer (translation: Reality is 
the ultimate judge of coincidence, can see in your pockets, and has eyes everywhere); RBD means Result-Based Determinism 
(result is the only thing that matters, not how you got that result); and HYP translates to Harass Yonder Passerby (which is a joke). 


Under HOO, nothing a mage can do counts as a coincidence, because Reality is a godlike observer who judges your 
activities. And under RBD, you can conjure a taxi from nowhere with a Bae ondence spell because the only thing 
that matters is getting from Point A to Point B. (Mages tend to HYP as a matter of course. Yes, mages can be real dicks.) 


Ultimately, you — the players and the Storytellers of individual Mage chronicles — provide the final decisions about 
whether coincidence follows a HAB or HOO model, and whether Effects get decided by RBD or PBD. As far as Mage 
20's default position goes, however, our rules favor a HAB/ PBD approach: the Hypothetical Average Bystander decides 
whether or not something is possible (and she cannot see what you've got in your pocketses), and the results of your 
Effects depend upon the process you use to make them manifest. 


Hopefully, this helps settle a few long-running arguments... around your gaming table, if not on the Internet. (As any 
Virtual Adept can tell you, nothing truly settles arguments on the Internet.) 


Another source of endless arguments around Mage's magick has already been addressed above: theoretically, anything 
is possible if you've got the Spheres, Arete, and imagination to pull it off. What, then, stops mages from conjuring wealth 
and turning vampires into lawn chairs or soap bubbles? 


Successes and consequences. 


Yes, a wizard with the Spheres and Abilities listed above could theoretically conjure a taxi and its driver from thin air. That is possible. 
Now, just make a few Crafts rolls (lots of successes — you're building a car); some Science rolls (likewise — you're creating a 
functional, humanoid life-form, plus a working internal-combustion engine]. If all that goes well, then roll 20 or 30 successes on a 
vulgar Effect (base difficulty 9 if you're in the middle of nowhere, otherwise 10, with a reduction no lower than difficulty 6 if every 
single factor goes in your favor). Don't botch, incidentally — the potential Paradox backlash could blow you to atoms. 


Not that simple, is it? 


The same rule runs true on smaller, less obvious complexities... conjuring money, for example. Modern currency is incredibly 
sophisticated, filled with tiny cues, subtle colors, complex designs, electronic strips, holographic marks, and so forth. You 
want to make a wad of twenties from thin air? How many successes, exactly, do you think it'll take to craft even one passable 
duplicate of a $20.00 bill? Does your mage have several dots in Crafts and a specialty in Counterfeiting? And if so, which 
currency has he memorized down to the smallest details? Will that money feel right, or will it have a telltale slick, rough, 
or otherwise unusual texture that would tip off a cashier? Even if you can foal a cashier with that fake cash, do you think a 
human being's memory can fool a teller machine's cash scanner? Not bloody likely. After all, the Technocracy and other 
non-mage agencies have worked hard to protect their institutions from influxes of fake cash. Things that sound easy in theory 
are damned difficult in practice... and thus, they demand phenomenal numbers of successes, often at epic difficulty ratings. 


On a related note, magick does not happen in a vacuum. Changing one thing dramatically has dramatic effects on other 
things around it. If you conjure a localized thunderstorm, you also affect the weather patterns on a grand scale. Turn 
Count Dracula into kitchenware, and his minions will have your ass... and so will he, once that spell wears off. Yes, a 
Hollower can drain a local bank machine; you think the Syndicate won't notice that, though, even if she has an Arcane 
of 5 with which to blur the camera on that ATM? Think some street kid can get away with passing off $ 100 bills at every 
store counter? Not in this social climate, she can't! Dramatic activities have dramatic blowback, and magick does not 
shield mages from such consequences. As anyone who studies metaphysics can tell you, it’s often quite the opposite. 


The obvious (and sometimes not so obvious) effects of Paradox reflect the echoes of a mage's actions. Large, flashy workings 
get mages slammed to the mat, and smaller ones generate uncanny Resonance or accumulate tiny increments of Paradox until 
the player abruptly realizes that she’s got eight or 10 Paradox points on her sheet. Hypothetical Average Bystanders might be 
fooled, but Reality will have its due one way or another. Even when cast in low-Paradox environments (Sanctums, Chantries, 
the Otherworlds), large spells remain challenging. Rolling 20 successes is still difficult, risky, and time-consuming when the 
difficulty of that roll is 6 instead of 9, and Paradox can still smack you if you screw up in outer space. Beyond Paradox, of 
course, other consequences still exist, and there’s still that matter of scoring enough successes to pull off an Elect to begin with. 


A Storyteller is not only allowed but also advised to use successes and consequences as limiters on abusive levels of 
magick. The Magickal Feats chart provides guidelines for drastic acts of reality hacking, so if someone's trying to whip 
up a basement nuke orturn his co-workers into hordes of screaming minions, the Storyteller has the option of making such 
feats so difficult and risky that our budding Voldemort is better off trying a more subtle approach to life. Sure, there are 
times when flashy magick is totally appropriate — the game is called Mage, after all. By bearing in mind the successes 
and consequences involved, however, you can keep things from getting out of hand. 


534 Mage: The Ascension 20" Anniversary Edition 


p — = 


assist an activity - perhaps employing Entropy 2 to draw the 
Strength card from her Tarot deck - then her Arete roll is 4 
even though the Perception * Enigmas difficulty is still 5. Each 
success, of course, reduces that difficulty, though. Jinx scores 
three successes, and her Tarot-reading difficulty drops to 2. 


The Dramatic Featssection near the beginning of Chapter 
Nine offers a wide range of potentially helpful activities, and 
the Focus and the Arts section in this chapter shows how 
certain feats can provide focus or assistance for a magickal 
Effect. As mentioned above, certain skills and feats may be 
required for certain workings; if you want to soup up your car 
with Forces and Matter, for instance, then you'll have to know 
how to work on a car. 


Step Three: Roll 


As we've already seen, you cast an Effect by rolling your 
Arete rating. Atthat point, however, various other circumstances 
determine what your difficulty is and how well you succeed. 


Regardless of speed or circumstances, you can make only 
one Arete roll per turn. 


The Difficulty 


To reiterate what we've mentioned above, the difficulty of 
your casting roll depends first upon whether or not your mage 
is using coincidental magick or vulgar magick, and second 
whether or not someone’s around to notice it when she does. 


* Coincidental magick’s difficulty equals the highest Sphere 
in that Effect + 3. If you use Forces 2 to make a breeze 
blow in your direction at just the right time, then the 


roll’s difficulty is 5. (2 + 3 = 5) 


e Vulgar magick WITHOUT Sleeper witnesses bases its 
difficulty on the highest Sphere + 4. If you used Forces 
2 to make a candle flame fly across the room and into 
your hand while you were alone, then the difficulty for 


that feat would be 6. (2 + 4 = 6) 


e Vulgar magick WITH Sleeper witnesses has a difficulty of 
the highest Sphere + 5. If you pulled that same flying- 


flame stunt in front of an unAwakened neighbor, your 


difficulty would be 7. (2 + 5 = 7) 


Minimum Difficulty 

The various modifiers described below can raise or lower 
the difficulty up to three factors in either direction. No magick- 
casting roll, however, can go below a difficulty of 3 if the caster’s 
working somewhere on Earth. Reality has a limited amount of 
flexibility, and although lower difficulties might be possible 
in the Otherworlds (Storyteller’s discretion), your Arete roll’s 
difficulty will never drop below 3, regardless of the modifiers 
involved. 


Magickal Attack Rolls 


Under many circumstances, you simply roll your character’s 
Arete, plus or minus modifiers, to see whether an Effect goes 
off. If you succeed, then the Effect succeeds as well. 


In certain circumstances, though, you need to hit a target 
who doesn’t want to be hit. Perhaps you’ re firing an energy gun, 
swinging an enchanted sword, or flinging the archetypal fireball 
at your intended target of misfortune. In such situations, you 
also need to roll an attack to hit that person. The Effect might 
succeed, but its impact may go elsewhere. 


Such circumstances apply to targeted Effects - ones in 
which you might miss that target or ones that the target of the 
Effect can dodge. Chapter Nine covers such situations, and 
their appropriate rolls, in the Magick and Violencesection (pp. 
413-416) and on the Order of Battle chart, featured on (p. 445). 


Fast-Casting and Working Without Tools 

A desperate or reckless mage might try fastcasting her 
Effect - that is, making stuff up and firing it off without 
preparation or practice. On a related note, she might also try 
working without her usual instruments, trusting sheer force 
of Will to carry her through. 


In both cases, the player suffers a penalty to her Arete roll 
when casting that Effect - a +1 increase to her difficulty when 
fast-casting and a +3 increase to her difficulty when working 
without her usual tools. Again, both modifications can be 
found on the Magickal Difficulty Modifiers chart, and both 


Appropriate and Opposed Resonance 


Two of the modifiers presented on the Magickal Difficulty Modifiers chart feature the idea of appropriate and 
opposed Resonance. Essentially, this means working with things whose energy fits (or do not fit) the spell and subject. 


As an example, imagine a spell that's intended to comfort a frightened child: using a well-loved teddy bear, a soft security 
blanket, or a lullaby from the mage’s happy childhood would provide appropriate Resonance for the spell in question. 


Meanwhile, using a blood-stained blanket from an urban warzone, a lullaby sung by an abusive parent, or the teddy bear 
clutched in the mage’s hands back during the awful days of Daddy’s drinking binges would provide opposed Resonance. 


Now, some of those items might still be appropriate under certain situations. If that teddy bear was the mage’s only 
comfort during those days, and if the child he’s trying to comfort is struggling with family abuse, the old stuffed animal 
might still provide an appropriate focus for that spell. And so, the difference between appropriate and opposed has 
more to do with the story elements than with an arbitrary list of items that are good or bad for particular sorts of workings. 


For more details about the effects of Resonance, see Resonance and Synergy, (pp. 560-561). 


Chapter Ten: The Book of Magick 535 


536 


Ma$e: The Ascension 20^ Anniversary Edition 


affect any mage who has not raised her Arete high enough 
to work without a focus, as described in the entry Arete, 
Focus, and Instruments, Chapter Six, (p. 329). 


Modifiers 


As the last few chapters have shown, various modifiers 
reflect circumstances that make a task more or less difficult. 
On the Magickal Difficulty Modifiers chart on (p. 503), 
you'll find a collection of modifiers that reflect Tools and 
Rituals, matters of Time and Effort, and a host of General 
Circumstances that can help or hinder a mage's work. 


Modifier Limits 

As that chart points out, no collection of modifiers 
can raise a difficulty by more than +3, lower that difficulty 
by more than 3, or bring the difficulty of a magickal Effect 
below 3 if that Effect gets cast on Earth. 


The Thresholds Option 

If your group employs the thresholdsoption described 
in Chapter Eight (p. 387), then you'll be setting your 
maximum difficulties at 9 instead of 10. In such cases, then, 
a modifier that would push the difficulty to 10 or beyond 
that pointwill instead presenta threshold of successes. Each 
+1 to the difficulty equals one additional success that you 
need to roll in order to clear that threshold. 


Let’s say that your modifiers add +3 to your difficulty 
and that those additions take the difficulty to 11. Because 
11 is two more than 9, you get a threshold of two. To beat 
that threshold, you need to roll at least three successes at 
difficulty 9 - the first one to reach the difficulty, the next 
two to beat that threshold. 


This option works best when you've got an incredibly 
challenging task and the time and space to work on it properly. 
For quick-resultspells, threshold successes can be unnecessarily 
complex. Use the option only when you need to do so. 


Difficulties Above IO 

Even if your group chooses not to employ thresholds, 
you'll still add extra successes when a modifier pushes the 
difficulty above 10. Each +1 modifier adds another success 
that you need to roll before you succeed. 


If, forinstance, Lee Ann tries to use Time 5 to travel back 
in time in front of witnesses, that would add a +3 modifier 
to that difficulty 10 Effect. In game terms, that would 
demand a minimum of three extra successes at difficulty 10, 
over and above the other successes necessary to accomplish 
that feat. The mathematical absurdities involved in that roll 
show why mages so rarely attempt such feats... and why they 
even more rarely succeed when they do. 


Osing Willpower 

Will drives magick. When you throw a point of 
Willpower behind a spell, your character gets one automatic 
success on the Effect in question. 


As detailed in the Chapter Sixentry Willpower, spending 
this Trait involves points of temporary Willpower, not permanent 
Willpower. Essentially, you're pushing the limits of reality by 
investing part of your character's determination to succeed. 
In order to do so, however, you have to declare the Willpower 
expenditure before you roll your Arete. Once you've made that 
roll, you cannotadd more successes to it by spending Willpower 
to make things happen. 


A mage may spend only one Willpower point per turn 
when casting an Effect. 


Osing Quintessence 


As the essential energy of Creation, Quintessence fuels 
magickal Effects. A mage can spend one point of her personal 
Quintessence per turn for each dot in her Avatar background 
Trait. As the Magickal Difficulty Modifiers chart shows, you 
can spend points of Quintessence to reduce the difficulty of 
your character's magickal Effects. 


Adjusting Arete Roll Difficulties 


As usual, the final difficulty of a single Arete roll can be 
reduced by a maximum of -3 (or three points of Quintessence). 
That said, you could spend additional points in order to balance 
out other modifiers; if, for example, you had a +2 addition to your 
difficulty and an Avatar Background of 5, you could spend up 
to five points of Quintessence in order to drop that difficulty by 
-3, canceling out the +2 and reducing the difficulty by -3 as well. 


Other Oses for Quintessence in Magick 
Quintessence has other potential uses as well: 


e Reinforcing the Pattern of an object so that it resists or 
inflicts aggravated damage. 


* Fueling new Patterns so that Life, Forces, and Matter 
can be created from scratch. 


* Facilitating the many uses of the Prime Sphere. 


In certain cases - such as adding the ability to inflict 
aggravated damage to something that doesn't normally do 
that - you must spend a point or more of Quintessence in 
order to complete that Effect. In all cases that don't involve 
Prime 3 or higher, however, you can spend only one point of 
Quintessence for each dot in your Avatar. Beyond that, a mage 
must rely upon Prime Sphere Effects. 


Successes 


Brief, simple spells are easy to cast; larger, more complicated 
magicks take time and effort. As the Magickal Feats chartshows, 
it's easier to cast a simple Effect on yourself than it is to rock 
someone else's world with powerful magicks. 


Base Successes 
For a simple guideline, assume that you'll need a certain 
number of successes before your Effect manifests: 


* Personal Effects that make minor changes in your 
character’s own reality require only one success. These 


include sensory-perception enhancements, divinations, 
self-healing, temporary Trait boosts, minor cosmetic 
changes (hair color, skin color, height, etc.) and the 
like. Extreme or long-lasting alterations - radical shape 
changes, multiple selves, transformations into elemental 
forces, and so forth - require three successes or more. 


* Effects that change reality for another person or object require 
at least two successes. For this reason, a single success 
inflicts no damage upon an opponent - damage begins 
at two successes. An unwilling target can also try to resist 
or dodge an attack, as detailed under the Dodging and 
Resistance entry below. In order to get around that 
resistance, you might need to roll additional successes; 
the more successes you roll, the more damage you inflict. 
(See Damage and Duration, also below.) 


* Effects that significantly change your surroundings, even if 
that’s only on a local level, require at least five successes. 
Large-scale alterations can demand 10, 20, even 30 
successes, whereas small and subtle ones are much easier 
to achieve. 


Magickal Feats 


Especially ambitious or complicated Effects take longer 
to cast and demand more effort in the process. For such 
workings, consult the Magickal Feats chart and find the 
number of successes you'll probably need in order to achieve 
the desired Effect. 


To gather those successes, an extended roll - in story terms, 
a ritual - could be essential. The Rituals, Rolls, and Extended 
Successesentry, below, describes the process of rolling largenumbers 
of successes and the various complications and consequences that 
can result when you try to bend reality on an epic scale. 


De$rees of Success 

Most Effects are fairly straightforward. Conjuring fire, 
changing your shape, downloading your consciousness into the 
Digital Web... such things either happen or they don't. The 
Base Damage or Duration chart presents the basic amounts 
of damage that a given spell inflicts, or the length of time that 
a given Effect lasts, based upon the roll of your dice. 


Other Effects, however, might succeed only partially or 
succeed beyond your expectations. In such cases, use the Degrees 
of Success chart to find out how well your mage managed the 
Effect in question. If she fell short of her goal or had to stop in 
the middle of a ritual (see below), then she could either accept an 
imperfect spell or try to pick things up again later. If she succeeded 
beyond her expectations, the Storyteller owes her a bonus of some 
kind, based upon the attempted Effect and the circumstances 
surrounding the caster, spell, and subject of the Effect. 


Picking Op Where You Left Off 


After casting an imperfect Effect or falling short of her initial 
plans, a mage can pick up where she left off by making another 
roll at *1 to the original difficulty. In story terms, she grits her 
teeth, regroups, and gives it the old (wizard) college try once again. 


Chapter Ten: The Book of Magick — 537 


IA 7 


The following optional rules offer complex possibilities for your chronicle. Use them or avoid them as your group sees fit. 
As per Mage Revised, the Storyteller may decide to let a player divide up her successes between Targets, Damage, 


and Duration. At the price of some extra complication, this option allows you to customize certain elements of your 
magickal Effects. 


| For each success above the Base Successes, the player could place one success into one of the following categories: 


T you Want 


Damage: Normally, your Effects inflict damage based upon the numbers of successes you roll, as described under 


Damage and Duration in Step Four and the Base Damage or Duration chart. If you choose to divide up your 
successes, however, then you have no "default" damage - every level of damage must be "purchased" with successes. 


Each success you put into Damage allows you to inflict two health levels of damage on yovr subject. Depending 
upon the Sphere yov're using, that damage might be bashing, lethal or aggravated - see the Magickal Damage 
chart for details. 


Normally, damage is instantaneous. By adding Duration to Damage, however, you can cast time-release Effects — poison, 
curses, pain spells and so on — whose harm continues over consecutive intervals. 


Each interval costs a certain number of successes: 


za cn 


e Each day interval = two successes 


* Each six-month interval = four successes 


Time-release spells can be dispelled with appropriate Countermagick. See the entry of that name, (p 
for details. 


If the mage wants to spread things around before she casts an Effect, the player must add up the successes needed and 
then use that as her Base Successes. 


If, for example, you wanted to hit three Targets for six health levels of Damage, then you'd need to add five successes 
(one for each additional Target beyond the first, plus one for every two health levels of Damage) to your Base of two 
successes — giving you a total of seven successes you need to roll in order to get the Effect you want. 


For a quick-reference overview of this option, again see the Optional Dividing Success Rule chart. 


For situations in which you try again due to a failed roll- orty Rituals, Rolls, and Extended Successes 
again and fail the roll - check out the Failed Rollsentry below. In other 


cases, an extended roll might be in order... and for those situations, 
again see the Rituals, Rolls, and Extended Successes entry below. 


By definition, ritual refers to a practiced sequence of 
events with a desired end. Glaring at a person and making her 
burst into flames is not a ritual, but shaking a burnt bone in 


538 Mage: The Ascension 20" Anniversary Edi 


es — 


Optional Rules (Continued) 


Automatic Successes 


Skillful mages can do simple things with little effort. To reflect that ease, the Storyteller might let a character perform 
simple spells without having the player roll for that Effect. 


Like the automatic success rule described in Chapter Eight, this option requires a dice pool that's at least equal to 
the task at hand. In this case, that means an Arete Trait of the appropriate Sphere +3. So long as the trick in question 
doesn't stir up a fuss or make some huge difference in the course of the story, the mage can pull off small coincidences — 
enhancing her senses, changing her eye color, pulling a business card out of her pocket, etc. — without rolling for success. 


Obviously, if the trick does involve some complex or vital activity — creating a gun out of thin air, just happening to find a 
Big Mac in the middle of the desert, and so forth — then the player should have to roll for the Effect as usual. This option 
reflects simple, practiced tricks, not life-changing alterations of reality. 


For obvious reasons, this option should not be used with vulgar magick, only for coincidental Effects. That said, it's worth 
noting that Sanctums, Chantries, Realms, and the Otherworlds often accept certain magickal practices as coincidental. 
On his home turf, then, an accomplished mage might be able to do things that would normally be considered vulgar 
magick — like igniting a roomful of candles with a wave of his hand, stirring a pot without touching the spoon, or getting 
a book to float off the shelf and onto the table — without rolling for the Effect. Such tricks are colorful reflections of a 
wizard's power and could be considered part of the landscape in a personal Sanctum, home Chantry, or dedicated 
Horizon Realm where the mage in question has keyed the local reality to conform to his Arts. (For details, see the section 
about The Otherworlds in Chapter Nine, as well as the Backgrounds Chantry and Sanctum, both in Chapter Six.) 


For equally obvious reasons, this option should not apply to combat-based rolls. 


The Domino Effect 


After a certain point, the idea of coincidence wears thin. If mages are throwing around unlikely events in quick succession, 
then this optional rule might come into play. 


For every two wild coincidences within a single scene, the Storyteller may add +1 to the difficulty of subsequent coincidences. 
This penalty adds up, too: +2 difficulty after five coincidences, +3 after seven, and so on. To be fair, however, the penalty 
should come in only when those coincidences affect the scene in noticeable ways: exploding gas mains, unlikely ricochets, 
unexpected appearances of the police... that sort of thing. Personal Effects that no one knows about except the mage 


who cast them (sensory enhancements, minor Trait boosts, etc.) should remain immune to this domino effect. 


her direction while tossing a handful of ashes and invoking 
Chango would be a ritual. 


Essentially, a ritual allows you to roll until you get the 
number of successes your mage’s Effect requires. In game 
terms, a ritual might involve extended rolls, several turns, and 
aseries of actions, possibly with several different tools involved. 
No Hermetic wizard, for example, would dare summon an 
angel without the proper sigils, purifications, invocations, and 
ceremonial instruments. Some rituals involve brief activity, 
and others can take hours or even days. The optional Rite, 
Ceremony, and Great Work rule (see below) reflects the 
different time periods a ritual might require, as well as the rolls 
and successes involved in such rituals. 


What Does a Ritual Look Like? 


For game purposes, a ritual involves any kind of extended 
process that requires several rolls, has a focus, and produces 
a magickal Effect. Despite the word’s religious connotations, 
that ritual doesn’t have to be mystical; a LAN party, a musical 
concert, an extended programming session, the loving care 
devoted to restoring an old car or inventing a new gadget... 
for our purposes here, they’re all rituals. 


The ritual in question can be solitary (like a series of katas, 
a deep meditation, the R&D process for a glorious machine) 
or communal (a play, a rave, the ignition of a gigantic statue 
in the middle of a desert). The focus element, however, is 
essential. A ritual involves intention (the goal of that rite), 
practice (the activity that fulfills that goal), and the appropriate 
instruments (the tools - from wrenches or computers to elaborate 
masquerades or intricate designs - used to turn that intention 
into a reality) for the practice in question. 


Coincidental and Vulgar Rituals 

Are rituals coincidental? They can be, especially when the 
shape and Effects involved with the ritual dovetail with the 
beliefs ofa given culture or subculture... and mostespeciallywhen 
people from that culture form a congregation for the ritual itself. 
Essentially, those people - even when they're Sleepers - add 
their faith to the ritual's power, making it coincidental except 
in the most obviously vulgar kind of applications. Getting a 
Catholic congregation to accept a small miracle during High 
Mass is coincidental; ripping open the Gauntlet and letting a 
demon horde pour through it, on the other hand, is vulgar even 
if you do it in the middle of an Electric Hellfire Club reunion. 


Chapter Ten: The Book of Magick 539 


eZ 


In many cases, the dividing line between a coincidental rite 
and a vulgar one depends upon the dressing involved in that 
particular ritual. A tech-based ritual - a demo, an experiment, 
a rock concert, a launch party for some new software - tends 
to be coincidental unless it folds, spindles, and mutilates the 
laws of physics... and occasionally even then. (What was the 
Space Race of the 1960s if not a series of Technocratic rituals 
bents on transforming human beliefs about possibility?) 
Mystic rituals are trickier, balancing the abstract concepts of 
the faithful with the experiences of a Sleeper's daily reality. 
(“Sure, I believe in angels... but did you SEE that fucking thing?”) 
Even then, however, a rite can push the edges of what people 
accept as possible. You might not be able to conjure a raging 
hellbeast without risking heavy Paradox, but if you can make 
it seem like cool theatrics, then you might just get away with 
passing it off as special effects during an especially wild Black 
Metal show. (Once it starts eating the audience, however, you 
have a problem...) 


It’s worth noting that rituals cast by a mage within her 
dedicated Sanctum are almost always coincidental, so long as 
they follow the set of reality inside thatspace. A Nordic Verbena 
could call up some powerful Effects using ser i shamanic rites; if 
she brings in a computer, though, such heresy probably won't 
go down well with the Old Gods watching over her ritual grove. 


Base Difficulty 

As usual, a ritual's base difficulty depends upon the highest 
Sphere involved in the Effect, plus the modifiers for coincidental 
or vulgar magick. Other modifiers - for tools, Quintessence, 
allies, and so forth - will probably reduce that difficulty. The 
ritual's base, however, is that difficulty before any modifiers have 
been applied... and when you're figuring out the difficulties for 
Stamina rolls and mundane activities (see below), that base is 
the difficulty that you'll use. 


Maximum Rolls 

Rituals take a lot of energy. Mentally and physically, 
keeping the kind of attention and intention a ritual needs is 
pretty draining. Even with a group of faithful allies working 
together - and lowering the difficulty of the rolls involved - the 
mage in charge of the ritual will wear out sometime. 


As a result, the maximum number of rolls you can make 
during your ritual is equal to your permanent Willpower Trait 
plus your Arete. An houngan with a Willpower of 7 and an 
Arete of 4 could make 11 rolls (7 Willpower + 4 Arete = 11) in 
the course of his ritual to court Shango’s blessing before he 
has given that rite everything he has to give. 

Note that the number of rolls is independent of the number 
of hours your mage spends performing the ritual. See Rituals 
and Stamina, below, for more about how long your mage can 
keep this ritual stuff up. 


Simultaneous Effects During Rituals 


As noted under the heading Instant Effects and Rituals, 
(p. 529), a ritual demands intense concentration. With the 
exception of Rank 1 sensory Effects, or perhaps a Mind or 


Mage: The Ascension 20" Anniversary Edition 


Entropy Effect that sways an audience or tilts odds in your 
favor, a mage cannot use more than two Effects at once while 
he’s casting a ritual. 


If a mage does choose to juggle two different Effects during 
aritual, then thatsecond Effect adds +1 to the ritual’s difficulty. 
Please note that this applies only to different Effects (like a Mind 
spell cast to influence a congregation during a larger ceremony), 
not to different Spheres being used within the SAME Effect. 


Failed Rolls 

Aside from the potential benefits of coincidence (shown 
above), a ritual’s primary purpose in game terms involves the 
ability to use extended rolls to create bigger Effects. On the good 
side, an extended roll can help you assemble a large number 
of successes; on the not-so-good side, it also gives you plenty 
of opportunities to fail or botch a roll. Each new roll presents 
a risk of failure and potential catastrophe. 


If you fail a roll - that is, you get no successes that turn 

- then you may still continue rolling in subsequent turns. 

Each failed roll, however, adds *1 to the difficulty of those 

subsequent rolls. Fail one roll, it's *1; fail two rolls, and it's 

2... and so it goes until you either complete the Effect, fail 
completely, or botch a roll. 


Ifthe difficulty reaches 9 and you fail another roll and acquire 
a new penalty, then the new penalties become thresholds: a +1 
difficultyadds one moresuccess to the total you need, a +2 difficulty 
adds two more successes, and so on. By that point, your mage 
is risking disaster, and it's probably best to stop the process and 
regroup than itis to press forward - see Rituals and Paradox, below. 


Botched Rolls 


If you roll a botch during a ritual, you may spend one turn, 
atemporary Willpower point, and one previously rolled success 
in order to keep the whole thing from blowing up in your face. 


At this point, your mage is holding the ritual together 
through sheer determination. You can either stop there or 
else keep going with a *1 increase to your difficulty. A second 
botch, however, spells immediate disaster... again, see Rituals 
and Paradox. 


Interference 

If an outside party disrupts a ritual - say, by attacking the 
rite or distracting the caster - then the mage in charge of that 
ritual must make a Willpower roll, difficulty 8, or else botch 
the entire deal. If she successfully keeps things together, the 
ritual proceeds as if there had been a botch rolled; a second 
turn of interference brings the hammer down and the ritual 
to a crashing halt. 


Rituals and Paradox 

Magickal rituals stir up a lot of reality. And so, every roll 
after the first one adds one point of Paradox to the caster's total. 
If the ritual concludes successfully, then those extra points of 
Paradox go away. If the caster botches the ritual, however, then 
the Paradox backlash adds those additional points of Paradox 
onto the Paradox that the mage would suffer to begin with. 


Let's say you made three rolls as part of your ritual; those 
three rolls add two points to your Paradox pool - one for each 
roll after the first. If the Effect succeeds, then those two points 
disappear. If you botch a roll during the casting of that Effect, 
however, those two points get counted toward the Paradox 


backlash. (For details, see Part IV: The Paradox Effect.) 


Paradox point accumulation does not reset after a botch; 
once you botch and take those two points, you can continue 
at +1 difficulty (see above), but you would take three Paradox 
points in the next turn, then four after that, and so on. 


Rituals and Stamina 

Extended rites are exhausting. As a general rule, assume 
that a character may work for one hour without penalty for 
each dot in his Stamina Trait. After that, you’ll need to make 
a Stamina roll for each subsequent hour... and the difficulty 
for that roll is the base difficulty of the ritual itself. 


A successful roll allows the mage to go on for another 
hour; the second roll suffers a +1 penalty to its difficulty; the 
third suffers a +2 penalty, and so on. 


A failed roll means that exhaustion has set in. At that 
point, you can either call off the ritual or spend a point of 
Willpower to keep going. If you keep going, the next Stamina 
roll suffers a +3 penalty as above... after all, your mage is 
seriously running out of steam! 


A botched Stamina roll counts as Interference, above. In 
story terms, the mage starts fumbling around in a daze and must 
struggle to keep the rite from ending in catastrophe. For obvious 
reasons, then, long rituals can be extremely dangerous affairs. 


Rituals and Mundane Abilities 

By their nature, rituals tend to employ mundane Abilities 
- Art, Computer, Esoterica, Technology, and so forth. In story 
terms, the activity provides the focus for that ritual; and in 
game terms, the Attribute + Ability roll lowers the difficulty 
of the rite. 


As described above, under Mundane Skills and Magickal 
Effects, each success with a mundane activity roll reduces the 
Arete roll difficulty by -1, to a maximum reduction of -3. The 
difficulty for that roll is the base difficulty for the ritual itself. 


For more details, see that Mundane Skills and Magickal 
Effects entry; for potential ritual activities and tools, see Focus 
and the Arts, later in this chapter. 


Optional Rule: Rite, Ceremony, and Great Work 

As an optional rule, you could break rituals down into 
three categories, each one reflecting a certain investment of 
time and effort: 


e A brief rite (one to five successes) reflects a short observance: 
a song, a quick prayer, activating a mechanical sequence, 
sticking pins in a doll, that sort of thing. Game-wise, 
this involves one or two rolls and five minutes or less of 
story time. Magick-wise, the rite conjures a simple Effect 
through either a focus or sheer force of Will, depending 
on the mage’s abilities. More involved Effects require... 


* A ceremony (five to 10 successes), which commits time 
and effort to the casting of an Effect. A mass, a concert, 
a session in the workshop, a trance, a series of katas, an 
eveningofdebauchery - such things countas ceremonies. 
The ceremony doesn't have to be a social event but can 
involve solitary practice as well as a communal gathering. 
In game terms, each Arete roll performed within a 
ceremony reflects an hour or so in story time and may 
run for up to five hours, after which it becomes... 


* A Great Work (10 successes or more) - a serious devotion to 
the Effect at hand. High Ritual invocations often involve 
Great Works, as do mechanical inventions, major spiritual 
observances, alchemical research, festivals, and other 
forms of hard time in the lab, workshop, dojo, or temple. 
Game-wise, each Great Work roll reflects five hours of 
commitment to the task, which can run as long as it needs 
to before the mage either reaches his goal, fails horribly, 
or hits the end of his endurance, as shown under Rituals 
and Staminaand Maximum Rolls. A major investment of 
time, materials, effort, and skill, a Great Work is the sort 
of thing mages do when they're trying to move the world. 


Taking Breaks During a Great Work 

Great Works aren't usually one-sitting projects. A mage 
could spend days, weeks, or longer dedicating himself to a 
Great Work. In game terms, you may consider the option of 
stopping for a break during a Great Work, hanging the process 
by spending a Willpower point and then resuming the effort 
after a short interval. 


To pick up where you left off, make a Wits * Esoterica roll 
(or Wits * Technology for acts of enlightened hypertech). That 
roll's difficulty begins atthe ritual's base difficulty (no modifiers 
allowed), and then goes up by *1 for each break taken after the 
first one. So long as the work area remains undisturbed, and 
no more than 48 hours pass between sessions with the Great 
Work, the mage may continue to extend the process. One 
failed roll, however, ruins the process and forces the mage to 
begin again... which explains why so many Great Works take 
a long time to perform. 


Acting in Concert 


So you've got some helpers while you're casting that 
ritual. What does that mean in game terms? As we saw above, 
a sympathetic crowd can make a ritual feel coincidental, and 
assistants can lower the difficulty for a magickal Effect. Allied 
mages can also help out by acting in concert with the caster, 
and a Cult (as in the Background Trait of that name) adds 
to the caster's dice pool. In short, then, a group ritual can be 
incredibly beneficial, provided that you're willing to deal with 
the increased risks and potential complications of getting a 
bunch of people to cooperate on an important project. 


Common Ground 


When several characters collaborate within a single ritual, 
they must all share a certain amount of common ground: 


Ma$e: The Ascension 20^ Anniversary Edition 


* Each mage involved must have at least one dot in each 
of the Spheres involved in the ritual's Effect. You can't 
help someone summon a cyclone, after all, if you don't 
understand elemental Forces. 


* Allparticipants must remain in contactwith oneanother 
forthe duration ofthe ritual, ableto communicate freely 
through whatever means work best for them: telepathy, 
speech, Instant Messaging, texting, etc. 


* Those participants need to work out a shared approach 
to the ritual; after all, an Etherite in a shamanic rite will 
probably do more harm than good. That said, mages 
from distinct yet allied groups - differing Traditions or 
Technocratic Conventions - can certainly collaborate 
if they approach one another's practices with respect 
and attention. Story-wise, those collaborators need to 
hash out some common cues and protocols... which, in 
game terms, will probably involve a few social feat rolls 
before all is said and done. Once they've established a 
common base to work from, the allies can focus their 
intentions through a shared ritual. 


The Collaborators 

Coordinating a large ritual may demand several hours of 
prep time. Once everything has been established, though, the 
casting group can work together in one of two ways: 


* Equal Collaborators - that is, mages who are more or less 
on the same level as the primary caster - can roll their 
Arete and then add their successes toward the success 
of the ritual as a whole. The Effect's normal difficulty 
and modifiers apply equally to all such collaborators. 


* Enlightened assistants - that is, mages with less knowledge 
and experience than the primary caster - add one 
automatic success to the Effect, up to a maximum of 
five successes, total. These successes, however, DO NOT 
APPLY to cancel out a botch. If the caster botches the roll, 
then those assistants' successes disappear. The additional 
successes count only to enhance a successful Effect. 


Only one option may be used at a time - not both. 


OnAwakened Assistants 
Acolytes, cultists, citizens, and so forth can add certain 
benefits to the ritual as well: 


* The Cult Background adds one die to the caster's dice 
pool, up to a maximum of five dice. And yes, those 
extra dice may also help to botch a casting roll - cults 
can screw things up as well as help things along. 


* [f you've got over 100 people involved, certain vulgar 
Effects (summonings, gateways, raisings of the dead, 
and so forth) may be considered coincidental if there 
are no other witnesses around to contradict that impression. 
A solitary rite on the Moors is far more effective in that 
regard than a concert in a nightclub downtown. 


Downsides and Risks 

It's notall roses, of course. The downsides of collaboration 
include the difficulty of wrangling several people toward a 
common goal (especially if they don't share a common belief 
system); coordinating logistics for large gatherings (which 
usually requires time, work, space, and often money); and 
the potential to screw up on a grand scale. Grand, as in if 
one caster botches a casting roll (see below), every participant 
suffers the Paradox, either by adding the Paradox points to 
their individual pools or by enduring a large-scale blast that 
affects everyone - Awakened and otherwise - who happens to 
be near Ground Zero at the time. 


Despite the risks and costs, collaboration provides a sense 
of security and fellowship. Solitary rites do have their own kind 
of significance, but we humans tend to be sociable by nature, 
and our group rituals - magickal and otherwise - transform 
the potential of one into the power of many. 


Step Four: Results 


The dice have been cast. What happens now? In Step 
Four, we cover the effects of your mage’s spell. Game-wise, 
those effects are based on the number of successes you roll. The 
more successes you get, the more potent your reality-bending 


Effect will be. 


Range 

As mentioned under the Divided Successes option (see 
the Optional Rules sidebar), a typical Effect affects one target 
within the caster’s clear sensory range. If you choose not to 
use that option, simply assume that you can affect one target 
per success if the spell you cast is capable of affecting several 
targets at once... a sleep spell, for instance, rather than a 
healing spell. Specifically targeted spells (mind control, curses, 
transformations, etc.) reach only one target ata time. Area-effect 
workings -explosions, broadcasts, storms, and so on - reach 
everyone within the area of that feat. 


A target on the fringes of the mage's sensory range (under 
cover, far away, obscured by fog or forest) increases the difficulty 
of the caster's Arete roll by +1. A mage with Correspondence 
3 or better can expand her sensory range rather dramatically, 
as shown on the Correspondence Ranges chart. That mage's 
familiarity with expanded perceptions allows her to ignore that 
penalty; all other mages, however, must take it into account. 


If your target is out of sight, behind barriers, or otherwise 
beyond the normal reach of your senses, then you must use 
the Correspondence Sphere in order to reach him. A song 
might affect someone who can't see the singer, for example, 
but it won't reach someone who cannot hear it unless the 
singing mage adds a Correspondence Effect to connect the 
song to its intended target. (For details, see the entry right 
below this one.) 


Damage and Duration 


Unless you’re using the Divided Successes option, an Effect 
that inflicts damage follows the Damage or Duration chart. 


Healing spells work the same way, repairing lost health levels 
at the same rate that an attack spell takes health levels away. 


Like damage, an Effect’s duration is based upon the successes 
you roll; the better you roll, the longer your spell lasts. This 
applies, of course, to spells that could potentially last a while - 
charms, enhanced perceptions, shape-changing, and so forth. 
Damage-based attacks tend to be immediate, whereas attacks that 
change the target without causing health level injuries follow the 
Duration part of the Damage or Duration chart. 


As mentioned on that chart, you can either inflict 
immediate damage (in which case Duration is one turn) or else 
cast a spell that lasts awhile (in which case Damage is zero). 
The only way to inflict damage over a period of time involves 
the Divided Successes option. 


Spheres and Damage 
As noted on the Magickal Damage chart: 


e Correspondence does not inflict damage at all unless 
it’s coupled with another Sphere (like using Life 3/ 
Correspondence 3 to teleport a person into several 
different destinations at once) or used to drop a target 
into an unfortunate location (like an active volcano). 
Such attacks tend to be extremely vulgar and usually 
cause aggravated damage. 


e Entropy Sphere attacks cannot inflict direct damage at all 
until Rank 4, after which point they inflict aggravated 
damage by disintegrating the target’s Pattern. (Entropy- 
based indirect attacks, like falling walls or speeding cars, 
inflict damage as Environmental Hazards; see that 
section in Chapter Nine for details.) 


e Forces Sphere attacks inflict one extra success of damage. 
That damage is often lethal, although wind-based attacks 
inflict bashing damage, and fire or electricity-based 
attacks inflict aggravated damage. 


e Vulgar Life-based attacks inflict aggravated damage; 
coincidental ones inflict lethal damage. 


e Mind-based attacks inflict bashing damage, unless the 
caster adds Prime 2 and a point of Quintessence to 
make an attack aggravated. 


e Vulgar Prime attacks inflict aggravated damage. Prime 
2, plus a point of Quintessence, allows the caster to 
make any Sphere’s damage aggravated, and Prime 3 lets 
him attack with a weapon or blast composed of pure 
Quintessence energy. 


* Matter and Spirit inflict lethal damage unless they're 
augmented with Prime 2 and Quintessence. 


* Time does not inflict damage unless it's combined with 
Matter (to age objects) or Life (to age living things). 
In such cases, it inflicts damage through enhanced 
decrepitude. 


Chapter Ten: The Book of Magick 543 


. 


IA 7 


A^ 


P 
J 


/ f 

r a 
à ho 

"- 7 nm 
k 


Sphere-Specitic Effects 


Certain Spheres have specialized elements and results. Those results apply whenever these Spheres get used in an Effect. 
A witch skilled in Correspondence and Time, for instance, can use the Correspondence Ranges chart to look at a 
faraway place and the Time Sphere Timelines chart to look back at that area's past. 


If you're not using those Spheres, then just stick to the usual rules. 
Correspondence Ranges 


Correspondence Effects, as noted in the text, reach beyond usual spatial boundaries. Like Damage and Duration, 
that Range depends upon the number of successes you roll. To find out just how far such Effects can reach, check the 
Correspondence Ranges chart. 


Ifthe caster has a certain connection to the subject of his spell or has been using an object, place, or person that's related 
to the subject, it's easier to use Correspondence magick as a bridge between the caster and the subject. The closer your 
connection, the fewer successes you need in order to reach out and affect your target: 


As noted on the Correspondence Sphere entry, an Effect that combines Correspondence with another Sphere is 
limited to the dots you have in the Correspondence Sphere. You cannot, for example, use Forces 5/ Correspondence 
2/ Prime 2 to blow up the moon; in order to attack such a remote target with such a potent assault, you would need 
Correspondence 5 and a lot of successes. (Just for the record, that’s a seriously vulgar Effect, too.) 


Spirit Magick and the Gauntlet 


Because Spirit-based Effects often have to cross the Gauntlet, the difficulty for such Effects depends upon what you're 
trying to do: 


Spirit Effects cast against someone on the same side of the Gauntlet have a difficulty based on the highest Sphere + 
the usual coincidental, vulgar, or vulgar with witnesses modifiers. 


To cast Spirit Effects across the Gauntlet, check the Gauntlet Ratings chart to find the difficulty of your spell. 


If the Avatar Storm is still raging, then a mage reaching across the Gauntlet with anything more than his perceptions 
or an astral form might wind up taking damage. See the Otherworlds:section-of Chapter Nine for details. 


Time Sphere Reach 


With the Time Sphere, a mage can reach across spani of time. In this case, use the Time Sphere Timelines chart. As 
f 


usual, the number of successes determines how effective the spell will be. 


Important note: That chart shows the span of time your mage can look into the future or past, NOT the length of time 
that a Time-based spell endures. Despite common misconception, a spell's Duration — even the Duration of a Time-based 
Effect - is based upon the Damage and Duration rules, not upon the Time Sphere Timelines chart. 


Certain vulgar Time Effects can also speed or slow the passage of time, even possibly rewind events or age targets out 
of existence. For such situations, use the Feats of Time Magick chart, right below the Time Sphere Timelines one. 


* If several different Spheres have been combined into an 
Effect, then the damage is based on the most destructive Sphere 
involved. A Life/ Time Effect, for example, would deal out 
aggravated damage. You cannot stack damage by combining 
Spheres - only the most devastating Sphere counts. 


Dodging and Resistance 


Generally, a successful Arete roll equals a successful attack. 
Immediate effect, however, isn't always the case: 


Dodging a Physical Attack 

Any physical attack (fireball, mystic blade, plasma bolt, 
etc.) directed at an essentially solid target (car, person, spirit, 
etc.) can be dodged if that target is capable of dodging the 
attack in question. 


As detailed under Chapter Nine's Combat section, a 
Dexterity * Athletics (or Acrobatics) roll, difficulty 6, subtracts 
successes from an incoming attack. If the attacker still has more 


544 Mage: The Ascension 20^ Anniversary Edition 


successes than the target, remaining successes determine how 
much damage is done... and if the attacker winds up with only 
one success left over, then there's no damage at all. 


Really obvious attacks - lightning bolts, clouds of deadly 
gas, and so forth - are easy to see coming. Invisible ones - 
flesh-eating spirits, silent curses, Entropic ripples that collapse 
a bridge, that sort of thing - may be detected with a successful 
Perception * Awareness roll, difficulty 8. 


Resisting Psychic Assaults 

Mind-control spells, mental commands, Social 
Conditioning, and so forth can be resisted by an unwilling 
target if she’s aware that she’s under attack. In such cases, a 
Willpower roll, difficulty 6, acts as the dodge for that assault, 
subtracting successes from the aggressor’s roll. If the character 
isn’t aware of that attack, however, she suffers the full Effect... 
which is the primary reason that Mind-savvy mages prefer to 
be subtle (“You have beautiful eyes...") rather than overt (“You 
are in my power...”). 


Soaking Damage from Magickal Attacks 

Magickal attacks that unleash physical force - blades, 
bolts, storms, etc. - can be soaked like any other physical 
damage. The usual rules, presented in Chapter Nine, apply 
when soaking damage. 


AlLout Reality-fucking, however, is hard to endure. Vulgar 
attacks of pure reality-alteration power (curses, transmutations, 
possession, etc.) cannot be soaked unless the target has 
countermagick or some other specific protection against the 
Effect in question. 


Mental attacks can be resisted, as shown above, but they 
cannot be soaked except by Willpower. And so, a Mind-based 
blast of psychic trauma hurts... a LOT. 


Countermagick 


Magick-using characters can deploy countermagick to 
resist reality-warping effects. Essentially, the target dodges the 
Effect with her Awakened reflexes and her understanding of 
the Spheres. Countermagick counts as a full action; you can 
abort a previously planned action to employ countermagick, 
but you cannot use it if you’ve already acted within the turn. 
As with a dodge, each success scored on a countermagick roll 
removes one success from an assailant’s casting roll. 


True countermagick allows for several different optional 
rules variations, as shown below. To employ such advanced 
countermagick, a character has to be an Awakened mage. 
However, other characters - Night-Folk, hedge magicians and 
people with the True Faith Merit - can employ a sort of basic 
countermagick that's based on their innate capabilities. (See 
thesidebar nearby.) Either way, countermagick reduces a mage's 
ability to harm her target. The story-based techniques differ 
from character to character, but the rules remain the same. 


Basic Countermagick 


* Sphere Knowledge: To oppose another character's 
Effect, you need to have at least one dot in at least one 
of the Spheres that are being used to attack you. You 
can't resist a Forces-based assault, for example, if you 
don't understand Forces. 


* The Roll: Assuming you have the essential Sphere(s), 
make an Arete roll. In Mage 2^5, the difficulty for that roll 
is 7. (Under the Reckoning metaplot in Mage Revised, 
it's 8.) We suggest leaving the difficulty at 7. 


* Successes: Each success rolled deducts one success from the 
attacker’s successes. Ifthe incoming Effect’s results were based 
upon the Magickal Feats chart, then the incoming spellis less 
effective than itwould have been otherwise - see the Degrees 
of Success chart instead. If that attack depended upon a 
certain number of successes, the assault fizzles completely. 


Innate Countermagick 

Certain characters or materials possess innate 
countermagick. The Technocratic material Primium, for 
example, automatically provides a countermagick roll. 


Characters or machines with innate countermagick don’t 
have to use an action to deploy the protection - it's just an 
intrinsic part of who or what they are. 


Protective or Offensive Countermagick 
(Optional) 


Although countermagick usually deals only with attacks 
upon the mage in question, a skillful mage can try to interceptan 
attack that's aimed atsomeone else. Such protective or offensive 
countermagick still requires at least one dot in a Sphere from 
the attacking Effect, and demands a full action to cast. This 
type of countermagick, however, also requires at least one dot 
in the Prime Sphere, too, plus one point of Quintessence. That 
mystic energy fuels the protective spell. 


At *1 to the basic countermagick difficulty (see above), 
the protective mage can try to dispel the assailant's Effect. At 
*2 difficulty, he can try to reflect that assault back upon the 
caster. As usual, each success cancels out one of the attacker's 
successes. If the protector tries to reflect the attack and send it 
back where it came from, each success scored over the caster's 
original roll works as a level of success upon the caster. (Four 
successes scored against a two-success attack, for example, 
would inflict two successes’ worth of damage or effect of the 
spell upon the attacker.) 


Anti-Magick (Optional 

A common tactic among Technocrats, the anti-magick 
technique uses Prime Sphere principles (or Primal Utility) in 
order to harden Reality against an offending Deviant's magick. 
Mystic mages use this approach as well, but not with quite the 
same enthusiasm as their technomancer peers. 


Rules-wise, this counts as a full-turn action. The player rolls 
her Prime Rank as a dice pool; Prime 3, for example, would give 
you three dice to roll. The difficulty is 8 for that roll, and each 
success adds +1 to the difficulty of a mage who’s trying to cast an 
Effect. Every success costs one point of Quintessence from the 
Quintessence Trait of the mage deploying anti-magick. Essentially, 
she’s using her own Prime energies to counter another mage’s Arts. 


Onweaving (Optional 

By using the most sophisticated form of countermagick, 
a mage can unweave another mage’s existing Effects. Curses, 
gateways, wards, trigger-spells, transformations, and so on can 
be untangled by a sufficiently successful unweaving endeavor. 


Story-wise, the unweaver draws upon his understanding of 
the Spheres, Prime energy, and the methods of enchantment, 
then begins a ritual that unravels the original caster’s work. 
Game-wise, the character needs at least one dot in Prime, plus 
at least one dot in each of the Spheres used in the original spell. 
Rolling at +1 to the basic countermagick difficulty (again, see 
above), the player tries to overcome each of the original caster’s 
successes. 


How Many Successes Does It Take? 


If the Effect has been in place for a while - like for a ward, 
a gateway, a curse-in-progress, ora living construct that has been 


Chapter Ten: The Book of Magick — 545 


NAL 


Night-Folk Counterspelling 


Vampires, werewolves, faerie beings, and other paranormal entities have a chance to resist a mage’s Arts... and the 
mages can often resist Night-Folks’ abilities too. Although such monsters don’t use countermagick in the way that mages 
do, their innate abilities give them a certain degree of protection. 


Dice Pools 


Night-Folk can use the equivalent of basic countermagick. Instead of Arete, such entities use their Wits + Occult as adice 
pool. However, that dice pool cannot exceed the Gnosis or Rage (whichever is higher, for werecreatures), Willpower 
(vampires, spirits, wraiths, demons, hunters, and hedge wizards), Glamour (changelings and other fae), Mystic Shield 
(Bygones), or True Faith (faithful humans) Trait of the Night-Folk character. Essentially, those Traits reflectthe metaphysical 
capacity of the target character. If a werewolf, for instance, has a Wits + Occult dice pool of six but a Gnosis of 4 and 
a Rage of 3, then she cannot use more than four dice as countermagick. 


If the targeted creature does not have a Wits + Occult dice pool, then the Storyteller, may rule that the character cannot 
resist True Magick - see Optional Limits, below. That said, a mage needs certain Spheres in order to harm a member 
of the Night-Folk. As shown on the Common Magickal Effects chart (p. 508), Life Sphere magick alone cannot 
affect vampires, werebeasts, ghosts, spirits, or the fae. 


Difficulties and Limits 


Whatever dice pool you employ, the difficulty for such rolls is either 7 or the mage’s Arete, whichever is higher. This way, 
a powerful werewolf or vampire can shrug off the Arts of an amateur mage, but a powerful wizard or Technocrat can 
wipe the floor with supernatural foes. 


On a related note, the Night-Folk cannot counter immediate-damage attacks like plasma bolts or Enlightened martial 
arts, nor can they oppose indirect assaults like weakened floors, fire, typhoons, and so forth. The only way to counter 
a mage's attack is to recognize it as a mystic assault. Thaumaturgical counterspells won't prevent a Virtual Adept from 
using Enlightened hypertech to hack the vampire prince’s bank account. 


Mages Countering the Night-Folk 


When countering the effects of some paranormal critters’ Disciplines, Gifts, Glamour, and so forth, a mage uses her 
Arete as the dice pool. The Storyteller may rule that the mage needs certain Spheres in order to counter certain abilities 
- Mind, perhaps, to counter vampiric Dominate; Spirit to counter werewolf Gifts; Entropy and Spirit to counter a wraith's 
Arcanoi; Mind and Prime to counter the dreamlike powers of the fae, and so on. After all, it’s not as though mages corner 
the market on supernatural abilities... and although they certainly appear to be the masters of paranormal arts, mages 
have a hard time seeing beyond their own perspectives on reality. 


Optional Limits 


Asan optional rule, the Storyteller may decide that a Night-Folk or mortal character cannot use countermagick at all unless he's 
got some sort of magical knowledge. A vampire, for instance, may need the Thaumaturgy Discipline (or some other discipline 
that reflects mystic study and understanding) in order to resist a mage’s Arts. A hedge sorcerer could counter spells by dealt 
but most other humans could not. Werecreatures, spirits, Bygones, and the fae are magic(k)al by their essential nature, but they 
might still need at least one dot in Occult or Rituals in order to understand the mage’s spells enough to counter them. 


Given the vulnerability that fae creatures have to the banality of Technocratic accomplishments, it's fair to rule that 
changelings cannot counterspell technomagick at all... or, if they can, to raise the difficulty of doing so to 9 or even 10. 


For more details aboutthe Night-Folk, see the section of that name inseethe Mage 20 sourcebook Gods, Monsters, 
and Familiar Strangers. 


put together through magick - unweaving demands at least 10 
successes, possibly 20 or more in the case of major creations or 
Great Works. Certain Effects - Gilgul, instant damage, sensory 
magicks, and the titanic magicks used to craft Horizon Realms 
- cannot be unwoven. Others might have precautions woven 
into them, like the Primium armor used in many Technocratic 
cyborgs and bio-constructs. In this case, the protection acts as 
countermagick to the unweaving, subtracting successes from 
the mage who's trying to unweave the original creation. The 
moral: it's damn near impossible to unweave a HIT Mark. Still, 
a gateway can be closed, a summoning circle destroyed, or an 
enchantment broken by successful unweaving. 


546 . Mage: The Ascension 20^ Anniversary Edition 


Quintessence Cost 

For many Effects, unweaving doesn't require Quintessence, 
although you can spend a few points to lower the difficulty of 
such efforts. If the caster employed Quintessence in the original 
Effect, however, then the unweaver must spend at least an equal 
number of Quintessence points to undo that Effect... an important 
consideration when eitherwrecking Wonders orremovingthe special 
properties of Prime-reinforced weapons, armor, and other creations. 


Failure 


A failed roll - that is, one that scores fewer successes than 
it needed in order to activate the Effect - fizzles or fades away. 


If you're using the Degrees of Success chart, the spell might 
wind up having a diminished result; in most cases, though, the 
magick just won't manifest. 


Botching, Magick, and Paradox 

The terror of every mage (and Mage player), a botched 
roll invokes the forces of Paradox. If you roll 1s on your dice 
without scoring any successes on that roll, then you botch. (See 
Botching and The Rule of One in Chapter Eight, p. 393.) 
Story-wise, this represents a disastrous error: fumbled words, 
a dropped instrument, dancing widdershins when you meant 
to dance deosil, and so forth. Game-wise, a botch turns magick 
into a clusterfuck. 


* Ifthe Effect was coincidental, your mage gets one Paradox 
point for every dot in the highest Sphere involved with 
that Effect. A Correspondence 4/ Life 3 spell, for 
example, would score four Paradox points. 


* Ifthe Effect was vulgar without Sleeper witnesses, the mage gets 
one point of Paradox, plus one point for each dot in the 
highest Sphere. Thatspell now garners five points of Paradox. 


Part IV: The Paradox Effect 


Magick, it’s been said, is a double-bladed 
instrument. That fine metaphysical scalpel 
reshapes Reality to a mage’s desires, but it cuts 
the hand that wields it, too. Paradox is the cost 
of doing business with Reality - the scourge 
of Awakened vanity that reminds each mage 
of his true place in Creation. 


Poetry aside, Paradox limits a mage’s ability 
to work her Will without consequences. Story- 
wise, it smacks a proud magus off her throne 
in various unpleasant ways: burns, prisons, 
manifestations, entities, and worse. Game-wise, Paradox forces 
each player to be subtle and imaginative. Vulgar magick is a 
sure road to the Paradox Effect, and although coincidence can 
earna backlash too, your mage is better off playing things safe... 
or as safe as things can get in this World of Darkness, anyway. 


Chapter Two presents the metaphysical explanations for 
Paradox (see pp. 56-57), and Chapter Six lays out the game- 
system effects that Paradox has on your character (see pp. 
331-333). In this section, we'll look at what happens when 
"Jiminy Cricket with a chainsaw" pops up to take a swipe at 
you, and the various rules that kick in when he does. 


Sources of Paradox 


Clearly, Paradox is bad juju. In the course of the game, 
however, it's also inevitable. The question isn't really WILL I 
get Paradox? but HOW will I get Paradox, and how MUCH Paradox 
will I get when I do? 


Essentially, a character acquires Paradox points in one of 
three ways: 


* [fthe Effect was vulgar with Sleeper witnesses, then your 
mage gets two points of Paradox, plus two more per dot 
in the highest Sphere. That unfortunate mage racks up 
10 Paradox points and may be in for a visit from the 
Paradox Faerie. 


* [fthe mage gains five points of Paradox or more within 
a single event, the Storyteller may decide to roll for a | 
backlash - see the Paradox Effect section below for A | 
details. 


As mentioned earlier under the section Coincidental vs. 
Vulgar Magick, a Sleeper witness must be physically present. 
Cameras do notcountas witnesses in the current reality climate. 
Mages are notSleeper witnesses, nor are the Night-Folk or their 
various servitors. For more details, see the entry Witnesses in 
Part III, Step Two. 


For obvious reasons, the free botch option mentioned 
in Chapter Eight does not apply to casting rolls. Given the 
world-shaking powers that True Magick invokes, the edge of 
danger remains an essential part of Mage - the final element 
in the trinity of Pride, Power, and Paradox. F 


PW 


Botching Rolls 


As we've seen several times throughout this chapter, a 
mage acquires Paradox when her player botches an Arete roll: 


e [f that magickal Effect was coincidental, the Paradox is 
minimal: one point for each dot in the highest Sphere 
used in the Effect. 


* If the Effect was vulgar without witnesses, the amount of 
Paradox goes up: one point, plus one more point per 
dot in the highest Sphere. 


* [fthe Effect was vulgar with witnesses, the Paradox can 
be catastrophic: two points, plus two more points for 
each dot in the highest Sphere. 


Vulgar Magick 
Beyond that, though, vulgar magick ALWAYS accumulates 
Paradox, even when the roll succeeds: 


e Coincidental magick does not acquire Paradox unless 
you botch a roll. 


* Successful vulgar magick earns one point of Paradox. 
(See the sidebar for rules about post-Revised-edition 
Paradox, p. 550.) 


Permanent Paradox 

Certain magickal or hypertech adjustments to a living 
Pattern bestow permanent Paradox points on the character in 
question. In this case, note each point of permanent Paradox 
onthe character sheet; unlike normal Paradox, however, it never 


Chapter Ten: The Book of Magick 547 


EEE | 


548 


Mage: The Ascension 20^ Anniversary Edition 


comes off. A Paradox backlash takes those points into account 
but does not dispel them. Each time a character with permanent 
Paradox endures a backlash, those points count again toward the 
dice pool involved. 


Permanent Paradox generally comes through the Enhancement 
Background Trait, described in Chapter Six. Severe backlashes 
bestow such points as well, and certain alterations to a creature's 
Pattern may do so too. Bygones and constructs often suffer from 
permanent Paradox points - a flaw that keeps certain Technocracy 
operatives or Nephandi confined to the Otherworlds. (See the HIT 
Marks in Appendix I and the Gilledians described in Chapter 
Five.) Essentially, a being with permanent Paradox is a walking 
reality crime - a violation of Earthly metaphysics whose own body 
is hazardous to her health. 


In all three cases, Paradox constitutes a threat to the character 
involved, and a large Paradox pool reflects the potential for a 
serious backlash. 


The Paradox Backlash 


Generated by acts of magick, Paradox energies build up 
inside a mage's Pattern. Eventually, those energies bleed off 
naturally, manifest in strange Paradox Flaws, or else explode with 
devastating results. 


Essentially, Paradox becomes a metaphysical game of Jenga. 
Each incidentthatgenerates Paradox adds points to the character's 
Quintessence/ Paradox wheel. (See Chapter Six, p. 331.) Those 
points add up until the Storyteller decides to check for a Paradox 
backlash: a sudden release of Paradox energies. At that point, those 
energies break out and the character's life becomes hell. 


Rolling for Backlash 


At dramatically inconvenient moments - generally at times 
when a player has earned five points of Paradox or more ina single 
stroke - the Storyteller can say "Let's roll for a backlash.” Generally, 
this comes about when your mage has done something stupid, 
glorious, or gloriously stupid. The Storyteller picks up one die for 
every point on the Paradox side of your Quintessence/ Paradox 
wheel and rolls them against difficulty 6. Each success means that 
one point of Paradox gets discharged. 


On the positive side, this discharge dispels those points 
of Paradox, assuming that they aren’t permanent. (See above.) 
Paradox points that are not discharged remain on the wheel, to 
be discharged at some later time. 


On the negative side, a backlash hurts. 


Effects of Backlash 


How badly does it hurt? That depends upon the size of the 
backlash, the sadistic wit of the Storyteller, the things your mage 
did to acquire those points of Paradox, and the circumstances 
your mage happens to be in at the time. 


As mentioned above, each success discharges one point of 
Paradox; for other effects, see the Paradox Backlash Roll chart, 
presented both here and among the Magickal Reference Charts 
near the front of this chapter. 


Paradox Backlash Roll 


Successes Effects of Discharge 

Botch All Paradox points discharge harmlessly. 

No successes No effects, but no Paradox points discharge. 

1-5 One point of Paradox discharged per success. Mage also suffers one die’s worth of bashing damage per 
success and acquires a trivial Paradox Flaw. 

6-10 One point of Paradox discharged per success. Mage also suffers a Burn of one die of bashing damage per 
success or acquires a minor Paradox Flaw. 

11-15 Usual Paradox point-discharge, as well as a Burn of lethal damage or one of the following effects: a 
significant Paradox Flaw, a Paradox Spirit visitation, or a mild Quiet. 

16-20 Usual Paradox point-discharge, as well as a Burn of lethal damage and one point of permanent 
Paradox or two of the following effects: a severe Paradox Flaw, a Paradox Spirit visitation, a moderate 
Quiet, or banishment to a Paradox Realm. 

21+ 


Usual Paradox discharge plus a Burn of aggravated damage and one of the following effects: two points of 


permanent Paradox, one drastic Paradox Flaw, a Paradox Spirit visitation, a severe Quiet, or banishment to 


a Paradox Realm. 


Storyteller rolls one die for each point of Paradox in character’s current Paradox pool, against difficulty 6. 


Staving Off Disaster 


Generally, a mage can feel a Paradox backlash coming. 
The built-up energies within her frame tingle beneath her skin, 
vibrate in her bones, or beat inside her head like an impending 
migraine headache. When a backlash threatens to cut loose (in 
game terms, when the Storyteller rolls the dice), that character 
can "will it not to happen... YET." The player spends a point of 
Willpower, the Effect automatically fails, and the backlash 
hovers until the end of that scene. 


From that point onward, the mage is on borrowed time. Every 
additional point of Paradox she gathers adds one die to the coming 
backlash. The Storyteller could invent some especially poetic horror 
for the coming punishment, but the mage has an opportunity to put 
her affairs in order (possibly forever...) as the cataclysmic energies 
continue to build... and build... and BUILD inside her... 


A player who decides to put off the backlash will discharge 
all of her Paradox points, except permanent ones, at the end of 
that scene. (The permanent ones still count, however, toward 
the backlash dice pool.) The eventual results of willing the 
Paradox not to happen might be messy, but that scene - while 
it lasts - can certainly be dramatic. 


Nullifying Paradox 

A rare but precious ability available only to Masters of Prime 
allows a mage to wipe out Paradox with the energies of Creation. 
Story-wise, the magus invests some personal Quintessence (pos- 
sibly adding a bit more energy from external sources too) into a 
symbol or Periapt keyed to a magickal working or consecrated to 
his body and personal Resonance. (See the Prime Sphere entry 
for details about consecration.) When Paradox energies gather 
around him, he releases that stored up Quintessence, and the 
Prime Force cancels out the Paradox Energies. 


Game-wise, the player pools his Quintessence, then uses 
a Prime 5 Effect to channel that Quintessence and nullify the 
Paradox on a one-point-foreach-point basis. Any remaining 


Paradox energies have their usual effector remain on the mage's 
Paradox Wheel until some later event. If the Quintessence 
dispels all the Paradox, then that Paradox is gone until the 
mage gains some more... as we all know he will. 


Shedding Paradox 


Under normal circumstances, mages tend to generate small 
amounts of Paradox and then bleed them off simply as a matter 
of course. If a character manages to keep her Paradox pool 
below five points at a given time, then those energies simply 
fade back into the world at large at a rate of one point per week. 
Assuming that she doesn’t do anything overtly magickal during 
that time (she might, for instance, activate Rank 1 perceptions 
but never act on her surroundings in a magickal way), such 
minor amounts of Paradox cause no difficulties. 


If your mage wants to “pull a Willow” and go cold turkey 
on the magick thing, she can withdraw from reality-altering 
practices entirely. In this case, the Storyteller might — just 
MIGHT - allow her to shed a Paradox pool of up to 10 points 
at a rate of one Paradox point per month for the first five 
points, then one point per week after that. This optional rule 
runs outside the official systems for Mage Revised, but it can 
offer a lifeline to a character walking on the edge. 


After she hits a Paradox pool of 10 or more, however, all 
bets are off. One way or another, a backlash is inevitable... 


Backlash Forms 


When Paradox energies discharge, many strange things can 
happen. Oddly enough, several of these Paradox manifestations 
violate the very same Reality Consensus they supposedly protect. 
After all, when a person suddenly grows horns, explodes, or 
vanishes into a hole in reality - possibly in the hands of some 
demonic spirit-creature - those effects seem anything but real 
to a scientific mindset. 


So what’s up with that, anyway? 


Chapter Ten: The Book of Magick — 549 


| 
l 
d 


N 


"rtr. 


Optional Rule: Paradox in Mage Revised 


If you're playing by the Reckoning metaplot rules of the Mage Revised line, Paradox gets even nastier: 


* A successful vulgar without witnesses Effect acquires one point of Paradox for each dot in the highest Sphere in that 
effect. A Time 4 Effect — even performed successfully while alone — would gather four points of Paradox. 


* A successful vulgar with witnesses Effect generates one point of Paradox per dot in the highest Sphere, plus one 
additional point. 


For obvious reasons, vulgar magick is significantly more dangerous in the Revised setting than it had been before that. 
As an optional rule, however, the Storyteller may decide to use this approach to Paradox instead of the one given in 
the main text. 


Constant Bleeding 


Under the Revised rules, Paradox does not accumulate inside a mage and then bleed off with time unless there are 
fewer than five points in a mage's Paradox pool. Instead, all Paradox accumulations of five points or more discharge 
themselves immediately "unless the Storyteller feels really mean." (Mage Revised, p. 194). Rather than letting Paradox 
build up in a mage's Pattern, this system has the Storyteller rolling for backlashes whenever a mage uses vulgar magick 
and/ or botches an Effect. 


In practice, this rule turns most mages into reality-warping 'Dox machines, constantly manifesting weird Flaws and perilous 
injuries. Although this idea reinforces the tone of desperation within the Reckoning metaplot, it also keeps the average 


mage in a perpetual state of misery. 


For the effects of backlashes under either set of rules, see the Paradox Backlash Roll chart. 


The Paradox of Paradox? 


The nature of Paradox itself often seems like a paradox: to 
enforce Reality, unreal things occur. For that reason, a Storyteller 
may decide to limit the effects of a Paradox backlash to realistic 
things like terrible luck or physical backlash. ("Happens all the 
time. People just explode.") 


Other interpretations of Paradox claim that the 
manifestations of a backlash reflect the fears or personality 
of the mage on the receiving end of the backlash or represent 
some terribly ironic parody of the things that mage did to earn 
the backlash. Under this idea, a backlash becomes a karmic 
sledgehammer, crossing the eye for an eye of Old Testament 
justice with the self-inflicted element of Threefold Return. 
(“That which you do, for good or ill, returns to you threefold.”) 


The repercussions of Paradox seem even more uncanny 
when you take into accountthe Scourge of Mage: The Sorcerers 
Crusade: an apparently divine affliction that could either 
help or harm a mage through a capricious sense of justice. 
If the Paradox Effect began this way, a person could argue, 
then doesn't that mean that it is, by default, coming through 
some sort of conscious, godlike agency? The truth, ultimately, 
should remain the Storyteller's secret. The more mysterious 
and enigmatic such forces seem to be, the more ominous and 
terrible Paradox becomes in your chronicle. 


The more notorious effects of a Paradox backlash can be 
found below. 


An Onset of Quiet 


At times, a ‘Dox-ridden mage can slip into the fearsome 
form of metaphysical delusion known as Quiet, described in the 
section of that name, below. Instead of rolling for immediate 
punishment, the Storyteller just starts slipping notes to the 


550 Mage: The Ascension 20^ Anniversary Edition 


player like, "You overhear such-and-such...” or otherwise narrating 
events that only the afflicted character can perceive. This way, 
the Quiet slides into the story in a subtle fashion, without the 
pyrotechnics of other forms of backlash. That subtle drift into 
insanity suits the name given to such delusions. 


An onset of Quiet generally strikes mages who've 
accumulated 10 points of Paradox or more. Again, for details, 
see the section on Quiet, below. 


Paradox Flaws 

Manifestations of the "you are what you do" principle, 
Paradox Flaws twist reality around a reality-twisting mage. In 
game terms, a Paradox Flaw makes your mage’s life more difficult. 


Trivial or minor Flaws create small disturbances, whereas 
the higher degrees of Flaw spawn absurd distortions of reality. 


Strange as they might be, Paradox Flaws echo the effects of 
the magick that spawned them: a swaggering fire-wizard finds 
himself leaving sooty footprints or scorching everything he 
touches; a time-skewing trickster makes clocks run backwards, 
scrambles the temporal perceptions of her companions, and 
could even age in reverse; the mind-shattering Agentof Authority 
could make people tremble with his mere presence - a useful 
but ultimately alienating Flaw; and the witch who curses or 
heals too freely might impose the opposite effect - blessing her 
enemies and injuring her friends - despite her best intentions. 
Paradox displays a fine sense of irony of the non-Morissette 
variety, and we encourage the Storyteller to hone a sense of 
delicious irony as well. 


Paradox Flaws increase in severity, from minor inconveniences 
to gross distortions of body and surroundings. At the higher levels, 
amagecannotappear among the Masses without being recognized 
as some sort of aberration. If the Avatar Storm has faded in your 


chronicle (or if it never happened at all), people with such Paradox 
Flaws probably retreat beyond the Gauntlet for their own safety. 
If such passage remains barred, then badly ‘Doxed mages remain 
in nearsolitude, their lives warped by the energies within them. 


Most Paradox Flaws fade in time. Even the supposedly 
permanent ones easewith the passing of months or years... assuming 
that the mage does not, in the meantime, acquire more Paradox. 
Onceagiven Flaw has latched itself onto a mage's Pattern, however, 
it tends to become the focus of her Paradox. Subsequent Paradox 
energies gravitate toward that Flaw and, rather than spawning new 
ones, enhance the present Flaw. Horns become larger and more 
prominent; warm or cold skin becomes too hot or cold to touch; 
fluctuations of time or space distort the localized reality so badly 
that the mage travels within a personal vortex of oddity. Gamewise, 
the initial Flaw would move further up the severity scale, keeping 
its initial form but becoming even more impairing or grotesque. 


This severity scale runs as follows: 


¢ Trivial Flaws (1-5 point backlashes): Shortlived distortions 
of body or circumstance haunt the mage fora short time. 
Hair changes color; skin chills or grows uncomfortably 
warm; breezes blow or air stills; odd smells - ranging 
from the pleasant to the nauseating - waft from the 
mage’s general direction. He might hear or speak words 
in reverse, like an odd metaphysical dyslexia, or witness 
minor hallucinations among his various senses. (Some 
Ecstatic mages speculate that psychoactive delusions might 
be minor Paradox Flaws in action.) Dull or stabbing pains 
afflict his joints, or sudden surges of weariness or manic 
energy take hold. Whatever the Flaw might be, its effects 
last between several minutes to several hours before fading 
away... unless, of course, the mage continues to garner 
Paradox, at which point the Flaw may last longer and 
become more intense. 


e Minor Flaws (6-10 point backlashes): Although the 
effects at this level become more noticeable, the Flaw 
still presents a minor inconvenience - an uncontrollable 
sneezing fit, perhaps, or an attack of Tourette Syndrome 
(which is actually an onslaught of sudden fits and sounds, 
not the stereotypical avalanche of profanity), maybe a 
blurring of vision or a dampening of sound for an hour 
orso. Material things around the mage might be affected 
too: his clothes mightwrinkle, change color, or fall apart; 
his digital technology might all malfunction at once; 
or his footprints could smoke or leave scorch marks 
on a carpet. Lower-level Paradox Flaws could become 
more acute and last longer if the mage has continued to 
gather Paradox energies. These Flaws might add +1 to 
the difficulties of certain of his rolls for a scene or two, 
and they might even become sources of embarrassment. 


* Significant Flaws (11-15 point backlashes): Now the mage 
becomes a walking billboard for reality flux: horns sprout 
from her head, useless wings jut from her shoulders, 
or her hands curl into claws or gnarled appendages. 
She might radiate intense cold or heat, or maybe suffer 


AENA 


excruciating migraines or incapacitating nausea. The 
mage could vomit flies, speak gibberish, or float several 
inches off the ground. Lower-level Flaws last longer and 
have more debilitating effects. Certain challenges could 
raise difficulties for certain types of rolls (social, physical, 
mental) or penalize the mage’s dice pools by a die or two. 
Significant Flaws tend to last a while, too - several days, 
perhaps even a week or more. 


* Severe Flaws (16-20 point backlashes): Awful Paradox 
energies now warp the mage's body and circumstances. 
His facial features might turn into a smooth, shapeless 
mass; his arms might transform into tentacles or boneless 
flaps of skin. He could burn everything he touches or 
transmute it into some precious or worthless material. 
(That Midas touch, of course, is rarely as helpful as it 
mightsound...) Perhaps his skin grows stony warts or other 
projections, or he turns into a shadow or wisp of smoke. 
Lower-level Flaws intensify, lasting longer and hurting 
more. By this point, the mage probably suffers reduced 
dice pools, increased difficulties, or both, and he cannot 
show himself among the Masses without tragic results. 


¢ Drastic Flaws (21+ point backlashes): By this level, the 
Paradox energies have distorted a mage’s Pattern so badly 
that she may never recover her old, normal self. She 
might turn into a treedike wooden horror or melt into a 
protoplasmic mass. Lovecraft would need to invent new 
adjectives for the impression she presents. Flaws from the 
lower ranks can reach inhuman levels and last for months 
oreven years. Plagued by chronic pain, unusable physique, 
or both, the mage loses dice from various pools and adds 
*2 or more to many difficulties. Such Otherworldly 
abominations exist either beyond the Gauntlet or in the 
most remote corners of Earth they can find. 


Physical Backlash, a.k.a. the Burn 


A simple yet terrible consequence of Paradox energies, 
the Burn manifests as intense pain at the lower levels, rising 
to literally explosive levels at the high end of the spectrum. 
Essentially a searing physical backlash, the Burn manifests as 
(re)opened wounds, dizzying pains, sudden headaches, brands 
across the mage’s skin (often in cryptic symbols or glyphs), 
rashes, scabs, welts, and other agonizing and often debilitating 
afflictions. At the highest end of the backlash scale, the Burn 
literally incinerates a mage from the inside out or else detonates 
him in a screaming flash of discharged Paradox. 


As shown on the Paradox Backlash Roll chart, the Burn 
begins as bashing damage at the lower levels, then rises to lethal 
and finally aggravated damage. A mage can try to soak the bashing 
damage normally; armor will not help her soak the lethal or 
aggravated damage, because it comes from inside, not outside, 
that mage's Pattern. Other methods, however, could help in 
that regard - cybernetics, Life Sphere magick, the Cinematic 
Damage option, and so forth. So long as the protection is a 
part of the mage's actual body, not something that can be put 
on or taken off, it might help her deal with the Burn. 


Chapter Ten: The Book of Magick 


55] 


Why Paradox? 


It’s a common question: Why do we need Paradox? Why can't my mage just sling fireballs down Main Street, like in D 
Actually, your character can sling fireballs down Main Street. It's just gonna cost him dearly. 


Seriously, though, it’s because Mage isn't D&D. If mages could just fling fireballs down the street without consequences, 
then Mage's setting would look nothing like our world. 


For all of its obvious exaggerations and fantasy elements, Mage is set in a satirical version of the world we know. And a 
world where people throw fire from their fingertips on a whim would have developed in radically different ways than our 
worldihas. Sure, if your Storyteller wants to run Mage in a high-fantasy style, she can disregard Paradox and let mages 
do whatever they want. Thing is, that'world is going to change in some serious ways if things like that start happening... 
and if they've happened like that all along, the world of Mage wouldn't be anything that seems familiar to us. (Although 
it might look a lot like Mage: The Sorcerers Crusade...) 


On a more serious level, magic(k), as itis understood in the real world, outside the realm of high-fantasy media, does not 
operate without consequences. D&D is a war game wrapped up in Tolkien drag. It's fun, but it's nothing like real magic 
at all. If you look at real-life metaphysical practices, however, you'll see that all of them place major limitations on the 
things magic can accomplish... and that all of them have consequences for using it. Discarding that element would also 
involve discarding an essential element of authenticity. And although Mage is a game set in a fictional cosmos, we strive 
to keep the essence of its magic authentic, even though the practices and practitioners have been heovily fictionalized. 


Beyond all of those factors, you also have several core themes of Mage: courage, imagination, hope, struggle, sacrifice, 
progress, consequences, and interconnectedness. None of those themes would be supported — and most, if not all, of 
them would be undercut — if magick were a quick and easy thing that every hero could just DO. The theme of Paradox 


enhances the other elements of Mage. If that doesn’t work for you, then you're probably playing the wrong game. 


Thatsaid, the larger Burns radiate outward like explosions, 
inflicting damage upon the mage’s surroundings and 
companions. A physical backlash (of any type) that involves 10 
points of Paradox or more becomes an explosion, dealing out 
damage in a radius around the mage, as per the Explosionsrules 
in Chapter Nine. Such backlashes seem especially common 
amongtech-based mages, whose machines detonate with Paradox 
energies when things go poorly. 


Paradox Spirits 

As fearsome as the Burn can be, Paradox Spirits - a.k.a. Paradox 
Manifestationsor Entities- may bethe mosthorrific backlash effects. 
Ranging from near-mindless phenomena to legendary figures, these 
reality police become judges, juries, and occasional executioners for 
errant willworkers and their aberrant ways. 


These entities rarely manifest for minor violations of the 
Consensus. A backlash of over 10 points, however, might draw the 
attention of such a creature. The smaller ones seem to manifest 
and then disperse on a peroffense basis. Larger backlashes (over 
15 points) tend to summon more formidable spirits - selfwilled 
beings whose appearance and behavior have become infamous 
enough to echo through Awakened myths: Farandwee. Wrinkle. The 
Man. Known long ago as Scowrgelings, such entities are immune to 
Spirit Sphere magicks lower than Rank 5, unless those magicks 
inflict damage...and even then, the nastier Paradox Manifestations 
have an uncanny talent for shrugging off such attacks... 


Appendix I features several Paradox Spirits and offers 
inspiration for more original creations. Because such spirits 
are sometimes thought to manifest a mage's conscious or 
subconscious, an inventive Storyteller can create her own 
Paradox Spirits, based upon the characters in her game. 
Regardless of their origins, such entities tend to have individual 


552 Mage: The Ascension 20^ Anniversary Edition 


calling cards: certain types of magick that draw their attention, 
certain punishments they inflict, and certain behaviors they 
follow when they appear. Some dish out nasty, Flaw-like 
impediments, others attack the offending mage in combat, 
and many pull the offender into a Paradox Realm tailored to 
suit that Spirit's personality. In the old days (that is, in Mage: 
The Sorcerers Crusade), such beings were even known to aid 
a mage in need. The modern variety, however, seem as ruthless 
and unforgiving as the forces of nature that spawn them. 


Realms 

Like any other kind of tapestry, the Tapestry of Earthly 
Creation occasionally tears. When it does, those rips in Reality 
become Paradox Realms: pocket worlds where the normal laws 
of Earth and the Otherworlds no longer apply. 


According to some sources, such Realms occupy a parallel 
existence with Earth’s Penumbra, vibrating at a different 
metaphysical frequency. Other sources plant Paradox Realms 
far beyond the Horizon, floating like weird little soap bubbles 
through Etherspace. As with so many other manifestations of 
Paradox, a Storyteller should decide the truth for himself, then 
keep it secret from the players. In story terms, Paradox Realms 
present an eternal mystery that still intrudes with disturbing 
frequency into the adventures of a mage. 


Game-wise, a Paradox Realm could be a solitary hole in 
existence, a prison managed by a Paradox Spirit, or a Realm that’s 
expansive enough to accommodate dozens or even hundreds of 
characters. The shape and form of each given Realm are unique 
and often echo the principles of a particular Sphere. Even this 
tendency, though, is not a hard-and-fast rule. If you want to craft a 
Paradox Realm in which the mage meets, or becomes, every person 
she has ever harmed, then let that Realm become her prison. 


That said, each Realm should also have an escape; if one of 
your players, after all, gets his mage dropped into an inescapable 
Paradox Realm, that character would wind up scrapped unless 
youand the player wanted to stage an entire solo chronicle within 
the Realm. Escaping a Realm, then, should be possible, but not 
easy... and that escape should be measured not by mystic might 
but by solving problems without the use of magick. 


Reality Among the Realms 

A trip to a Paradox Realm can become an Otherworldly 
adventure in which the usual rules of reality become puzzles 
fit for a wizard or philosopher. Chapter Nine’s section about 
Magick in the Otherworlds contains suggestions for the odd, 
reality-warping effects a Paradox Realm might have on the 
usual rules. (See pp. 483-485.) As general guidelines, however, 
a Storyteller might decide to use the following tendencies for 
the set of reality within a particular type of Paradox Realm: 


* Correspondence-based Realms tend to skew perspective 
and distance. It's almost impossible to judge spatial 
relationships in such places; an object that seems far 
away might be close enough to stub your toe against, 
but a person who appears to be within reach actually 
stands a fair distance away. 


e Entropy Realms either accelerate decay to horrific 
extremes, or hold the pristine quality of CGI illusions. 
Folks tend to associate Entropy with death, but a Realm 
based on such principles might instead seem incredibly 
random or painfully predestined. 


*  ForcesRealmsthrowaround theelementalenergies associated 
with this Sphere. Storms abound; shadows and light move 
in capricious ways; Earthly physics run in reverse - water 
flows uphill or objects fall up unless otherwise restrained. 
Forces-based magick either causes great upheavals or has 
exactly the opposite of its intended effect. 


* Life-based Paradox Realms feature biological fluctuations 
or endless levels of mutation and genesis. Living things 
mightself-generate in midair, out of nothing, or dissolve 
into new and shocking forms. The mage himself could 
beturned into a chaotic biomass, growing limbs, shifting 
in size and shape, or otherwise being rendered helpless 
in the endless flow of life. 


* Matter Realms jumble the apparent solidity of material 
forms into endless fluctuations or unpredictable altered 
states. Solids become liquids; liquids condense into 
solids; both become vapors. Colors and mass become 
irrelevant or else attain such stability that no force 
imaginable can change them. 


e Mind Paradoxes trap a mage in her own mind, alone with 
her worst fears, memories, confusions, and neuroses. 
The Realm becomes a form of Seeking (as described 
in Chapter Seven, pp. 367-369), based not around the 
advance of magick but rather upon the avoidance of it. 


e Prime-based Paradox Realms pulse with the essence 
of pure, unfiltered energy. Ultimately indescribable 
in words, such regions become endurance tests of 
overwhelming sensations and vitality. 


e Spirit Realms are, essentially, miniscule Dream Realms 
into which the mage is cast and then sealed away. 


* Time Paradoxes confront the visitor with temporal 
loops, recursive events, dilated time flows, splitscreen 
realities, and Groundhog Day-type scenarios in which the 
mage must either reenact previous sins or deal with a 
timeline in which she never existed, amidst otherwise 
familiar locations and circumstances. 


In short, the Storyteller is encouraged to let her creativity 
off the chain when dealing with a Paradox Realm. That said, 
she's also advised to construct such Realms in advance, then 
drop them into a story at an appropriate time, rather than try 
to make them up off the top of her head. A Paradox Realm 
works best when it suits the overall flavor of the tale and the 
characters within it. 


Onbelief: The Shit Factor 


Perhaps the most devastating form of Paradox doesn't 
strike mages down at all. Instead, it degrades the things they 
hold sacred: the creations they shape with their Arts, the 
beasts that embody wonder, the magnificent technologies they 
strive so hard to perfect. Unbelief is the crushing weight of the 
Consensus, squeezing the life out of miracles and denying the 
products of a better world. 


Although mystic mages feel the effects of Unbelief most 
keenly, Technocrats suffer from those effects as well. It's 
Unbelief, after all, that causes bodies to reject cybernetics, 
restricts flight to the most awkward sorts of contraptions, 
and forbids the full enjoyment of economic ideals. Certain 
willworkers refer to Unbelief as "the Shit Factor" - the idea that 
the Masses cannot accept anything unless it's shitty. When 
Agent Smith in The Matrix described the flaw-ridden world 
created by the machines, he was referring to Unbelief. Normal 
people, supposedly, cannot accept a reality filled with wonders. 
It has to be a mess in order for them to accept it as real. And 
so, dragons and clones and HIT Marks must be disguised or 
hidden when they appear within Earthly reality. Otherwise, 
they soon die from the effects of Unbelief. 


The Shit Factor seems to work most powerfully in cities... 
and might, in fact, be the primary reason why the ideal of cities 
keeps crashing and burning in the realities of urban decay. Rural 
areas and open wilderness appear to have less weight and more 
potential for marvelous things. Even so, Unbelief stifles the 
uncanny marvels of bygone legendry, literally dissolving things 
that “cannot be” soon after they appear. Perhaps the Mythic 
Threads sustain certain creatures - vampires, ghosts, and the 
like - but dragons and aliens quickly disappear withouta trace. 
Ultimately, Unbelief is the damning expression of the mortal 
status quo: that which should not exist cannot exist. 


Chapter Ten: The Book of Magick 553 


eo 


Ne Nc 7^: 


oe ee 


Mages depend upon clear minds in order to 
do what they do. And yet - in another layer of 
paradox - they also inhabita state of metaphysical 
insanity in which they choose to deny the reality 
that everyone else accepts. The Awakening is a 
sort of madness in which a person can no longer 
see or accept what passes for reality among most 
other people. And so, a mage occasionally loses 
track of reality altogether, drifting or plunging 
into the state often known as Quiet. 


Essentially a state of disassociation and 
disconnection, Quiet sets a mage adrift from any reality except her 
own. Atits lower levels, this leads to irrational actionsand momentary 
delusions. At the higher end of the spectrum, this Wizard’s Twilight 
manifests those delusions in forms that other people can see, or else 
it drops the mage into a prison of her own mind’s making. At the 
extreme end of such disconnection, the mage becomes a Marauder, 
essentially oblivious to the world outside her head. 


As with Resonance (see pp. 550-551), Quiet often depends 
upon a mage’s actions. A stiff-necked, intolerant character is 
more likely to gravitate toward Denial, whereas a libertine drifts 
into Madness and a hot-tempered killer falls to Morbidity. People 
often view Quiet as a single sort of malady; as the Types of 
Quietsection shows, however, metaphysical un-sanity follows the 
choices made while sane. Like magick, Quiet is an extension of 
the mage. From the chronicle’s standpoint, then, your character 
will probably get the breakdown she deserves. 


Baseline Reality 

What is crazy by a mage’s standards, anyway? After all, when 
your entire existence is based around denying and remaking the 
reality that other people take for granted, aren'tyou crazy by default? 


Yes and no... which is why Quiet is so dangerous for the 


Awakened. 


Psychologists and philosophers often refer to baseline 
reality — that is, the level of reality that's generally acceptable 
to a person or society. The Consensus, for example, presents a 
massive baseline reality. Around that baseline reality, though, 
everyone’s got a bit of wiggle room: one person may believe 
in angels, another in the Old Gods, and a third in nothing 
at all. All three people, however, accept a baseline reality in 
which objects fall down, the sun rises in the east, and certain 
temperatures freeze or boil things. 


Mages use their beliefs and practices to alter baseline 
reality. Even then, however, they still maintain their own frame 
of reference. A Hermetic wizard might invoke angels to cause a 
typhoon, but he accepts that his friends are his friends, that his 
sword is a sword, and that there isn’t a fat little naked version of 
himself sitting on his shoulder belching Macc Lads songs in his 
ear. However, if he does start seeing that fat little naked version 
of himself, or believing that his friends are conspiring against 
him, or perceiving his rune-encrusted sword as a singing waffle 


554 . Mage: The Ascension 20" Anniversary Edition 


iron, then that wizard is beginning to go crazy. His baseline 
reality has shifted into the Twilight Zone. 


For all that talk about crazy wisdom, a smart mage keeps 
an eye on his sanity. The power of flexibility carries the price of 
vigilance. Each practitioner of mystic or Enlightened Arts has 
a responsibility the world at large: don't make your practice, goes 
one saying, everybody else's problem. Such vigilance also explains 
why so many mages gather into groups - allies can provide 
sanity checks - and why solitary mages often go batshit insane. 


In game and story terms, Quiet occurs when the mage's 
normal perspective and perceptions about what is and is not real 
shift toward irrational levels. Even by the standards of his sect and 
paradigm, that person's baseline reality enters hazardous terrain. 
As many real-life mystics see it, madness is that place where your 
perceptions and behavior make you a danger to yourself and 
everyone around you. Each mage has a different baseline reality... 
and some ofthem get pretty eccentric. When eccentricity becomes 
delusion and potential violence, however, most Awakened folks 
would agree that that a person's going insane. And for beings 
with the power to mold Reality, insanity's a truly awful thing... 


Storytelling Quiet 


Game-wise, an episode of Quiet is best handled as a story 
arc within the ongoing chronicle: 


* The Storyteller makes some plans, based around a 
particular character's personality and actions, and 
decides how this particular case of Quiet will manifest. 


* Selecting from among the types and symptoms of Quiet 
described below, he determines the early effects of the 
Quiet insanity. 


e When the character reaches a particular goal (say, 10 
Paradox points), or endures a certain challenge to her 
sanity (reading a blasphemous tome, perhaps), the 
Storyteller begins slipping notes to the player, describing 
the delusions or suggesting irrational acts. 


e Instead of, or in addition to, the notes, the Storyteller might 
start introducing weird objects or characters (the hobgoblins) 
into the story, as if they’re perfectly normal parts of the tale. 


e If/ when the player resists the idea that her mage is 
going crazy, the Storyteller can have her start spending 
Willpower points or making rolls that may or may not 
succeed in driving the madness away. 


e And, of course, ifthe mage gains more Paradox, the Quiet 
grows deeper and more irrational... possibly removing 
the mage from the player’s control if that player refuses 
to go along with the madness or lets it go too far. 


Most players enjoy a chance to go crazy and will probably 
take an episode of Quiet and run with it to delightfully demented 


extremes. Just remember: insanity is not cute or fun. We can't 
emphasize that enough. Quiet should be an unnerving and 
potentially ruinous experience. As a result, we suggest that 
removing the character from the player's control - either 
through catatonic withdrawal or total Marauderdom - be a very 
real option when a mage goes into Quiet. Otherwise, there's 
no real incentive to fear the madness or escape its influence. 


Effects of Quiet 


The onset of insanity can be gradual or sudden, depending 
onthe circumstances of the afflicted person. Most often, though, 
it begins with subtle quirks of perception and behavior, rising 
(or falling) steadily into a deeper sense of dislocation from the 
reality shared by everybody else. 


In game terms, Quiet follows six levels, starting with the sort 
of minor quirks that anyone could have, but then progressing... 
or regressing... toward dangerous irrationality. 


Falling Into Quiet 


Generally, this metaphysical insanity comes aboutasa result 
of accumulated Paradox. The mage becomes so comfortable in 
her removal from reality that she starts to lose touch with it. 
Other forces, though, can also inspire such madness: 


e Paradox Backlash: Strong Paradox backlashes (10 points 
or more) can knock a mage straight into Quiet. The 
degree of insanity depends upon the number of Paradox 


points discharged during the backlash - see the Levels 
of Quiet chart for details. 


* Trauma: Severe mental and psychological shocks can jolt 
the character’s connection to reality. Botched Mind Sphere 
rolls (on Effects of Rank 3 or higher); extended torture or 
Social Conditioning; sanity-cracking experiences; devastating 
loss; massive Mind Sphere attacks (that take the character 
to Incapacitated or worse); or physical brain damage (five 
health levels or more to the head) can all provoke an onset of 
Quiet. In such cases, asuccessful Willpower roll (psychological 
attacks) or Stamina roll (physical damage) - made with the 
mage's current Paradox Pool as the difficulty - might keep 
the insanity at bay. (See also Things Man Was Not Meant 
to Knowin Chapter Nine p. 407 and Social Conditioning 
and Reprogramming in this chapter pp. 605-607.) 


e Resonance or Synergy (optional rule): Mages connecting 
with the far reaches of Resonance or Synergycan lose track 
of reality as a result. In this case, the Storyteller might call 
for an Arete roll, difficulty 8, when the player reaches five 
dots ina Resonance or Synergy Trait. Ifthe roll succeeds, the 
mage’s excellence overcomes the heady effects of Resonance 
or Synergy; if not, she succumbs to those forces and enters 
Quiet. (For details, see Resonance and Synergy, below.) 


In all three cases, the level of Quiet depends upon the 
character’s current Paradox Pool. The more paradoxical her 


Chapter Ten: The Book of Magic — 555 


D 7T 


f 


Levels of Quiet 


Level Paradox Discharged Delusions or Disassociation 

1 1-3 Minor quirks or occasional delusions; mage begins to manifest odd behavior and minor 
disassociation from his baseline reality. 

2 4-6 Delusions and disconnection become more severe; mage perceives things that no one 
else can see, starts denying the experiences of other people, and begins to behave 
irrationally even by Awakened standards. 

3 7-10 Mage's senses backfire, creating blindness (real or conceptual), vivid hallucinations, 
and erratic — perhaps dangerous — behavior. Hobgoblins might appear, manifesting 
the mage’s delusions in ways that other people can perceive. 

4 11-15 Mage either gets trapped in a mindscape of his own design or else behaves so 
irrationally that he becomes a danger to himself and everyone nearby. 

5 16-20 Mage either drops into total catatonia or takes on many of the characteristics of a 
Marauder but without immunity to Paradox. 

6 21+ Mage goes Marauder and becomes a Storyteller character. 

Types of Quiet 

Level Denial Madness Morbidity 

1 Stubbornness, minor projection Minor hallucinations Attraction to death and decay 

2 Selective perceptions, hypocritical Frequent delusions, mood swings Fixation with mortality 

behavior 
3 Irrational behavior, literal blindness to Wild hallucinations, sensory Bloodlust and macabre behavior 
denied subjects overload 
Deadly fanaticism Mindscape or constant hobgoblins Violent sociopathy 
5 Fanatical drone Catatonia or dementia Sadistic killer 
Marauder Marauder Marauder 


relationship with reality becomes, the more severe her case of 
Quiet will be. See the Levels of Quiet chart for the practical 
results of disconnection. 


Levels of Quiet 

The crazier you get, the crazier you act. In game terms, Quiet 
ranges from minor afflictions (Level 1) to total dementia (Level 5). 
At the extreme level of that scale (Level 6), the character goes 
irrevocably insane and becomes one of the Marauders - a 
permanent convert to the reality in her head. (See Chapter 
Five, Part ?*!: The Mad.) 

For reasons explained in Chapter Five, a player character 
who goes Marauder should be essentially dead to the player, 
reverting to the Storyteller as a supporting character in the 
ongoing chronicle. Although a Storyteller might choose to 
allow Marauder player-characters, such characters can easily 
destroy a game. 


Rising Out of Quiet 

A character who's aware of her declining mental state can 
try to shake off the delusions or irrational behavior. In game 
terms, this means spending a Willpower point, taking at least 
oneturn to do nothing except resist the effects of Quiet, and then 
scoring at least three successes on a Willpower roll. Under the 


556 . Mage: The Ascension 20" Anniversary Edition 


usual Mage rules, the difficulty for this roll is 7; as an optional 
rule, the Storyteller might decide to make that difficulty the 
character's Quiet level * 5, thus making it harder to shake off 
higher degrees of Quiet. (Shaking off a Quiet level of 3, for 
example, would be difficulty 8.) 


With those three successes, the mage manages to assert her 
will over the delusions during the current scene. Although the 
madness isn't gone, she keeps a clear head and gets through 
the rest of the scene intact. Game-wise, the player removes one 
point of Paradox from the mage's pool, which might lower the 
Quiet level. 


That roll, however, is an all or nothing affair; the player 
must score three successes, or more, with a single roll - not an 
extended action. One or two successes just make the delusion 
seem more real, and failure leaves the mage where she was 
before. A botch causes the delusion to manifest as a hobgoblin 
(see below). Either way, the Willpower point is gone. 


Curing Quiet? Some Dramatic Options 
With a lot of effort and Willpower, it's possible for a 
mage to will herself sane. In practical terms, the player spends 
Willpower points and roleplays out the process of asserting her 
character's sanity. This can become a dramatic story element, 
especially if the character's in the middle of some existential 


Mindscape Rolls 
For details, see p. 559 


Attempted Task Dice Pool 


Meditate into mindscape Perception + Meditation 


Meditate into Demesne Perception + Demesne 


Reduce time in mindscape Wits + Enigmas or 


Perception + Demesne 


Communicate to outside Willpower 


Difficulty for all is Quiet Level + 3 


or external crisis that forces her to sort her shit out fast before 
ongoing events make things worse. 


Other characters can try to help a mage recover from Quiet; 
doing so, however, typically involves some powerful roleplaying, 
a few social or Knowledge-based rolls, and an extended roll in 
which the healing character uses Mind 4/ Prime 4 to drive 
out the Paradox within the suffering mage’s mind. As a base 
guideline, assume that the healer must invest his own personal 
Quintessence and replace each point of Paradox in the Quiet- 
ridden mage’s pool with two or three points of the healer’s 
own Quintessence. The particulars of such curing efforts are 
left to the individual players and Storytellers. Whatever it 
takes, however, the cure should NOT be easy. After all, if fixing 
Quiet were easy, no mage would fear this madness... and yet, 
all sensible mages do. 


Types of Quiet 

Although generally considered a side effect of Paradox, 
Quiet is, in many ways, its own beast - asymptom of dissociation 
from the Consensus to which any mage, regardless of affiliation, 
remains vulnerable. It’s the flipside of that godlike power to 
rework reality, the place where no reality exists except the one 
you perceive. And despite the old stereotypes (and old game 
systems) that present Quiet as either babbling dementia or 
catatonic withdrawal, new-millennium mages recognize several 
different types of insanity: 


Denial 


Mistakenly known as Clarity in Mage Revised (there’s 
nothing clear-headed about it), Denial shuts out things the 
mage does not want to recognize. A common malady among 
Sleepers as well as the Awakened, this delusion categorically 
denies things, people, or circumstances that a person refuses to 
accept. Essentially, you don’t believe in it, therefore it cannot 
possibly exist. 


Denial has another awful feature too: a person - mage or 
otherwise - in a state of denial often acts out the things she 
denies. The jealous lover cheats on her spouse; the bully-hater 
bullies people; the religious fanatic murders innocents because 
they weren't holy enough. "What you repress,” the saying goes, 
“you express." As a result, a Black Suit who denies the existence of 
witchcraft might find himself practicing witchcraft as a joke... or 
worse, doing so without even recognizing the things he's doing 
as witchcraft ("That's ridiculous - YOU'RE the one who's crazy..."). 


This sort of shadow-projection is less a matter of hypocrisy than 
of delusion - the insane person literally does not see what he's 
doing. Such delusions are bad enough when Sleepers have them. 
Backed up by the metaphysical power of a mage, though, they 
can have fearsome effects on that person's world. 


Denial Quiet robs a mage of clear perceptions. She won't 
see things that are there, all the while insisting upon things 
that are not. Often associated with the Technocracy (who don't 
use magick - oh no, perish the thought!), this form of Quiet 
can strike any type of mage. A Celestial Chorister could hate 
people in the name of love; a Weaver could command demons 
in the name of Allah; an Akashic could become a harmonious 
monster. When Nephandi tempters cast their webs, they love 
to inspire Denial-type Quiets... and, because Denial blocks out 
what the mage doesn't want to see, such weapons become their 
most effective shields as well. (* Nope, no Nephandi here — not one! 
Believe me, if there were, I'd know...") 


Effects of Denial 


* Levels 1-2: At the lower end of the spectrum, Denial 
manifests as a stubborn refusal to perceive stuff that's 
obvious to everybody else. No, there is NOT a dragon 
sitting in the middle of Main Street; no, Islam is NOT a real 
religion; no, magick does NOT exist — that's just a bunch of 
Superstitionist nonsense propagated by Reality Deviants, and 
the sooner we purge it from the Earth, the happier everyone 


will be. 


© Levels 3-4: As Denial grows stronger, it begins to manifest 
as literal blindness or deafness to circumstances... or 
worse, blindness/ deafness to anything but a twisted 
version of them: why did you call me a fat pig?; no, you never 
told me that Master Porthos is dead; I HEARD you planning to 
kill me and sell my body off for spare parts. Delusions block 
out or pervert the reality experienced by everyone around 
the mage, and things that were once annoying quirks of 
behavior can become frightening and dangerous. 


* Levels 5-6: At the highest levels of Quiet, Denial can 
reshape the world in that mage's immediate vicinity. 
People might lose their voices in her presence, blurt 
out things they would never have said under their own 
power, or even disappear until the mage leaves the 
room. This explains the weird reality warps that often 
follow a Marauder attack: blanked hard drives, fuzzy 
photos or videos, people who swear that nothing odd 
just happened even as the fire trucks arrive at the scene 
of mass destruction. The mage's delusion becomes part 
of localized reality, externalizing her refusal to accept 
certain things into the temporary disappearance of those 
things from the reality around her. 


Madness 


The most infamous and common form of Quiet, Madness 
showers the afflicted mage with mood swings and delusions. 
Often associated with the Marauders and other clearly 


Chapter Ten: The Book of Magic 557 


. 


IN ZA 


1 
i 
d 3 


4 
< 


P 
J 


1 
a 
ho 
HE 
k 


demented willworkers, such hallucinatory perceptions and 
volatile behaviors start out as little quirks but then swell to 
sanity-rupturing proportions. 


Sometimes known as Dementia, Madness turns you 
into a prisoner of your own mind. Senses feed you incorrect 
perceptions; things and people who are not there appear as solid 
as you are; surges of emotion or calm drag you along emotional 
roller coasters, with often inappropriate results (making fart 
jokes at a funeral, grabbing your teenage son's crotch). And 
while the dotty old wizard might seem amusing in theory, the 
maniac who has the power to turn people inside out without 
even realizing what he's done is a terrifying figure indeed. 


Although it can manifest in subtle ways - sounds or scents 
without a source, strange fluctuations of color or proportion - 
madness has ultimately unsubtle consequences. The mage can try 
to keep things together fora while, and he may even successfully 
wave off or ignore the early manifestations of delusion. When 
the hallucinations become too strong, however... or, still worse, 
start running around as self-willed hobgoblins... that's when 
the Quiet becomes too powerful to ignore. The mage himself 
might still think he's sane, but his version of sanity looks pretty 
cracked to everybody else. 


Effects of Madness 


* Levels 1-2: Madness often starts as tiny ripples of unreality 
or distortion. Did I just hear the phone ring? Did someone 
call my name? Who's smoking in here — I thought I was alone? 
In many cases, the symptoms begin as extensions of the 
mage's tools and practice: great ‘shrooms, man... hey, when 
do they wear OFF? Hmmmm... I thought I had dispelled that 
ghost... Beyond that, Madness might set in as sudden 
mood swings or implacable obsessions, unquenchable 
urges or hyperfocused monomania. And because such 
things aren’t uncommon among the Awakened, Madness 
only gets worse from there... 


* Levels 3-4: By the time Dementia becomes obvious, 
the mage has already hit a downward slide. Obsessions, 
aberrant behavior, hairtrigger passions, and vivid 
hallucinations take hold. Objects, impressions, or images 
manifest: graffiti, phantom phone calls, floating spiders 
in the air. At Level 3, only the mage can see them; by 
Level 4, other folks start to see them too. Meanwhile, 
the afflicted character behaves erratically, reacting to 
things from a deluded impression of reality. 


Levels 5-6: Madness attains its most frightening degree: 
wild visions, violent behavior, hazardous fixations, or 
total catatonia. The mage mightsuffer from metaphysical 
autism, withdrawing from her surroundings even while 
apparently awake. She'll chant nonsense, shit her 
drawers, and tangle Reality in the strands of her personal 
insanity. At the highest degree, the mage either detaches 
herself from baseline reality and falls into a mindscape, 
or else becomes a raving lunatic with the powers of a 
god. Either way, she might easily be lost for good. 


558 Mage: The Ascension 20" Anniversary Edition 


— 


Morbidity 

Drawn from the word morbus - "disease" - Morbidity 
reflects an obsession with death, corruption, and pain. The 
Archmage Voormas may be the poster child for this particular 
insanity. From early fixations with mortalityand ruin, a Morbid 
willworker careens toward sadistic pleasures and ultimate 
extinction. Although referred to as Jhor in Mage Revised, 
Morbid Quiet is a soulsickness... not the Resonance of Death, 
but a fascination with Oblivion. 


One could say that all Nephandi suffer from Morbidity. 
That accusation gets dropped on Thanatoics, Goths, and Black 
Suits too. As with all forms of Quiet, though, any mage can 
grow Morbid in this sense: the priest obsessed with crucifixion, 
the sadistic lover, the callous scientist. As a form of delusion, 
Morbidity is less about death than it is about gore, disease, 
and torment... and whereas some folks glory in vicarious thrills 
through fictional horror, the Morbidity-afflicted mage becomes 
an instrument of real-life cruelty. 


Along with the usual delusions of Quiet - delusions that, 
in this case, involve decay and suffering - a Morbid mage attains 
a corpse-like pallor or leprous corruption. His thoughts and 
activities focus on mortality. Unlike the dark or sardonic humor 
of the Hollow Ones, his mood is often deadly serious, so to 
speak - nihilistic in temperament and vicious by design. As 
insanity digs in further, he'll be driven to unhealthy extremes. 
By the time he lurches toward suicide or homicide, the Morbid 
willworker has become an avatar of decay. 


Effects of Morbidity 


* Levels 1-2: Despite the stereotype of Morbid Gothlings, 
Morbid Quiet often sets in with people who don't share a 
casual relationship with darkness. Most often, in fact, it 
tends to strike people who deny their dark sides and are 
paragons of righteousness within their own minds: the 
pious preacher, the haughty shaman, the valiant hunter of 
Reality Deviants. Provocative delusions lead to flashes of 
anger and despair: Why’d you betray me? You broke my heart. 
God HATES you! Violence soon seems not only reasonable 
but necessary. And with those surges of dark emotion and 
subtle hallucination, the doors open toward insanity... 


* Levels 3-4: As Morbidity takes hold, the mage begins 
to reflect his unhealthy obsessions. His behavior grows 
callous or deliberately cruel; his thoughts reflect constant 
violence and hate; he rages, seethes, or settles into 
cold deliberation. The law of the jungle consumes his 
thoughts... featuring himself, of course, as the alpha 
predator. In some cases, he might gravitate with Poe-like 
fascination toward excess, grit, and horror; in others, he 
might force himself through a sardonic kind of cheer - 
the brightlights grin of an American Psycho. 


* Levels 5-6: By this point, the mage has the look of a 
wolf, the soul of a virus, and the mind of a demon on 
PCP. Honestly, this is one fucked-up character, and 
the Storyteller might want to take it over on general 


EN E 


principle. A mage at this stage of Morbidity is a Pol Pot 
or Dr. Mengele, but he has inhuman powers and the 
will to use them in the most sadistic way possible. If 
he's not already entering the Nephandic Cauls by this 
point, it's only because he's either nursing a massive 
case of denial or else feeling like he could be a dark god 
himself. Marauders of this type are the worst of their 
kind - reality cyclones that should be killed on sight. 


Quiet Manifestations 


Mages remake reality to suit their desires... and so, when 
those mages go insane, their insanity affects Reality as well. 
Beyond the behavior changes and internal delusions that 
characterize a Quiet, the following manifestations change the 
world around a demented mage, reflecting often-subconscious 
applications of magick. 


Hobgoblins 


Little minds aren’t the only kind of minds that suffer 
from hobgoblins. That term also refers to the self-willed 
hallucinations that take shape and direction from the mind of 
an insane mage. Rooted in the fears, conflicts, and memories 
of an afflicted willworker, a hobgoblin embodies things that 
the mage in question would rather deny. 


Game-wise, a hobgoblin comes into play when a player 
either botches a roll to wish away the madness, or reaches a level 
of Quiet where that character's delusions attain recognizable 
form. A hobgoblin could actually be anything: a smear of paint, 
a cry of pain, a religious tract that shows up tucked inside every 
book on the mage's shelf, the vision of an old enemy or lover, 
a TV broadcast no one else can see, a song that plays over and 
over in her head, a stranger shouting on the corner, a car that 
speeds toward the mage in traffic... The possibilities are limited 
only by the mage's backstory and the Storyteller's imagination. 


A typical hobgoblin lasts for one day for each point in the 
offending mage's Arete, though some can last much longer than 
that; if the hobgoblin becomes a character, it has health levels and 
abilitiesto match the mage's own Traits. Many hobgoblins manifest 
as doppelgangers: evil twins (or perhaps good ones) whose deeds 
embarrass the mage in question. Others appear as lost children, 
crusading reporters, tearful relatives, or other personifications of 
guilt or irritation. And although the Storyteller could create one 
manifestation for each point in the mage's Arete, there's really 
no upper limit to the number of hobgoblins that might appear... 


Environmental Alteration 

A truly powerful Quiet can spread outward from the 
mage’s mind to alter the landscape and living beings nearby. As 
noted earlier in this section, things can shift without conscious 
effort on the mage’s part: weather patterns could manifest, the 
ground might tremble, music might play, and people could be 
rendered silent. A crowd of people could turn, temporarily, into 
zombies or birds. Packs of rats, dogs, or naked toddlers might 
manifest out of thin air to chase the mage down the street. Such 
alterations come only from mages with great powers and potent 


madness. When they appear, however, these manifestations 
can be pretty fucking weird. 


In game terms, large-scale alterations are the Storyteller's 
prerogative. The player has no control over such things 
whatsoever, and the manifestations can twist reality as much 
as the Storyteller wants it twisted. Essentially, these alterations 
become the reality-warping special effects that follow Marauders 
around, as described in Chapter Five, Part 7* The Mad. If 
your mage begins to manifest such Fortean phenomena, then 
she’s halfway to Maraudertown on a greased-tracks bullet train. 


Mindscapes 

The polar opposite of environmental alternation, a 
mindscape pulls the mage’s consciousness into its own little 
world and then locks the door behind her. Within that 
mindscape, the mage struggles through her insanity, finding the 
keys she needs to unlock the Paradoxes of her consciousness. 
To the rest of the world, the mage enters the catatonic state 
that gives Quiet its name. For the mage, that journey becomes 
a Seeking through which she might make herself sane again. 


Voluntary and Involuntary Mindscapes 

Depending upon the nature of the Quiet and the efforts of 
the mage, a mindscape can be either voluntary or involuntary. 
For a voluntary mindscape, the mage meditates herself into 
a mental sanctuary where she can sort things out, probably 
by making a few successful Perception + Meditation rolls. 
(Difficulty is the Quiet level + 3.) If that character has the 
Demesne Background Trait, she might be able to retreat to that 
mental domain through a Willpower roll of difficulty 9. (See 
Chapter Six, p. 311, for details.) Once in her private space, the 
mage undergoes a symbolic quest to recapture her equilibrium. 


For an involuntary mindscape, the mage winds up stuck in a 
realm of the Storyteller’s design, fighting to regain her sanity again. 
Either way, when she emerges, her entire Paradox pool is clear, 
unless she’s got some permanent Paradox that cannot be resolved. 


Time Passing 

Generally, Quiet mindscapes last for one day for each point 
of Paradox in the pool. Mindscapes that involve a Paradox pool 
larger than 10 points, however, can last one week per point, and 
though a few rolls of Wits + Enigmas or Perception + Demesne 
(difficulty, again, is the Quiet level + 3) might speed up the 
journey toward sanity by one day per success, we recommend 
roleplaying through the struggle as a miniature story. 


Messages from Within and Outside Assistance 

While inside the mindscape, a mad mage can try to contact 
the world outside her head. Three successes with a Willpower 
roll (once again, difficulty is the Quiet level + 3) allow her to 
send a clear message; fewer successes than that send a garbled 
message to whomever might be listening. 


Meanwhile, an adventurous friend can try to reach into 
the mindscape and retrieve the lost mage. A few successes with 
a Mind 3 dreamwalk or Mind 4/ Mind 5 astral projection 
can send that ally into the Quiet mindscape if the Storyteller 


Chapter Ten: The Book of Magic 559 


| 
| 
d 


560 


The metaphysical reflection ofa mage's deeds, Resonance holds a vital yet ambiguous role within Mage: The Ascension. 
Originally defined as story-based, metaphysical echoes, Resonance eventually reflected the mage's deeds through 
energetic physics of consequence. Because of the different (and often conflicting) treatments of resonance throughout 
the Mage series, Mage 20 treats Resonance as an optional rule. And although the full treatment of that option is too 
large to include in this chapter or rulebook, a brief treatment of that option appears below. 


Certain Mage sourcebooks used a very different definition for Resonance. In those sourcebooks, Resonance became a 
type of energy that links a mage to cosmic principles. Although that definition is essentially the flipside of the same coin, 
a connection to universal energies would be more properly called Synergy. Your Mage group can decide to use both 
Resonance and Synergy to reflect different phenomena: Resonance to echo outward from the mage's actions, Synergy 
to reflect cosmic principles working inward through the mage. Both energies follow the same rules, but they come from 
opposing sources with opposing results. Depending upon your group's preferences, you might use only Resonance, only 
Synergy, both, or neither in your game. 


is Resonance? 


Essentially, Resonance provides an energetic residue from a mage's effects upon reality; the more dramatic the effects, 
the more powerful the Resonance. A subtle, temperate mage who moves through life with very little fuss doesn't generate 
much Resonance, whereas a flashy drama-queen with a penchantfor vulgar spells becomes a walking Resonance factory. 


Story-wise, Resonance shapes the energy in and around the mage. His personality generates it, his spells reflect it, his 
aura pulses with it, and his home echoes it. At low levels, such. energies are hard to spot, but at higher degrees they 
become almost impossible to miss. 


In game terms, Resonance takes a one-word description (the signature), measures it between one and five dots (the 
degree), affects the story (the manifestations), and follows one of four categories (the flavors) that reflect the type of 
energy involved. This signature flavors that mage's Effects and Quintessence; colors or shapes his aura; influences the sorts 
of Abilities and Backgrounds he has; and inspires the types of Seekings, Quiets, and Paradox backlashes he endures. 


«ample. Signatures 


Alluring Feral Nurturing Stormy 
Calming Furious Parasitic Graceful 


Decaying Gloomy Rigid Warlike 


Degree Expressions 
istinc 


Faint Vague signature. 
Noticeable Odd manifestations. 


Overwhelming Unmistakable energies 


Faint: Slight traces (minor ripples, vague feelings). 
) | ell ng characteristics (environmental q 
Noticeable: Recognizable signs (environmental oddities, distinct flavor). 
[ L 


Overwhelming: Recognizable signature (personalized and identifiable phenomena affecting 
environment, actions, people, and locations]. 


Ma$e: The Ascension 20^ Anniversary Edition 


Optional Rule: Resonance-and»Synergy (Continued) 


Flavors of Resonance 


Devotional 
Elemental 
Stabilizing 


Temperamental 


Reflection of dedication to a cause, belief, society, or ethic. 
Reflection of affinity for creatures, spirits, or forces of nature. 
Reflection of calmness, structure, control, and integrity. 


Reflections of dominant emotional state. 


Flavors of Synergy 


Dynamic 
Entropic 


Static 


Affinity for active, vibrant, chaotic energies. 
Affinity for destructive, random, disintegrative energies. 


Affinity for stable, controlling, preserving energies. 


A Storyteller can choose to keep Resonance as a narrative and roleplaying device; that way, there are no rules attached 
to Resonance - it simply appears as various special effects throughout the chronicle. At higher levels, it could manifest 
as the Echoes Flaw (see Appendix Il, pp. 646-647), sending weird ripples into the world around the mage. Lower 
degrees of Resonance have very little effect, but the higher ones can reveal all sorts of things about a given mage. 


Alternately, the Storyteller might decide to run Resonance (and perhaps Synergy) as full-fledged Traits, with significant 
effects on gameplay and characters. In this case, a character begins play with a single dot in a Resonance Trait and 
earns or loses dots through roleplaying and events during the chronicle. Full rules for this option can be found in The 
Book of Secrets, a storehouse of arcana from Mage 20" Anniversary Edition. 


chooses to allow it. Once there, however, that friend becomes 
vulnerable to the mindscape and all its potential terrors. 


Characters who suffer damage in a Quiet mindscape take 
bashing damage; if that damage kills someone, that person 
might either die for real or fall into a coma at the Storyteller’s 
discretion. As mentioned earlier, the mindscape becomes a 
Seeking through which the mad willworker - and perhaps her 
friends - must find a path toward sanity. And like any other 
Seeking, such journeys should not be guided by dice alone. 
(See Chapter Seven for more advice about Seekings.) 


Wisdom From Insanity 


There's a reason people speak of crazy wisdom. For 
although insanity presents a hazard to everyone involved, a 


person who manages to puzzle through that madness might 
emerge with deeper insights into life, magick, and the universe. 


In story terms, a character who emerges from Quiet with his 
sanity intact might resolve certain issues; change his Demeanor or 
even his Nature; gain dots - by the Storyteller's choice only! - in certain 
Traits like Awareness, Cosmology, Enigmas, or Occult; and resolve all 
the Paradox in his pool, save the ones that have become permanent. 


A Quiet, of course, might never be truly resolved; Porthos 
FitzEmpress faced his own Quiet in the final moments of his 
life, and such madness blasted Doissetep to its foundations in the 
Ascension Warriorsaga. Marauders lose the people they once were 
in the dementia they now embrace. And so, Quiet may play a vital 
role in your saga as a whole... shaping and perhaps transforming 
the chronicle through a solitary, but expansive, madness. 


Part VI: Examples in Play 


Rules, rules, rules... so many rules. What do they play 
out like when the dice hit the table? The following 
examples ought to give you some ideas about the 
practical applications of the previously described 
systemsand thewaysin which they mixwith narration 
and roleplaying over the course of your chronicle. 


Coincidental Mystic Effect 


Hungry Jinx wants to score some food. 
Panhandling on the Ave, she sets up her sign 


and decides to hedge her bets with a bit of magick. And so, 
Jinx takes out her playing cards and begins to deal them out in 
apparently random patterns while whispering a prayer to her 
goddess, Risk. As far as anyone else is concerned, Jinx is simply 
some weird street-kid playing solitaire and talking to herself. 
Jinx’s player Camille, however, knows what Jinx is really up to. 


"I'm throwing outan intention,” she says, “that someone will 
either take Jinx to lunch, or else give her enough money to buy 
a meal or two.” As she shuffles and draws the cards, Jinx keeps 
glancing up at passersby, giving them the puppy-dog-eyes treatment. 


Chapter Ten: The Book of Magic 56l 


"Entropy 2 to manipulate probability," Camille says, "plus Life 
2 to note hungry bystanders who'd be likely to help a cute girl 
get a meal, and Spirit 1 to read auras so she can figure out who's 
most likely to feed her without expecting anything else in return." 


Using Entropy 2/ Life 2/ Spirit 1, Camille rolls two dice 
for Jinx's Arete. Jinx's battered cards count as a personalized 
instrument (-1 difficulty), and the Effect is coincidental because 
she’s not doing anything that obviously defies reality or otherwise 
looks like magick. The roll’s difficulty, therefore, is a base of 5 
(highest Sphere + 3), -1 for the cards, for a total of 4. Camille 
rolls the dice and gets one success. 


In the story, Jinx spots a college girl not much older than 
Jinx herself. That girl’s got store-bought distressed jeans, a 
Washington State sweatshirt, and a blue-green aura, suggesting 
trust and generosity, tinged with a bit of hunger. Jinx’s spell 
tilts the odds in her favor, and the girl looks over to Jinx and 
smiles. “Hey,” she says, holding out a hand. “I’m kinda hungry 
too. You wanna go catch some lunch? My treat...” 


Abilities Enhancing an Effect 

Let’s say that Jinx’s attempt didn’t succeed. Camille’s 
rolled a couple of times, and folks just keep passing by because 
Camille hasn’t rolled any successes. “Okay,” says Camille, “Jinx 
is seriously turning on the charm.” 

In the game, Camille rolls Jinx’s Charisma of 4, plus her 
Etiquette of 1, for a total of five dice. In the story, Jinx goes 
into a spiel along the lines of “Pick a card, any card, the first one 


562 Mage: The Ascension 20" Anniversary Edition 


to draw the Jack of Diamonds gets to have lunch with a beautiful 
girl!” Because this is a fairly presumptuous stunt, the Storyteller 
allows Camille to use Jinx’s “Dare you!” specialty in order to 
count any 10s Camille rolls as two successes. The Storyteller 
sets the difficulty at 7 (a stranger trying to convince folks to 
buy her food), and Camille scores two successes. 


Those successes, in turn, lower Camille’s difficulty for the 
casting roll by -2; with a total difficulty of 3 (4 - 2 = 2, but the 


minimum difficulty is 3), Jinx scores lunch in no time. 


Technomagickal Effect 


Dr. Hans von Roth leads cops on a merry chase. Laughing 
behind the wheel of his reengineered Aston Martin Vanquish 
(its coppersilver chassis blurred into an eye-watering streak), he 
shifts into 7” gear, activating the Trans-Temporal Warp Drive... 


Meanwhile, at the game table, Paul tallies up the five dice 
he needs to roll an Effect with Dr. von Roth’s most excellent five 
dots in Arete. Because that Effect - a Correspondence 4/ Time 3/ 
Forces 2/ Matter 2 Effect - is focused through the hypercharged 
sports car, the Storyteller rules that Paul's high-speed getaway is 
coincidental: “BARELY coincidental, but I'll allow it this time." 


The Spheres involved break down like this: Correspondence to 
skip thecarfrom one place to another through intervening distances 
in order to avoid hitting other vehicles, Time to accelerate the car 
beyond its normal capabilities, Forces to handle the gravitational 
physics involved, and Matter to keep the car from flying apart 
under stresses it’s not designed to endure. Because Dr. von Roth 


has been engineering such capabilities into the car, it functions as 
aunique, personalized instrument; and because those capabilities 
workonlyfor Dr. Roth, the carisa focus instrument, nota Wonder. 


And so, Paul rolls the dice. The base difficulty is 7 
(coincidental = highest Sphere +3), reduced by-2 for the unique, 
personalized instrument. Paul throws a point of Quintessence 
into it as well (“special fuel”), so the difficulty drops to 4. Paul 
rolls his five dice and scores three successes... 


Seconds later, the cops are left shaking their heads, 
wondering what kind of car can manage to zip out of sight 
right before their eyes... 


Targeted Damage Effect 

Bruce Foster sights, aims, and shoots. A .44 Magnum slug 
tears into the raging man-beast that's been rampaging through 
the office complex. The monster sneers - Bullets? How pathetic 
- and then howls in realization that the special Technocratic 
ammo in Bruce's gun, combined with Bruce's Enlightened 
marksmanship, has unexpected, deadly consequences. 


“Thanks to ourspecial ammo," says Bruce's player, Bill, "I'm 
using the gun to throw a coincidental Forces/ Prime Effect into 
thatlycanthropic bastard: Forces 2 for velocity and damage, and 
Prime 2 to energize my bullets so they do aggravated damage." 
Because this is a coincidental Effect, the difficulty is 5. (2 + 3 = 
5) Bill rolls Bruce’s Enlightenment of 4 to trigger the desired 
Effect. Four dice hit the table, scoring two successes. 


To see whether or not the gunshot hits, Bill rolls with 
Bruce’s Dexterity + Firearms dice pool. Three successes. Bruce’s 
gun can fire up to three shots per turn; because a player can 
make only one Arete/ Enlightenment roll per turn, however, 
the Effect roll applies the damage as the result of all three shots. 


Checking the Base Damage or Duration chart, Bill 
discovers that his two successes, plus one additional success 
for the Forces Sphere, equal six health levels’ worth of damage. 
Because the Prime 2 addition enhanced that damage, the 
arrogant lupine who figured he could shake off that pistol shot 
suddenly takes a six health-level aggravated damage attack. Sure, 
the werewolf can try to soak that damage, but still - six agg in 
a single turn? That shit’s gonna hurt. Suddenly, Wolfie’s not 
quite as spry as he was a moment ago... 


Extended Roll Ritual 


Nix decides to ward zir home, shielding it from outside 
observation and setting up silent alerts in case someone breaks in 
anyway. Gathering up collection of black candles, a paintbrush, 
appropriate herbs, a bowl of Nix’s own blood, an iron bell, chalk, 
and other instruments, Nix begins the long process of lighting 
the candles, burning the herbs, painting the corners with daubs 
of blood, inscribing chaos-magick glyphs in chalk on various 
surfaces, and murmuring invocations of safety and threats while 
going from room to room with the blood, the bell, and a candle. 


Nix’s player, Koe, hashes out the necessary Spheres: 
Correspondence 2 to thicken the space against long-distance 
observation, Matter 2 to bind the Effect to the materials of that 
place, Mind 2 to disperse a subtle yet steady Go away impulse to 


anyone who comes near, and an additional Correspondence 2/ 
Mind 2 component that sends Nix a mental alarm if the place 
gets breached. Because Nix is trying to affect a large area, reduce a 
would-be intruder's successes, and do so more or less permanently, 
Koe's Storyteller checks the Rite, Ceremony, and Great Work 
section, then decides that Koe needs seven successes - in ritual 
terms, a ceremony - in order to complete the desired Effect. 


Thanks to its subtle nature, the warding Effect is 
coincidental; if those wards were to burst into flame or do 
something else obvious, the Effectwould be vulgar instead. The 
base difficulty is only 5 (Sphere 2 * 3 for coincidental magick), 
and Koe spends two Quintessence (in the form of Nix's blood) 
to lower it to the minimum difficulty of 3. Still, Nix has an 
Arete of 3, so it'll take a few rolls to complete the ritual. 


In the story, Nix goes from room to room, chanting, 
painting, and ringing the bell. At the gaming table, Koe rolls 
three dice and gets one success for the first hour; two successes 
in the second hour; and one more success in the third. Nix 
has four dots in Stamina, so Koe rolls a fourth time to reflect 
the fourth hour of work; this time, though, it's a failure - no 
successes at all. The dice are not on Koe's side this evening. 
Nix decides to take a break and finish up after a bit of rest. 


Following a short break, Nix resumes the ritual. The 
next roll garners two successes, for a total of six successes. 
One more success needed. The final hour's work nets two 
successes, wrapping up the ceremony with eight successes. So 
now, after six hours and change, the ritual wards Nix's home, 
deducting eight successes from anyone who tries to spy upon it 
with Correspondence, broadcasting a fairly strong KEEP OUT 
impulse to would-be trespassers, and sending Nix the desired 
mental warning across a pretty significant distance. Sure, it 
took some work, but the wards are essentially permanent until 
Nix takes them down. The Hollow One settles in to sleep as 
dawn breaks, confident that the protections will hold... 


Divided Successes Option 

Over the last several weeks, Malcolm Jamal Leonard has 
amassed quite a bit of dirt on a collection of public figures. 
With it, he could demolish their credibility, undermine their 
influence, alienate their sponsors, and remove them from the 
larger game of power politics. That dirt, however, must be 
revealed the right way. Handing it over to the proper authorities 
would mean nothing. No, his targets must disgrace themselves. 
Moyo kizungu - "speaking the heart.” It's an old honesty spell. 
Combining tech-based data with an ancient ritual, Malcolm 
prepares a public spectacle of self-inflicted ruin. 


Around the table, Steve lays out his plan: "With my new 
dots in the Correspondence Sphere, I’m going to work up a 
Mind/ Entropy/ Correspondence spell that'll get the targets 
to reveal the things they least want to be public knowledge." 
Because the long-distance spell is limited by Malcolm's two dots 
in Correspondence (rather than to the three dots he has in 
Mind), the Effect Steve decides upon is a Correspondence 2/ 
Mind 2/ Entropy 1 enchantment that sends a truth-speaking 
impulse to Malcolm's targets, getting them to inadvertently 
spill their guts at the worst possible times. 


Chapter Ten: The Book of Magic 563 


Ne 7^: 


eo 


A 


AE 


oe a 


(In game terms, Correspondence sets up the connections, 
Mind sends the impulse, and Entropy finds and exploits the 
psychological weak points of the men and women in question.) 


Asin the previous example, this Effect calls for an extended 
ritual, with a large number of successes to be spread out over 
the targets. Using the Magickal Feats and Optional Dividing 
Successes Rule charts, Steve and his Storyteller set the Base 
Successes at four successes (influencing someone's mind); select 
six targets (six more successes, total); establish a Duration of 
one story for that Effect (three more successes) so that those 
targets spread their revelations out over a period of time; and 
then determine - using the Correspondence Sphere Ranges 
chart - that it will take five more successes (described location) 
to reach the targets through the personal information Malcolm 
has compiled. Thankfully, this is a coincidental Mind Effect; 
no one will see Malcolm working, and everyone knows that 
public figures say stupid things when you shove cameras and 
microphones in their faces. Therefore, Malcolm's ritual requires 
17 successes (a Great Work, according to the Rite, Ceremony, 
and Great Work entry), with a base difficulty of 5. Tools and 
time can reduce that difficulty to 3, but it's still a hell of a 
ritual to pull off. 


The process is exhausting; Malcolm needs to take several 
breaks, and Steve has a lot of die-rolling to do. Thankfully, 
he doesn't botch any of those rolls, and within a few days the 
press and Internet are buzzing about the sudden attacks of 
vocal diarrhea that have taken down several noted pundits and 
politicians. In his penthouse, Malcolm smiles ata job well done. 


Vulgar Magic Effect/ 
Spending Quintessence and Willpower 

No time for subtlety! When Aria finds two assholes beating 
a guy half to death with a baseball bat, she reaches out to her 
understanding of the time stream. Taking a few seconds to 
focus her concentration, Aria blinks rapidly as the baseball 
bat rises and falls, battering the victim’s arms and ribs. Aria 
takes a deep breath, concentrating on the stench of garbage, 
the tang of blood, the glass-strewn pavement under her bare 
feet, the dull thud of wood against muscle, skin, and bone, the 
miraculous arc of pain and mortality on this chilly city night. 


At the gaming table, Cedar picks up six dice to represent 
Aria’s Arete of 6. “Focusing on her affinity for senses, places, 
and time,” Cedar says, “Aria’s going to stop those bastards, 
grab the dude, and get him out of there.” 


That’s a tall order. The Effect would be extremely vulgar 
- with Sleeper witnesses, no less! Checking the Feats of Time 
Magick chart, Cedar finds that she would need at least five 
successes to create a time-bubble around the three men. Because 
that Effect involves Time 4, the difficulty would be 9 (Time 
4 * 5 for a vulgar with witnesses Effect. Six dice, five successes, 


difficulty 9? The odds kinda suck. 


“I can’t stand by and do nothing,” Cedar says. “I’m gonna 
throw three points of Quintessence behind this, too." Given 
Aria's Avatar of 5, that's easy. This brings the difficulty down, 
from 9 to 6. Cedar also spends a point of Willpower, giving 


564 Mage: The Ascension 20" Anniversary Edition 


Aria one automatic success. Now she needs to roll only four 
successes at difficulty 6. It's still rough odds with only six dice, 
but it's do-able... 


Paradox: Success, Failure, Botching, and 
Backlash 


Cedar rolls the dice for Aria’s vulgar with witnesses Effect: 


* Success: The dice fly. Five successes, plus one automatic 
one from the Willpower! In the story, Aria reaches out 
her hands and time stops. The men with bats freeze in 
place, as does their victim. Aria rushes over to him, pulls 
him up, and drags him out of the way. 


"Are they still frozen?" Cedar asks the Storyteller. 


"You got six successes out of five. So the guys are frozen 
for..." he checks the Optional Dividing Successes Rule 
chart... "the rest of the scene, because you got one 
success more than you needed in order to complete the 
Effect." Watching to make sure that no one else can see 
her, Aria wrestles the baseball bat out of one attacker's 
hands, beats the living crap out of both men with it, 
and hauls the still-frozen victim away. 


That victory, though, has a price. Even though she 
succeeded, Aria takes one point of Paradox. (Cedar's 
troupe isn't using the Reckoning metaplot rules. If they 
were playing in the post-Reckoning Mage world, then 
Aria would get five points of Paradox: one point * one 
point for every dot in the highest Sphere used.) 


* Failure: The dice fly, but Cedar scores only three 
successes, not four. Temporal energies shift, but nothing 
happens. One of the attackers looks up and spots Aria 
behind them. “HEY!” he yells, pointing at the mage. The 
other man turns as well. Some nights, it just doesn’t pay 
to be a Good Samaritan... 


e Botching: The dice fly. No successes, but two ones. 
Botch! Temporal energies seethe, coil, and then crackle 
into a burst of sudden paralyzing pain. “Oh, crap,” says 
Cedar, as Aria gets 10 points of Paradox (two points + 
two per dot in the highest Sphere). 


“So, Cedar,” the Storyteller asks, “How many points of 
Paradox did Aria already have?” 


“Um...” Cedar replies, glancing at her character sheet. 
“Dammit. Six.” 


“That makes sixteen Paradox?” The Storyteller shakes 
his head. “This is probably going to be ugly...” 


Paradox Backlash 

The Storyteller picks up sixteen dice, one for each point 
in Aria’s Paradox pool. Rolling them against difficulty 6, he 
gets ten successes. Checking the Paradox Backlash chart, he 
narrates Aria’s fate: “The pain locks all your muscles into place. 


Aria screams as cascades of time and possibility whip through 
her body and mind. Over what seems like an eternity, she 
slowly falls to the pavement, dropping into the black void of 
unconsciousness. Mark off ten points of Paradox and..." (he 
rolls ten dice) “...ouch! Seven health of damage.” 


"Bashing or lethal?" 


"Um..." the Storyteller checks the Paradox Backlash Roll 
chart... “bashing.” 


Cedar sighs. “That'll probably kill me.” 

“Maybe not,” says the Storyteller, choosing another option. 
“So what happens next?” 

“That,” says the Storyteller, “is the question, isn’t it?” 


From this point on, the Storyteller gets to make the call. 
Will Aria be blown to bits? Sucked into a Paradox Realm? 
Visited by Old Man Wrinkle, the guardian of time? Cedar 
has no idea, which is why it’s not often wise to play too freely 
with titanic forces of space and time. Even when you've got 
the power to do so, things can still go so terribly wrong... 


Quiet 

Ithappenseven to the bestof mages. And when you've been 
around for centuries, as Jodi Blake has been, then you're no 
stranger to a little less-than-peaceful Quiet. Blake has spanned 
the spectrum of Denial, Madness, and Morbidity during her 
time on Earth. This time, she's in Denial... unaware that she's 
even a mage, much less a mage from the infamous Nephandi. 
How did she get here, then, and what happens now that she is? 

In game terms, Jodi's player Jim had been piling up 
some Paradox. Rather than bringing the hammer down, Jim's 
Storyteller has decided to spice up the chronicle by giving Jodi 


a special kind of madness. For a Nephandic Master, innocence 
is dementia. And so, when a bit of vulgar magick sends Jodi's 
Paradox wheel past the 10-point mark, the Storyteller begins 
her Quiet campaign. 


“Jodi,” says the Storyteller, “when you wake up the next 
morning, you find yourself in a beautiful bedroom, the sun 
streaming through billowing white curtains. Your pink pajamas 
feature little smiley faces, and you can smell your mother making 
French toast downstairs. It's a wonderful day to be alive." 

"Um..." says Jim. “Say WHAT?!?" 

In game terms, Jodi's new 13 points of Paradox have put 
her in a Level 4 mindscape of Denial. Although the Nephandic 
sorceress is actually naked in her richly appointed, black and 
red bedchamber some time after dusk, her newfound Quiet 
resists her true identity. As far as she herself can tell, Jodi's now 
a 12-year-old innocent on a bright Saturday morning. 


As it turns out, the Storyteller has been planning this out 
for a while. She has a name and personality picked out for 
Jodi's mom (in a cruel quirk of memory, it's the 21*century 
version of Jodi's real, medieval French mother, now very long 
gone), and a detailed description of Jodi’s new life. Meanwhile, 
Jodi’s sorcerous acquaintances gradually realize that Ms. Blake 
is not herself... thatshe has, in fact, retreated from the beautiful 
monster she normally is and slipped into a delusion of being a 
modern preteen girl who has neither memories nor knowledge 
about things like magick. 


Will Jim shake off the effects of this Quiet by spending 
Willpower points and making a successful Willpower roll against 
difficulty 9? For now, Jim seems content to play along with the 
mindscape and see where it leads. For a mage like Jodi Blake, 
however, innocence can never last for long... 


Part VIL: Focus and the Arts 


Belief makes the mage. Belief in something - 
gods, science, spirits, technology, one’s own 
place in the universe, perhaps simply the 
conviction that one’s Will is enough to move 
the world - is utterly essential if you want to 
change reality. Faithless folks cannot use True 
Magick, for such Arts and Sciences depend upon 
belief. That belief provides the core of focus: that 
lens through which a mage does what he does. 


Chapters One, Two, and Six have already 
covered the importance of focus and of the 
three components - paradigm, practice, and instruments - that 
comprise it. In previous Mage editions, that term - and its 
awkward plural, foci - had been used to describe the tools 
through which a mage works. Practice had been called style, and 
paradigm was simply left for the player to determine. Really, 
though, all three pieces are connected. The tools, after all, are 
just extensions of the practice, and that practice draws upon 
belief. Belief inspires, practice directs, and instruments put that 


practice into action. And so, all three elements provide a focus 
for your mage's Will. 


Practice, Instruments, 
and Growing Beyond Them 


As detailed in Chapter Six (see p. 259 and p. 329), each 
Mage character begins play with a focus made up ofa paradigm, 
a practice, and at least seven instruments that channel that belief 
through that practice. As he or she progresses through the game, 
your character can choose to alter or discard instruments, change 
practices, modify one practice to accommodate another one, and 
perhaps even eventually recognize that she doesn’t need the tools 
at all. Even then, however, your character believes in something. 
Without that conviction, she’s just another Sleepwalker, going 
through motions she doesn’t truly understand. 


Certain mages never manage to separate the instruments 
from those convictions. It takes a certain kind of worldview, 
especially in our era, to realize that you don’t need technology 


Chapter Ten: The Book of Magic 565 


| 
| 
d 


BE SERES 7^: 


"rtr. 


NG 


NN 
fA 


SENG 


to accomplish miracles. When a mage’s belief in technology 
provides the Path to Enlightenment, that belief is almost 
impossible to shake... and most folks wouldn’t want to shake 
it, even if they could. There’s comfort in technology, after 
all, even if that technology involves books and bones, not 


What does the mage believe? = 
paradigm 


How does the mage turn belief into 
action? = practice 


What does the mage use in that 
practice? = instruments 


All combined = focus 


A Mechanistic Cosmos 

A World of Gods and Monsters 
Bring Back the Golden Age! 
Creation's Divine and Alive 
Divine Order and Earthly Chaos 
Everything is Chaos 

Everything is Data 


Everything’s an Illusion, Prison, or 


Mistake 

It's All Good - Have Faith! 
Might is Right 

One-Way Trip to Oblivion 
Tech Holds All Answers 


Alchemy 


Art of Desire/ Hypereconomics 
Chaos Magick 

Craftwork 

Crazy Wisdom 

Cybernetics 

Dominion 

Faith 

Gutter Magick 

High Ritual Magick 

Hypertech 


computers and cars. 


566 


Maleficia 
Martial Arts 
Medicine-Work 
Reality Hacking 
Shamanism 
Voudoun 
Weird Science 
Witchcraft 
Yoga 


Armor 

Artwork 

Blessings and curses 
Blood and fluids 
Bodywork 

Bones and remains 

Books and periodicals 
Brain/ computer interface 
Brews and concoctions 
Cards and instruments of chance 
Celestial alignments 
Circles and designs 
Computer gear 
Crossroads and crossing-days 
Cups and vessels 

Dances and movement 
Devices and machines 
Drugs and poisons 
Elements 

Energy 

Eye contact 


Fashion 


or tools. 


Mage: The Ascension 20" Anniversary Edition 


Food and drink 
Formulae and math 
Gadgets and inventions 
Gems and stones 
Group rites 

Herbs and plants 
Household tools 

Knots and ropes 

Labs and gear 
Languages 
Management and HR 
Mass media 

Meditation 

Money and wealth 
Music 

Nanotech 

Numbers and numerology 
Offerings and sacrifices 
Ordeals and exertions 
Prayers and invocations 
Sacred iconography 
Sex and sensuality 
Social domination 
Symbols 

Thought-forms 

Toys 

Tricks and illusions 

True Names 

Vehicles 

Voice and vocalizations 
Wands and staves 
Weapons 


Writings, inscriptions and runes 


Working Without Focus 


Because mages are vessels of Will, they can sometimes will 
things to happen without using tools or a practice. Working 
through determination alone, a mage can surpass her focus 
and conjure Effects without channeling belief through practice 


Working this way doesn't happen without cost. Game- 
wise, the player spends one Willpower point and suffers a *3 
difficulty to his roll. Essentially, that mage throws every ounce 
of self-conviction he has into the spell, using Will alone to 
focus his intents. 


Because of their reliance upon scientific methods and 
tools, technomancers cannot perform this trick at all unless 
and until they completely transcend the need for instruments. 
A Virtual Adept might believe he's got the will to hack Reality 
without gear, but until he accepts that concept as an integral 
part of his reality, he just can't manage it. (See Focus, Belief, 
and the One-Inch Punch in the sidebar nearby.) 


In all cases, the modifier for using an instrument cannot 
bring the total difficulty above *3 or below -3. Reality has a 
certain degree of flexibility, yes, but itcannotbe stretched too far. 


Working With Onfamiliar Instruments 


Every so often, a mage finds herself working outside the 
paradigm. Maybe she’s learning a new practice or adding new 
tools to the practice she already employs - working with joss 
sticks and hell-money, for example, if her shamanic Path began in 
Kenya or Arizona. She might be using someone else’s laboratory 
or workshop, adopting desperate measures (like grabbing a 
Black Suit’s weapon during a firefight), or using instruments 
and rituals that she hasn’t had time to familiarize herself with 
just yet. (“The drums don’t really speak to me until we’ve spent some 
quality time getting attuned to each other’s vibrations.”) In such 
situations, your mage is working with an unfamiliar instrument 
or practice... which is often better than using nothing at all, but 
it’s not as effective as your established bag of tricks. 


In game terms, this unfamiliarity manifests as an increase 
to your difficulty until you’ve had some time to adjust to the 
instruments or rituals in question. At the earlier stages, a totally 
unfamiliar instrument (like a jetpack ganked from some crazy 
Etherite) or ritual (like joining a Lakota fancy-dance when you 
normally focus through the Five Rhythms movement practice) 
adds +2 to your difficulty. Later, when you’ve had some 
experience with the tools or practice in question (you’ve spent 
some time on the gun range with that blaster pistol or learned 
how to call the corners in your new Wiccan community) but 
have not yet fully adopted that practice, the modifier drops 
to +1. Both modifiers appear on the Magickal Difficulty 
Modifiers chart. 


Changing Tools and Practices 

Story-wise, a character can modify or alter his practice and 
its associated tools by going through a major change of life. It’s 
fairly easy to modify your existing practice - to, for example, 
go from being a primitivist Pagan to adding computers and 
modifying the Old Ways into a technopagan practice. Radical 
conversions - say, going from Pagan witchcraft to Sunni Islam 
- are more difficult, demanding intense roleplaying and deep 
story arcs. 

As described in Chapter Six under Changing Focus and 
Allegiance, (p. 339), such monumental paradigm shifts have 
various game and story complications. Although a character 


does not lose Arete, he must return to at least seven instruments 
(several of which may combine his old practice with his new 
one). For several in-game months, he’ll be working at half 
of his previous Sphere levels too... after all, he’s learning an 
entirely new way of dealing with those principles, even if he 
does still understand them. Chapter Six covers the details about 
that mage’s return to his previous levels of accomplishment; 
for now, just remember that your character is reorienting his 


deepest-held beliefs. 


Growing Beyond the Tools 

When it comes to moving beyond the tools of a given 
practice, mystic mages have a major advantage over tech-based 
ones. Despite the occasionally cumbersome nature of cauldrons 
and rites, a mystic worldview is generally more flexible than a 
scientific one. The mystic may eventually recognize that magick 
flows from his Will and a connection to the universe at large; a 
scientist, however - even a crazy one - still remains convinced 
that her tools and theories provide the bridge between Will 
and Effect. (See the sidebar SCIENCE!!! in Chapter Six, p. 
290.) Overcoming that conviction is sometimes possible, but 
it's difficult to do. 


In game terms, a mystic character can begin discarding the 
instruments of her practice when she reaches Arete 3. From 
that point onward, she may discard one instrument per point 
of Arete beyond the third - two at Arete 4, three at Arete 5, 
and so forth. By Arete 9, she can use tools but no longer needs 


to do so - see Arete, Focus, and Instruments in Chapter Six, 
(p. 329). 


Technomancers, by definition, find it difficult to do that - 
they do, after all, see “via technology.” A mystically oriented 
technomancer cannot discard instruments until Arete 6. From 
thenon, however, she realizes thather understanding transcends 
her need for technology, and she can set aside two tools per 
dot in Arete instead of one. 


Technocrats receive so much indoctrination that they never 
break through their preconceptions that way. Unless he leaves 
the Technocracy to pursue a different Path, a Technocratremains 
convinced that his faction's perception of reality is the only one 
that truly works... and that perspective demands instruments 
of science, even if those instruments aren't always obvious. At 
Arete 10, a Technocrat becomes part of the Machine - a focus 
for the Will of technology instead of the other way around. 


Belief: The Core of Focus 


Without or without instruments, belief forms the core 
of a mage's focus. Often referred to as paradigm, that belief 
reflects the way your mage thinks about the world, her place 
in it, and the things she does in order to spin that world to 
suit her purposes. 


Beliefs and paradigms aren't quite the same thing, but 
they're closely related to one another, especially with regards 
to a mage's focus. Belief tends to be a personal faith or creed, 
whereas paradigm tends to reflect an intellectual framework 
for understanding such things. Each depends upon the other. 


Chapter Ten: The Book of Magic 567 


E 


TN E 


s 


ny P 


Focus, Belief, and the One-Inch Punch 


Despite some misconceptions suggested by Mage*'s first edition, a mage doesn't use her focus to fool witnesses while 
picking Reality's pocket. Focus is an intrinsic element of every mage, and although an individual might eventually 
recognize that she herself is the true focus of her Arts, few mages ever reach the level where they can depend upon 
nothing except themselves. 


Ultimately, of course, the mage is the true focus - the living instrument of practice and belief. That's an easy concept to 
think about, but it’s almost impossible to grasp on a soul-deep level. True, a mage might intellectually realize that she's 
just moving things around in order to direct her intentions toward a desired purpose. Understanding that on a level that 
allows her to rearrange reality on a whim, however, is like breaking a board with a one-inch punch. Sure, you might 
recognize that it's possible; you could watch Bruce Lee do it on YouTube, and maybe even train well enough in martial 
arts that you can smash planks with a powerful punch or kick. Mastering the one-inch punch, however, takes dedicated 
practice with lesser applications of those arts. Few martial artists can break thick wooden boards with that punch, and 
even Bruce Lee himself had to punch the board. 


Now try breaking that board simply by thinking about doing so. 


Right. That's why it's so hard to grow beyond a focus even when you understand that it’s theoretically possible to do so. 


i a 


eem 


aa pppu” es 


It can be said fairly that paradigm represents how you think the 
world works, and belief represents why you think it works that way. 


The varieties of human belief are almost limitless. It 
wouldn’t be an exaggeration to say that every living person 
(and possibly every thinking entity) holds different beliefs. 
The things we believe come from so many factors - culture, 
experiences, memories, perceptions, meditations upon those 
other factors, and far more besides - thatalthough we can make 
general statements about a belief, we can never truly know 
what another person believes, nor can anyone else truly share 
our unique paradigm. We can come close in many respects, 
but except in the rare cases where a mage shares a lasting, total 
mind-body-soul connection to another entity, our beliefs still 
occupy different worlds. 


Common Mage Paradigms 


The P-word catches lots of flack in Mage. Really, though, 
paradigm is a pretty simple idea. A paradigm is a model that 
reflects the way something works. Mage paradigms represent 
the various belief systems that Awakened and unAwakened 
people use to understand the world they share. 


The most common belief systems you'll find in Mage: 
The Ascension include: 


A Mechanistic Cosmos 


Creation is essentially a machine. By understanding it, we 
can elevate ourselves to a superior state. All things possess an 
intrinsic sense of order, and chaos is an illusion that conceals 
a deeper form of symmetry. Although it’s most obviously 
identified with the Technocracy, this paradigm goes back at least 
as far as Classical Greece. The “divine watchmaker” concept 
from Enlightenment Deism, certain forms of Gnosticism, and 
the postmodern concept of reality hacking all stem from this 
image of a systematic and comprehensible cosmos. 


To the mechanistic viewpoint, enlightenment includes 
a clear-eyed view of the cosmic machine. Through it might 
be perceived through lenses of godhead, those divinities are 


568 Mage: The Ascension 20" Anniversary Edition 


still part of the system. Magick, therefore, is an Enlightened 
Science through which a person tweaks the gears. Metaphysical 
practices are simply toolkits for the people who know how to 
tinker with reality. 


A World of Gods and Monsters 


In this view, Creation is fundamentally irrational, 
dangerous, and filled with powerful forces, most of which are 
hostile. Nothing makes sense for very long, and apparent safety 
can give way at any moment and plunge us into chaos. Magick, 
science, and faith are tools we use, like fire and steel, to keep the 
threats at bay; those tools give us a leg up on our ancestors, but 
in the end we're all utterly fucked. Under this view, magick is a 
cosmic weapon, and using it makes you a monster too. Those 
gods and monsters hold the keys to magick, and if they like 
you (or if you kick their ass), they might share those powers 
with you... so long as your sanity holds out. 


The dark side of existential philosophy, this model insists 
that everything is meaningless. Paradoxically, it’s both a very 
primitive viewpoint and a completely modern one. In the World 
of Darkness, it's literally true - there really are vampires and evil 
spirits all over the place. Human beings are prey for beings that 
are essentially gods, and mages frequently become those godly 
monsters themselves. Although it often comes across as the 
mordant creed of Hollow Ones and other orphans, this model 
finds its way into the supposedly refined beliefs of many Tradition, 
Technocracy, and Disparate mages... and, of course, into the 
delusions of Marauders and the malicious truths of the Nephandi, 
for whom its reality becomes one of their greatest philosophical 
weapons. After all, when the werewolf's at your door, the world 
seems pretty fucking irrational - and very obviously monstrous. 


Bring Back the Golden Age! 

Once upon a time, goes this paradigm, everything was 
perfect. God or the Gods reigned in glory, and people held 
a valued, though submissive, place in this Earthly paradise. 

And then something broke it. Maybe that catastrophe 
involved disobedient human beings, rebellious gods or angels, 


an invasion of savage horse nomads, or some other upheaval 
that signaled an end to the Golden Age and the beginning 
of an era of misery. It's an archetypal story that echoes from 
monotheistic scriptures to neopagan lore. We had a good thing 
once, it goes, and we lost it — so it's up to us to win it back! 


Magick or Enlightenment, in this system, comes from your 
connection to that Golden Age, its ideals, its ancient wisdom, 
and the power it once had and will have again. This belief finds 
its way into the Tradition stories about life before Technocratic 
rule... and also into the ideals of New Avalon, which are held by 
certain Technocrats. It provides the foundation for the Akashic 
Arts, which recall a lost sense of human perfection. In a warped 
sort of way, it even shapes a Nephandic point of view, wherein 
Primal Chaos was usurped by Light and so everything must 
be returned to the Dark before the proper order is restored. 


Creation is Innately Divine and Alive 

The world, perhaps even the universe, is a living entity. 
That entity is either part of Divinity or else is Divinity itself. 
Gods and monsters exist, as do pain, horror, and death; that's 
cool, though, because in the end good things come from all 
the suffering. Death sustains life, life gives way to death, and 
the whole thing is a cycle that perpetrates itself in an ultimately 
beneficial way. Magick flows from an understanding of that cycle 
and your place in itas an agent of change. Everything, perhaps, 
has the potential of magick, but most beings never realize it. 


Best recognized as a common perspective among Verbena, 
Dreamspeakers, Euthanatoi, Ecstatics, and other grimly 
affirmative mages, this model stresses pragmatic acceptance 
mixed with wild joy. Certain takes on Kabbalism gravitate in 
this direction too, with Creation as the infinite embodiment 
of ineffable God. Minus the god part, this paradigm has a 
scientific analog in the Gaia hypothesis, which insists that 
Earth is a living, vaguely sentient biomass. Certain Progenitors 
embrace this idea, especially in the 21* century, when that 
biomass appears to be fighting its human infection. Unlike 
the Gods and Monsters paradigm, this belief system essentially 
says that there is a point to the madness if you look at the Big 
Picture and accept that what we perceive as pain and horror 
are merely ripples across a larger spectrum of life. 


Divine Order and Earthly Chaos 


According to the most prevalent belief system on earth these 
days, the material world is an imperfect reflection or creation of 
sublime Celestial Order. This paradigm covers the world's three 
dominant religious creeds (Christianity, Islam, and Judaism) as 
well as many strains of Confucianism, Hinduism, and other 
philosophies. Some believers see a cosmic Adversary opposing the 
Divine Order's God or Gods, and others consider our miserable 
slab of mortal muck to be a corruption of godly Will or abstract 
Platonic ideals. (See Gnosticism in Chapter One, p. 39.) 


Magick, in this perspective, comes from observance of 
and obedience to heavenly perfection, or else from the forces 


Chapter Ten: The Book of Magic 


of adversity that oppose the Will of Heaven. Some believers, 
who may view the gods as archetypes that represent that Order, 
view this heavenly plan as the interplay of impersonal cosmic 
forces that are perfect in their own right; most, however, see 
Earth and its surrounding Realms as a titanic chessboard, with 
mages playing the role of valuable but ultimately expendable 
pieces in the game. 


The obvious creed of monotheistic mages like the Celestial 
Chorus and the AhLi-Batin, this order and chaos model extends 
to polytheists (the Wu Lung), agnostic mystics (many Akashayana), 
and groups that straddle and blur the lines between mono- and 
polytheism (the Bata'a, many Dreamspeakers). Even certain 
professed atheists, most notably among the Technocracy, accept 
a godless version of this idea, which merges the Order/ Chaos 
concept with the Tech Holds All Answers paradigm below. With or 
without divinities, the core of the paradigm is that perfection exists, 
and although Earthly life falls far short of it, such grace remains 
attainable. Ascension, in this case, involves transcending our vale 
of tears and joining, if only as a servant, the grand Celestial Order. 


Everything is Chaos - 
You Only Think it Makes Sense 


The core of existential philosophy, this paradigm insists 
that Creation is indifferent and possibly meaningless until and 
unless we choose to impose meaning on our small part of it. 
Magick comes from wrangling whatever cosmic mysteries or 
principles you believe in and realizing that your belief is the 
thing that gives them power. Ultimately, then, magick comes 
from within. The Universe is an Etch-a-Sketch, and mages learn 
how to twiddle the knobs. At its extreme, this view maintains 
that nothing means anything... and that, perhaps, everything 
exists only in a mage’s head. Who’s to say this view is wrong? 
After all, the Universe might simply be a game played out in 
some mad god’s mind... 


Everything is Data 

It’s all code. That’s the theory, anyway. What we call reality 
is actually a simulation, a Matrix, a holographic projection that 
can be manipulated by anyone who knows the Reality Code. 
Variations on this idea include the concept of a God code that 
allows the Enlightened Elite to find cheats; a code interwoven 
into holy texts like the Bible, Qur’an, or Torah, or in divinatory 
systems like the I Ching or Tarot; a computerized take on the 
Mechanistic Cosmos paradigm; or the theory that everything 
is composed of waves and frequencies that can be adjusted 
with music or other methods. Regardless of the nature of that 
information, the paradigm remains the same: everything is 
data, and smart folks can work with that data. 


For those who embrace this paradigm, the Digital Web 
is the ultimate smoking gun. Composed of living (or at least 
adjustable) data, the Web embodies this belief. The material 
world, of course, is far more complex, with eons’ worth of bugs 
and twists of code. Even so, a reality hacker knows how to scan 
that code, rewrite it, and tweak physical, social, and mental 
realities through a sophisticated understanding of essential 
data and the methods that command it. 


Mage: The Ascension 20" Anniversary Edition 


Everything is an Illusion, 
Prison, or Mistake 


A dour yet prevalent view among mages is that Creation as 
we know it is a big fucking lie. It was created as a prison, a joke, 
or a project by malignant entities (Matrix-style Gnosticism); it’s 
a cosmic accident that only seems significant (a common view 
among Marauders, Virtual Adepts, and many Technocrats); 
or it’s an illusion obscuring a deeper Cosmic Truth that’s 
essentially benevolent or, at worst, indifferent (an idea often 
affiliated with strains of Buddhism, Hinduism, weird science, 
and existential philosophy). 


In this perspective, magick comes from transcending 
the illusion and learning how to work the strings that bind 
up everyone else. Knowledge and understanding provide the 
ultimate Ascension from this painful shadow of Cosmic Truth. 
The flipside, of course, involves making pacts with the powers 
behind the throne. Many Nephandi view their Path this way. 
The entire world is a grotesque joke, goes their reasoning, so 
you might as well enjoy some perks along the way. 


It's All Good - Have Faith! 


This New-Age Gnostic conceit insists that Creation is 
ultimately benevolent. We suffer because we believe we'll suffer; 
if and when we adjust our attitude, the world spills out its 
blessings upon us. Magick comes from refusing to be bound 
by common expectations. Energy is essentially a positive force, 
and a positive attitude can literally do wonders with it. 


Although it’s easy to make fun of such a paradigm, such 
beliefs are remarkably effective in the World of Darkness. There 
really does appear to be a correlation between good fortune and 
an optimistic viewpoint. Maybe it’s simply the defiance involved 
- spitting in the face of hell, as it were. For whatever reason, this 
transcendent Pollyanna lends power to Ecstatics, Dreamspeakers, 
and other mystics (even the occasional technomancer!) who treat 
Creation more like a party than a funeral. 


Might is Right 

The Law of the Jungle rules a dog-eat-dog world. As we’re 
hurled through an indifferent cosmos, nothing matters beyond 
an individual’s ability to impose his Will. The truly superior man 
or woman excels because that person will accept nothing less 
than excellence. Anyone who cannot meet exacting standards 
is essentially agreeing to be fodder for the elite. 


Aruthlessly popular paradigm, Might is Right takes its name 
and ethos from the book of that name by the pseudonymous 
author Ragnar Redbeard. Commonly called “social Darwinism,” 
it actually corrupts Darwin’s assertion that the most adaptable 
organisms survive. Ayn Rand and Anton LaVay cribbed this 
philosophy from a simplified version of Nietzsche’s übermensch 
ideal, and their adherents maintain that perspective through 
business, politics, and popular debate. Under this paradigm, 
truth is a useful illusion, fabricated and manipulated by society 
and those who govern or transcend it. “Right” refers less to a 
moral correctness (morality is for weaker beings!) than to the 
act of seizing your rights through superior might. 


For mages, this paradigm heralds the triumph of the Will, 
rewarding Awakened Ones with a superior state of existence. 
Ascension, therefore, is an individual goal, with social Ascension 
being the ability to get lots of people to accept your dominion. 
Some versions of this paradigm acknowledge implacable gods; 
others forsake any form of godhood other than personal 
perfection. Ultimately, Might is Right challenges a person to 
transcend the herd and achieve excellence at the expense of 
inferior beings. Reality, to this perspective, is just one more 
bitch to be slapped around when necessary. 


One-Way Trip to Oblivion 

A distressingly common belief attached to many of the 
other paradigms is that everything is doomed. Someday, 
probably soon, the whole house of cards will collapse, God 
will call us to account, and the heat-death of the universe 
will wipe away everything we ever valued, accomplished, or 
believed. For religious people, this End Times scenario means 
the extinction of this world and the beginning of a new one... 
preferably one where they're in charge. Among agnostics and 
atheists, nothing fucking matters because it's all dying anyhow. 
All that's important is getting what you can, while you can, and 
enjoying the show before the lights go off for good. 


Every faction has this belief among its ranks. The ticking 
clock that seems to define the World of Darkness reinforces 
a pessimistic view. If you embrace the Reckoning metaplot 
described in Chapters Three, Four, and Five, it's an accurate 
belief - the End Times really are upon us! To these believers, 
magick involves taking whatever a mage can grab, from whatever 
source appears to work, and rattling those metaphysical keys in 
all the doors you can find, hoping to open a few. Time's short, 
after all, so any tactic becomes fair game. 


For obvious reasons, this is the ultimate Nephandic line. 
Tt encourages every sort of excess, from religious extremism to 
Randian selfishness. However, it also inspires the greatest acts 
of heroism. If Creation's on a ticking clock, after all, then the 
greatest heroes may be the ones who can stop time, turn back 
the hands, or change the outcome when everything seems lost. 


Tech Holds All Answers 


Technology is not a modern secular invention; really, it's 
the other way around. The sciences we know of in the modern 
world are descendants of alchemy, sacred geometry, and other 
forms of refined knowledge with repeatable results. Most 
elements of modern science were once thought to be keys to 
God's Creation, given to selected men (and occasionally to 
women) to enact God's plans on Earth. Atheistic rationalism, 
therefore, comes out of inquiries made possible by knowledge 
once thought to come from the gods. 


According to the dominant paradigm in the industrialized 
world, the universe is innately rational and understandable. 
Every question has an answer, and technology provides the tools 
by which we can understand them. Magick is simply science 
that hasn't yet been accepted by the average person and may 
always be too advanced for most folks to understand. Although 
this is the default Technocratic worldview, the Technocracy 


isn't the only faction that embraces it. Most Etherites, Virtual 
Adepts, Children of Knowledge, and even many Hermetic 
mages accept this belief. High Ritual Magick, after all, is just 
another form of technology, even if ritual magicians hate to 
think of it that way. 


These paradigms aren't exclusive, nor are they the only 
systems of beliefamong Awakened folks. Mostofthem cross over 
into one another, mingling End Times theology with Golden 
Age ideals and a Divine Order cosmology behind them both. 
When you decide what a mage believes, whatever she believes, 
you've got a good idea about what her faith, focus, affiliations, 
and goals will be. And considering how vital belief is in this 
magickal world, that's a major - if often underrated - element 
of any Mage chronicle. 


Creating Other Paradigms 


Most belief-philosophies can be modeled offsome variation 
or combination of the entries above. If you want to create a 
new paradigm, or reflect one that doesn't seem to fit those 
entries, remember the following points when you're summing 
up that paradigm: 


e Belief Follows Need: People create and accept new 
belief systems because those beliefs suit their needs. If 
you're a hungry person in a war-torn land, for instance, 
then you need something that helps you understand 
your circumstances, either accepting them as temporary 
(“Things will be better in heaven”) or improving them (“I 
can fight for my right to be free”). In Mage’s history, the 
Masses didn’t accept technology because Men in Black 
beat them up. Folks accepted tech because it improved 
their lives. 


e Worthless Beliefs Get Rejected: By the same token, 
people toss out ideas that get in the way. When Victorian 
ideals met the meat grinder of World War I, those ideals 
gave way to existentialism, nihilism, and postmodernism. 
A paradigm may work for a while, but if it no longer 
gets the job done, folks will latch onto an idea that does. 


e Magickal Paradigms Demand Strength: Mages use 
their paradigms as levers that move the world. A weak 
lever - say, belief that Mickey Mouse is God - will break 
under that kind of stress. As a player, then, avoid facile 
or ridiculous paradigms. Your mage lives and dies by 
his beliefs, so those beliefs - and the people who accept 
them - mustbestrong enough to hold up under pressure. 
Sure, you can argue the fine points of Pastafarianism 
and the exact commandments of the Flying Spaghetti 
Monster, but will they help you survive a civil war? 
Probably not. 


* Evidence Substantiates Belief: Strong paradigms need 
firm foundations. As a result, the people who propagate 
beliefs submit evidence that backs up those beliefs. That's 
why religious people testify about faith and miracles, why 
scientists provide peer review, why philosophers argue 
their contentions. Paradigms without substance quickly 


Chapter Ten: The Book of Magic 521 


. 


TN E 


4 
S 


Dii ha rams 


[à 


ia 
i 
- En 
AS 
ak 


rnc oe 


Mixing Practices 


Although every Mage character needs at least one practice, you're not restricted to only one practice. Most 21*-century 
mages blend two or three traditional practices into a single personal practice. Lee Ann, for example, crosses crazy wisdom 
with a bit of shamanism and martial arts; Jennifer Rollins melds craftwork with witchcraft, and Jinx mixes gutter magick with 
a fair amount of chaos. You can blend up to three of the practices below into a single practice, or even invent your own, 
so long as the practices in question fit a coherent belief system. Sure, a blend of shamanism, hypertech, and alchemy is 
possible... but only if your character believes that such a practice could help him change his world. 


Practice and Coincidence 


The world’s a big place, with lots of cracks in its apparent Consensus. Even so, certain practices tend to be coincidental 
in the 21*-century World of Darkness, whereas others tend to seem vulgar. For an overview of these practices and the 
way they come across throughout the world, see Reality Zones, (pp. 611-617). 


fall apart. Ones with substance endure. And although 
force makes compelling short-term arguments (“Obey 
God or die"), such belief systems crumble when a better 
one inspires revolution. 


If you want to craft paradigms beyond the ones listed 
above, look into real-world philosophies, creeds, and 
metaphysics. The Complete Idiot's Guide to Philosophy or other, 
similar books can help inform and inspire your ideas. You 
don't need a master's degree in comparative religions in order 
to play Mage, of course, but if you want new models of belief, 
you should examine the existing ones first. As always, your 
Storyteller always has final approval over that new system of 
belief. If she says, "No, you can't base your magick practice off of 
Monty Python quotes," then her judgment stands. You might be 
able to change her mind using your knowledge of real-world 
philosophies, but if she says NO, respect that and move on. 


Moral Absolutes or Relativity? 

It’s one of the biggest hot-topic debates among mages, 
Mage players, and even Mage creators: are there absolute moral 
forces in the universe? Is everything morally relative - that is, do 
morals and ethics depend on who, where, and when you are? 
Or are there cosmic moral forces that make certain things 
always right or wrong? 


We can’t answer that question for you. 


Certain mages - especially Choristers, Templars, and other 
devoutly religious folks - assert absolute moral forces even when 
their own actions become morally relative. Others aren’t so 
sure about that, or they claim that everything - including time, 
space, and morality - is relative. In the end, the answer to 
such questions is up to the Storyteller behind each individual 
chronicle... which, by extension, does leave the entire issue 
relative. Your characters might exist in a dualistic cosmos, a 
moral void, or a righteous universe in which the Creator will 
eventually set everything to rights. Mage leaves the ultimate 
answer - if one even exists - up to you. 


572 Mage: The Ascension 20" Anniversary Edition 


Practice: 
The Shape of Focus 


Practice means "to make" or "to do." And so, a mage - 
guided by her beliefs - does her magick through a practice. As 
the name suggests, a practice is also practical, turning abstract 
ideas into useful activities. 


When your character makes things happen, she employs 
a practice that serves her needs and beliefs. One mage might 
petition her gods, whereas another dons her business suit, 
applies subtle cosmetics, and goes off to work her Will at the 
shareholders’ meeting. In game terms, every mage has a practice; 
instoryterms, thatpractice comes from thatcharacter's culture, 
beliefs, and circumstances. 


An appropriate practice can also spell the difference between 
coincidental magickand vulgar magick. Thatsaid, Mage characters 
don't choose their practices based on in-game benefits. In Mage, 
as in real life, people often choose to believe inconvenient things 
andfollowinconvenientpractices. Sure, that High Ritual magician 
knows he's an anachronism in the postmodern world, channeling 
his Will through cumbersome rituals and theatrical instruments. 
Itd be quicker and easier for him to simply use a computer like 
everybody else. For him, though, his practice is a matter of pride. 
He'snotlikeeverybodyelse, so his beliefs, practices, and instruments 
set him apart, defining him as extraordinary even when they seem 
somewhat inconvenient. 


Below, we've presented a range of common practices within 
Mage's world. Each entry is exceedingly generalized, encompassing 
dozens - sometimes hundreds - of loosely related disciplines, 
different in many specifics though linked by several common 
elements and intentions. Each one, though, offers an overview of 
a practice that you can choose for your character. If you like (and 
with theStoryteller's okay), you mightcreate your own practice to 
suit your character. Just remember: every practice meets a need. 
People craft new arts, sciences, and religions when the old ones 
don't accomplish the things they needed to accomplish. If and 
when you come up with something new, ask yourself this: how 
does this practice meet my character's needs, beyond the ability to cast 
Effects? How does it turn his beliefs into actions? And what sorts of 
instruments aim those actions toward a desirable goal? 


In the spirit of such activities, each of the following entries 
features a few Associated Paradigms, Associated Abilities, and 
Common Instruments. This way, you've got some guidelines 
for the things your mage knows, does, and uses in order to 
pursue her practice of choice. Those Abilities can be found in 
Chapter Six, and the instruments are detailed in the section 
after this one. 


Alchemy 

From turning base materials into decaying messes and then 
moving them upward toward eventual perfection, the ancient 
art of alchemy has provided the basis for modern chemistry. 
Wrapped in elaborate codes, symbols, and metaphors that 
still remain open to interpretation, this Art depends upon the 
idea of transformation from lower to higher states of being. 
The common perception of the Art rests upon its old claim 
of turning lead into gold; in reality, though, that claim is both 
metaphor and a way of scamming money to fund alchemical 
pursuits. Sure, a skilled alchemist might indeed use Matter 
magick to change lead into gold; on a deeper level, however, 
the lead is the alchemist and the gold represents self-perfection. 


Although its common name comes from an Arabic practice, 
alchemy has several different forms: the Taoist Arts of sublime 
energies, the medieval European "lead into gold" vocation, the 
Islamic refinement-ofself through the keys left by Allah in the 
hands of wise men, the roots of those Arts in Classical Greece 
and Egypt, the early forms of modern chemistry, the complex 
pharmacopeia of South American mystics, the postmodern 
psychotropic experiments of transhumanist philosopher- 
chemists, and probably a few more forms as well. A 21*-century 
alchemist might study several of these disciplines, formulating 
new variations on ancient principles. Alchemy, after all, focuses 
on learning-based perfection. The practitioner's mind and body 
transform themselves through practicing the Art. 


Asidefrom its chemicalapplications (poisons, psychoactives, 
explosives, and so forth), alchemy isn't really a fighter's Art. Its 
techniques demand patience, time, and a dedicated workspace. 
As a result, Ascension War alchemists tend to craft Wonders 
and compounds that come in handy when things get tense. 
And because it's not really difficult to turn lead into gold if you 
know what you're doing, such mages tend to be quite rich... 
with all the resources that wealth implies. 


In all its forms, alchemy demands discipline. An alchemist 
studies principles, experiments with materials, deciphers 
codes, puzzles over symbols, works in his lab, creates useful 
goodies, and constantly challenges and refines himself. For 
him, the practical applications of alchemy - drugs, acids, and 
other chemical compounds; quick wits; foreign languages; and 
other techniques of transformation - take a back seat to the 
self-perfection at the core of this venerable Art. 


Associated Paradigms: A Mechanistic Cosmos; Bring Back 
the Golden Age; Creation's Divine and Alive; Divine Order 
and Earthly Chaos; Everything is Data; Might is Right; Tech 
Holds All Answers 


Associated Abilities: Art, Crafts, Cryptography, Enigmas, 
Esoterica, Medicine, Pharmacopeia, Science (chemistry) 


Common Instruments: Books, brews and potions, designs, 
devices, drugs, formulas, laboratories 


The Art of Desire/ Hypereconomics 

Known in the Renaissance as Ars Cupiditae, the Art of 
Desire focuses upon achieving your desires through finding out 
whatother people desire and then using that knowledge to enact 
your Will. Like alchemy (and most other forms of magick, art, 
and science), this discipline involves plenty of self-perfection: 
athletic exercise, meditation, mental gymnastics, self-reflection, 
etiquette, and other social graces. Fashionable clothes, subtle yet 
influential cosmetics, poise and grace, martial arts, seduction, 
intimidation, and the trappings of wealth and refinement 
provide essential tools for this practice. Although it's most 
readily associated with the Syndicate and its original form as 
the High Guild, the Art of Desire has adherents throughout 
the mortal and Awakened worlds. 


Essentially, Ars Cupiditae converts desire to reality. What 
you want, you make happen. A devotee nurtures her desires and 
the desires of other people, then uses them to advance her 
agenda for Reality as a whole. An Art of value, this practice 
draws connections between people and places, reads emotions 
and influences thoughts, manipulates the physical and mental 
states of both the mage and her subjects, and directs probability 
and material toward a greater goal. As a result, this Art favors 
the Spheres of Correspondence, Entropy, Life, Matter, Mind, 
and Prime, using them as parts of a useful, interlocking whole. 


An eminently cultured practice, Ars Cupiditae draws upon 
a mixture of Asian, European, and Middle Eastern social and 
philosophical technologies. A practitioner of Desire rarely comes 
across asa mage atall - she’s more Nikita than Hermione. Although 
certain Ecstatics and Hermetic wizards favor this approach, and 
modern Ngoma and Taftani use itto command urban commerce 
and culture, a devotee of this Art employs social influence, 
economic wizardry, and sheer personal excellence in order to 
get what she wants. Such mages rarely use violence themselves, 
leaving the dirty work to paid enforcers. Ifand when a practitioner 
needs to get her hands messy, though, her athletic prowess and 
advanced technology prove that she’s no corner-office pushover. 


A related practice, hypereconomics, refines the Art of 
Desire into social and global control. By exploring and exploiting 
desires and values within a given group, a hypereconomist can 
sense the Primal Energies of wantand need within that group and 
then turn them to her advantage. An arcane practice understood 
mostly by Syndicate reps and the occasional Virtual Adept, 
hypereconomics provides an excellentvehicle for Entropy, Mind, 
and Prime Effects, channeled through social and mathematical 
activities so subtle that few people even recognize that their lives 
are being altered. Almost always coincidental (gross violations 
of Consensus Reality are considered cheap), hypereconomics 
remains a closely guarded secret in the 21*-century reality wars. 


Associated Paradigms: A Mechanistic Cosmos; Bring Back 
the Golden Age; Divine Order and Earthly Chaos; Everything 
is Chaos; Everything is Data; Everything's an Illusion, Prison, 
or Mistake; Might is Right; One-Way Trip to Oblivion; Tech 
Holds All Answers 


Chapter Ten: The Book of Magic — 573 


| 
| 
d 


Ne No 7^: 


saf 


— 


Left- and Righi-Hand Paths 


Originally named by Europeans trying to differentiate between separate approaches to Tantric practices, the terms Left- 
Hand Path and Right-Hand Path have come to reflect an outlaw approach to mysticism and a reverent approach to it, 
respectively. Supposedly, Left-Hand mystics favor sensuality, hedonism, intoxication, and other forms of disreputable 
bliss, whereas Right-Hand adherents prefer asceticism, reverence, denial, and other forms of disciplined devotion. 


In truth, mystic practices (especially Tantra) are more complex than that simplified (and westernized) division between 


so-called bad and good behaviors. Even so, the distinction between Left- and Right-Hand approaches crops up a lot 
when people talk about crazy wisdom, witchcraft, chaos magick, and other practices that include socially questionable 
activities alongside socially approved ones. 


Certainly, some activities are more destructive than others, and magick does have consequences, like Resonance, that 
reach further than the moment of that act. Still, the division of Left- and Right-Hand magick tends to drop a Christianized 
gloss on practices that might be far older than Christianity and lack its simplistic bad/ good moral polarity. Some modern 
mages employ that term as shorthand for their approach, but others avoid its easy answers to complicated questions. 


Associated Abilities: Academics (culture, philosophy, 
psychology), Athletics, Awareness, Carousing, Etiquette, 
Expression, Finance, Intimidation, Leadership, Martial Arts, 
Media, Politics, Seduction, Subterfuge 


Common Instruments: Cards and dice, cosmetics, (very 
refined) dance and gestures, eye contact, fashion, gadgets, mass 
media, money and wealth, sex, social domination, vehicles, 
voice, weapons 


Chaos Magick 


It’s not what you think it is. Although the term “chaos 
magic” tends to be associated with demons and evil, occultists 
understand chaos magick as a postmodern and often 
improvisational Art. Like other mystic practices, it emphasizes 
knowledge, reflection, and other forms of self-improvement. 
This revolutionary inversion of traditional mystic disciplines, 
however, depends upon personal intuition and interpretation; 
individual freedom; a deliberately iconoclastic approach; and an 
often subversive use of pop-culture symbols, social behaviors, 
and improvised designs. 


Chaos magick spits in the face of established dogma. Often 
regarded by outsiders as a Left-Hand Path, it's a sex, drugs, and 
rock-n-roll sort of practice, raising and directing personal energy 
(that is, Quintessence) through extreme experiences. Obviously, 
this sort of thing appeals to Cultists of Ecstasy, whose more 
formal practices - Tantra, vision questing, ordeals, and crazy 
wisdom (see below) - have been integrated into the chaos- 
magick potpourri. Even that diverse culture, however, is too 
confining for many chaos practitioners, whose embrace of the 
Chaosphere - the whirling fractal of absolute existence - resists 
confinement in any form. 


Playful yet serious, each chaos-magick practice draws 
from the individual practitioner's experiences and desires. 
Depending upon the individual practitioner, it can integrate 
formalized ritual or involve spontaneous improvisation... or 
both, or neither. Flexibility and personal investment are innate 
elements of the practice as a whole, often connected to psychic 
thought forms called egregores: concepts given reality through 
extensive investment of psychic energy. (See the Instruments 


574 . Mage: The Ascension 20" Anniversary Edition 


entry for Thought Forms, pp. 598-599.) Some folks use toys 
and Tarotcards, whereas others drawsigils, craft graphic novels, 
run raves, stage flash mobs, and concoct elaborate pranks on 
society at large. Eris, Bob, the Flying Spaghetti Monster... these 
deities supplant the classic divinities in a chaotic pantheon 
whose figureheads are less concerned with worship than with 
inversion. Each mage, then, is a vortex of potential whose Will 
spins energy into being. And if this sounds too abstract to be 
useful, then you're thinking about it too hard. 


Associated Paradigms: A Mechanistic Cosmos; A World 
of Gods and Monsters; Creation's Divine and Alive; Divine 
Order and Earthly Chaos; Everything is Chaos; Everything's 
an Illusion, Prison, or Mistake; Might is Right; One-Way Trip 
to Oblivion 


Associated Abilities: Art, Awareness, Carousing, 
Computer, Esoterica, Expression, Lucid Dreaming, Meditation, 
Pharmacopeia, Streetwise, Technology 


Common Instruments: Whatever works, so long as none 
of it becomes too stable or confining. 


Craftwork 


There are reasons that Hephaestus is a metalsmith, Jesus 
is a carpenter, and Ogun is said to be the iron “who always eats 
first.” It’s no accident that Freemasons remain one of the most 
respected yet feared societies around - a society responsible, in 
ways, for the foundation of the United States. Many myths peg 
humanity's origins to deities who fashioned us out of clay and 
then breathed life into their creations. That's because craftwork 
- the Art of making miracles out of raw materials - is among 
the first metaphysical practices. 


Craftwork's mystique has been largely diminished in 
the industrial world... so much so that it's often farmed out 
to sweatshop labor or performed by machines (which hold 
their own ominous metaphysical connotations - witness 
the Terminator and Matrix sagas). Even so, there's something 
magical about that Geek Squad specialist who can fix your 
errant computer, the tattooed malcontent repairing your 
car, or that friend who forges swords or crafts costumes for 
the SCA. The heart of craftwork comes from an apparently 


supernatural expertise with materials and tools - the ability to take bits of rock or skin or tree and then make lovely, useful 
objects from them. 


Many mystics bridle atthe thought of crediting craftsmanship as a magical practice. After all, the Technocracy began as a bunch 
of disgruntled Craftmasons who shaped the machines that ended the High Mythic Age, so why should such people be considered 
mages? And yet, that prejudice ignores the legendary ties between craftwork and the mystic Arts: the legacies of Solomon's temple 
and the masons who built it, of the temples whose sacred geometries invited gods to dwell within them, the shapers of iron, gold, 

and stone who brought humanity out of caves and into cities of their own 
design. Even the Industrial Era has a sense of magick - the sleek glare of 
glass towers, the hellish factory glamour, the enchanting pixel dance 
that comes from computers, T Vs, and the Internet... all of which 
demand craftwork in their creation, maintenance, and eventual 
dismantling into recycled components. That Art might be 
taken for granted these days, but it's still magickal to those 

who understand it. 


As a practice, craftsmanship combines the physical 
and mental skills involved in various crafts (carpentry, 
metalsmithing, glasswork, plastics, leatherworking, and 
so forth), then combines them with Pattern Arts in order 
to make those materials better than they'd been before. 
Y Matter presents the obvious Sphere for such disciplines, 

but Forces (to command fire, air, electricity, 

gravity, and the like), Prime (to energize and 

strengthen those creations), and often Life (to 

work living or organic tissue) and Entropy (to 

spot, add, or banish flaws) are more-or-less 

essential too. Old-school crafters employ 

Spirit to Awaken or placate the spirits 

within the materials - an important 

process in ancient craftwork, which 

depended upon the goodwill of gods 

and spirits in order to succeed. And 

although the rituals of creation 

demand time, materials, and 

expertise, the results - from glass 

vessels to armored tanks - can last | 

forcenturies... or even, as with the l 
pyramids, millennia. 


A typical crafter-mage seems 
rough around the edges compared 
to her more academic peers. Often 
physically strong and personally 

abrupt, she can be perceived as 
boorish and dull. That’s a common 
but mistaken view. In her chosen craft, 
this mage is every bit as sharp and 
knowledgeable as her book-bound 
contemporaries.. most of whom 
would be lost without her expertise. And 
although common prejudices view such 
mages as members of the Technocracy 
(not without some truth), a crafter 
is just as likely to be a stonesmith 
Verbena, an ironworking Ngoma, 
an artisan Hermetic, or a VA 
computer tech. The Taftàni 
weavers earned that name from 


Chapler Ten: The Book of Magic 575 


their physical skills as well as their mystical ones, and the Ngoma 
preserve the practical skills as well as the magical rites from 
their Egyptian/ Nubian origins. Even Akashayana employ craft 
Arts in their martial practices - see the film The Man With the 
Iron Fists for several examples. Though often forgotten in the 
catalogs of magic, craftwork is as old as humanity yet as fresh 
as the laptop at your fingertips. 


Associated Paradigms: A Mechanistic Cosmos; A World 
of Gods and Monsters; Bring Back the Golden Age; Creation's 
Divine and Alive; Divine Order and Earthly Chaos; Everything’s 
an Illusion, Prison, or Mistake; It’s All Good - Have Faith; 
Might is Right; Tech Holds All Answers 


Associated Abilities: Academics, Arts, Computers, 
Crafts, Energy Weapons, Esoterica (sacred geometry, quantum 
mathematics, elemental pacts, stone and metal lore), Hypertech, 
Research, Science, Technology 


Common Instruments: Artwork, blood, books, computers 
and IT gear, devices and machines, elements, gadgets, household 
and crafting tools, laboratories and workshops, symbols, 
weapons (hammers, blades, sickles, guns, etc.) 


Crazy Wisdom 

A mage who gets a little bit out of her head when performing 
magick might use what’s often called the crazy wisdom practice: 
deliberately irrational activities that supposedly grant wisdom by 
shattering established concepts of what is and is not possible and real. 


Another sex, drugs, and rock-n-roll approach to magick, 
crazy wisdom often involves psychoactive entheogens, trance- 
inducing music, vision quests, risky ordeals, sexual excess, 
gender inversions, social misrule, mass ecstatic rituals, and 
solitary isolation in which the practitioner turns her own 
personal reality inside out and then ponders what that means. 
Although it’s technically undisciplined by the standards of more 
rigid forms of magick, such behavior provides a potent tool for 
enlightenment... assuming it doesn’t kill you first! 


Although its obvious adherents come from the Cult of 
Ecstasy, crazy wisdom has a long and respected history as part 
of shamanism, voodoo, witchcraft, and even certain High Ritual 
practices. The Order of Hermes has its own variation - the 
Antinomian Praxis - in which a mage smashes taboos, violates 
her own standards, and breaks through constraints to find 
what lies beyond them. Drawing strength from its obvious 
contradictions, crazy wisdom is dangerous, disruptive, often 
scary, and potentially lethal. That's kind of the point, though 
danger isn’t always involved. Mystic contraries and genderqueers, 
who deliberately invert social expectations about identity and 
gender, practice a form of crazy wisdom on a social scale, 
fucking with people's preconceptions in order to show greater 
possibilities. This is the Trickster's Path, breaking on through 
like Jim Morrison in a mosh pit with Patti Smith, Br'er Rabbit, 
the Cat in the Hat, and several buckets of paint. 

Associated Paradigms: A World of Gods and Monsters; 
Creation's Divine and Alive; Divine Order and Earthly Chaos; 


Everything is Chaos; Everything'san Illusion, Prison, or Mistake; 
It’s All Good - Have Faith; One-Way Trip to Oblivion 


576 . Mage: The Ascension 20" Anniversary Edition 


Associated Abilities: Art, Athletics, Carousing, Esoterica, 
Lucid Dreaming, Meditation, Pharmacopeia, Survival 


Common Instruments: Blood and body fluids, bones 
and remains, brain/ computer interface, dance, drugs, music, 
ordeals, sex and sensuality, social domination, thought forms, 
toys, tricks and illusions, voice 


Cybernetics 

When organic machines get wedded to mechanical 
machines, the synergy called cybernetics raises the human animal 
to a whole new level. On a broader plane, cybernetics reaches 
beyond mere flesh and machine to embrace the technologies of 
communication, language, electrical impulses, complex systems, 
and thought itself. Drawn from a Greek phrase meaning "to 
steer or govern," cybernetic practices employ complex interactive 
systems - computers, electronics, prosthetics, mathematical 
formulae, linguistics, philosophy, even social dynamics - to 
extend the practitioner's control... first over his own reality, 
and then over the reality of other systems and entities. 


Essentially, the cybernetic practice views Creation as a vast 
machine whose systems can be understood and manipulated 
with sufficient dedication. For many adherents - like the 
members of Iteration X - that dedication includes merging 
their bodies with mechanical components. Other practitioners, 
though, use cybernetics as a theoretical construct - a model 
through which calculations, psychology, symbols, and external 
devices and machines (as opposed to implanted ones) can 
bend probability (through Entropy), change minds (the Mind 
Sphere), transform materials (Life and Matter), channel energies 
(Forces and Prime), and redefine temporal physics... or, in plain 
English, reroute Time. 


Despite the dated overuse of "cyber" as an adjective, 
cybernetics remains a bleeding-edge discipline. Rooted in 
Chinese, Greek, and Arab technologies, this discipline 
blossomed during the Industrial Revolution and hasn’t stopped 
blooming yet. In the 21* century, whole nations are composed 
of cyborgs - smart-phone-using, video-watching, TV-nurtured, 
socially networked machine-people whose relationships and 
realities are defined by the 24/7 interface of our Information Era. 
And although the science-fiction landscape of depersonalized 
drones looks nothing like the world as we know it now, 
every element of life in our new millennium depends upon 
a complex interplay of cybernetic forces that very few people 
truly understand... and that even fewer - aside from certain 
technomancers - can control. 


Associated Paradigms: A Mechanistic Cosmos; Everything 
is Data; Everything’s an Illusion, Prison, or Mistake; Might is 
Right; One-Way Trip to Oblivion; Tech Holds All Answers 


Associated Abilities: Academics, Biotech, Computer, 
Crafts, Energy Weapons, Hypertech, Media, Politics, Science, 
Technology 


Common Instruments: Books, brain/ computer interface, 
computers and IT gear, devices and machines, gadgets, 
inventions, laboratories, languages, mass media, nanotech, 
numbers and numerology, weapons, writing and inscriptions 


Dominion 


Social domination might just be the oldest form of 
magick. At its most basic levels, this practice directs animal 
instincts and human interactions toward the will (and Will) 
of the dominant party. Although other practices - notably Ars 
Cupiditae, shamanism, and High Ritual Magick - draw upon 
these techniques of domination, a raw assertion of command 
is the foundation of capital-A Authority... most notably among 
the New World Order. 


Rarely considered "magick" in the usual sense, the 
dominion practice employs inner discipline, social control, 
a cultivated understanding of behavior and governance, 
significant words and symbols, the trappings of power and 
authority, and a host of verbal and physical tricks that keep the 
practitioner on top of a given situation. At its lowest form, it's 
the art of the abuser, con-man, and pick-up artist. Its techniques 
come into play through office and sexual politics and often 
form part of any strong parent’s arsenal. On a metaphysical 
level, dominion taps into the primal need for leadership and 
parenting, then directs that need with a conscious eye toward 
overwhelming control. Through that control, in turn, you 
command Reality because you believe you do, and you make 
other folks believe you do as well. 


A serious practitioner of dominion (that is, a mage) goes 
beyond crude intimidation, studying the deeper applications 
of social domination and self-perfection. Like a devotee of 
desire, he learns how to maximize his personal strengths and 
minimize his social flaws while taking full advantage of another 
party's weaknesses and appealing to their need to be protected 
and led. Like Ars Cupiditae concentrates upon desire, the 
discipline of dominion concentrates upon command. The 
techniques can seem rather arcane, especially when they’re 
combined with religious and/ or philosophical beliefs; it’s 
through technology, however, that dominion finds its greatest 
influence. Queen Victoria was a master of this Art... and though 
she used technological instruments to get her point across, she 
exerted such a charismatic mystique that we still use her name 
to define the age she ruled. 


Skilled dominion practitioners employ eye contact, body 
language, vocal tactics, peer pressure, social appeal, and resonant 
symbols (uniforms, weapons, parental behavior, religious 
iconography) in order to cow their herd. From there, these 
alphas enact their Will in both a mundane and Awakened 
sense. Lots of mages use social techniques, but a dominion 
master takes them to a metaphysical extent, wresting control 
of Reality itself through mass domination - an Art of Kings 
that has shaped past history and continues to do so today. 


Associated Paradigms: A Mechanistic Cosmos; A World 
of Gods and Monsters; Bring Back the Golden Age; Divine 
Order and Earthly Chaos; Everything is Chaos; Might is Right; 
One-Way Trip to Oblivion; Tech Holds All Answers 


Associated Abilities: Academics (history, psychology), Art, 
Belief Systems, Empathy, Expression, Intimidation, Leadership, 
Media, Politics, Seduction, Technology 


Common Instruments: Art, brain/ computer interface, 
eye contact, fashion, group rites, languages, mass media, 
music, social domination, symbols, thought forms, tricks and 
illusions, voice 


Faith 


Through faith, all things are possible. This saying underscores 
the essence of what might be the most common mystic practice 
in the world: devotion to a higher source. Drawn from the Latin 
word fides - “loyalty, trust, belief” - faith provides the foundation 
for many other practices, yet it stands as a practice in its own 
right. For although witches, shamans, Voudoun practitioners, 
and even scientists might be faithful to their higher power, 
faith itself provides comfort and power for those who believe. 


Often regarded as the core of overtly religious sects like 
the Celestial Chorus and AhLi-Batin, faith can inspire and 
energize any mage. Even the demonic Nephandi maintain 
faith in their horrific Absolute or the Infernal entities they 
adore. Faith, you see, provides the believer with stability and 
purpose. And although magick is often seen as an egotistical 
practice, faith ideally removes the ego in favor of that greater 
Source. The faithful mage says “THY Will be done,” then acts 
as an instrument for that Divine Will. 


For a mage of faith, the actions she takes and the Arts she 
pursues all represent the ideals of her higher power. In most 
cases, those ideals come through a religion - a binding that 
unites Divinity with the people of the faith. Not all faithful 
people, though, are religious; strictly speaking, religion is a 
social institution, whereas faith is a personal connection. Even 
science - often seen these days as an enemy of faith - can be 
a devotional practice. The foundations of modern science, 
historically, were laid by men and women of faith who used 
their discoveries to delve into, and then to reveal, the glories 


of their God. 


A faithful magus follows the tenets of her creed, maintains 
contact with her source through prayer, and acts - as often 
as possible - as an emissary of her creed's ideals. "Keeping 
the faith" means pursuing virtues that supposedly please the 
higher power, and although the particulars depend upon the 
specific creed (a Franciscan Catholic, a Shi'a devotee, and an 
Odinist spá-kona all have very different ideas about virtue!), the 
mage's adherence to that creed is essential. "Faith" does, after 
all, mean loyalty. 


Associated Paradigms: A World of Gods and Monsters; 
Bring Back the Golden Age; Creation's Divine and Alive; 
Divine Order and Earthly Chaos; Everything's an Illusion, 
Prison, or Mistake; It's All Good - Have Faith! 


Associated Abilities: Academics (tenets of faith), 
Awareness, Belief Systems, Cosmology, Empathy, Enigmas, 
Esoterica, Expression, Medicine 


Common Instruments: Blessings and curses, books 
(scriptures), cups and vessels, energy, food and drink, group 
rites, music, offerings and sacrifice, ordeals and exertions, 
prayers and invocations, sacred iconography, symbols, thought 
forms, voice, writings and inscriptions 


Chapter Ten: The Book of Magic 577 


INS AA 


ip. San 
AZ 


Zo 


AAN 
RX) 
FN N 
f X 


NE ZT 


Gutter Magick 


The most practical magick practice is the one that uses 
whatever you’ve got to work with. Sure, wizards and cyborgs 
and Enlightened tycoons can afford all the best ritual gear 
around. What happens, though, when you're more or less 
broke? Homeless, maybe? Living in a squat or stuck on the 
street or getting by as part of the working poor? Well then, you 
use gutter magick, the craft of making do. 


Composed of odds and ends with symbolic connotations, 
gutter magick features coins, cards, toys, scraps, bottles, cans, 
nails, junk, graffiti, and things crafted out of the cast-offs 
of consumer society. Dead TVs, old magazines, cardboard 
boxes, gnawed chicken bones, sacrificed rats and alley cats, 
old clothes repurposed and restyled with feral urban flair... 
such instruments direct the Will of the truly destitute. On the 
next rung up the socioeconomic ladder, lower-class mages use 
cheap tricks, cheesy clothes, New Age books, action figures, 
and other tokens of postmodern mall-magic. When invested 
with Awakened intentions, these otherwise useless trinkets 
provide focus for orphans, Hollowers, and other mystics with 
more ambition than resources. 


As with many other mystic practices, art forms a potent 
force in gutter magick. Hip-hop culture, Gothic rock, the 
various flavors of heavy metal, the blues, neotribal, techno- 
industrial, and even country/ western music styles provide 
soundtracks for the mystic side of the urban scene. Inside the 
clubs, dancing and drugs create hypnotic atmospheres in which 
it often seems like anything could happen. A paranormal survival 
tactic, gutter magick skulks in the shadows of the alley between 
respectability and forbidden Arts. Gutter magick proves that 
you don’t need high wizardry and ancient tomes in order to get 
attention (if not necessarily respect) from the spirit world. In 
its darker elements, such magick employs guns, blades, cheap 
sex and cheaper booze, crimes and punishments, madness and 
desperation. Though not exactly new in form, it’s a common 
practice in the new millennium. 


Associated Paradigms: A World of Gods and Monsters; 
Creation’s Divine and Alive; Divine Order and Earthly Chaos; 
Everything is Chaos; Everything’s an Illusion, Prison, or 
Mistake; It’s All Good - Have Faith; Might is Right; One-Way 
Trip to Oblivion 


Associated Abilities: Animal Kinship (rats, cats, crows, 
etc.), Area Knowledge, Art, Crafts, Expression, Firearms, 
Intimidation, Pharmacopeia, Streetwise, Survival (urban), 
Technology 


Common Instruments: Artwork, blood and fluids, bones 
and remains, cards and dice, dance, drugs and poisons, eye 
contact, fashion, herbs and plants, household tools, music, 
offerings and sacrifice, sex, social domination, symbols, thought 
forms, toys, tricks and illusions, weapons, vehicles 


High Ritual Magick 


To achieve excellence, one must have perfection. To work 
one’s Will, one must have the discipline to master that Will 
and then direct it with utmost confidence. In an outsider’s 


Mage: The Ascension 20" Anniversary Edition 


perspective, the rigorous devotees of High Ritual Magick (all 
capitalized) are a pretentious pack of OCD pricks. For those 
devotees, however, the truth is plain: you must be strong, 
courageous, disciplined, and wise to unlock Creation’s power. 
High Ritual Magick demands those qualities. 


In High Ritual Magick, everything has significance: the 
alignment of planets, the tone of words, the calculations 
necessary to discover the correct number of times to repeat 
certain phrases, the formalities of address, and the measure 
or angle of materials aligned just so for maximum effect. That 
precision has a dual purpose: in one regard, the relationship of 
those many elements is crucial for success. In the other regard, 
the precision tests and challenges the magician, forcing him to 
overcome his flaws and become the superior person whom such 
intricacies demand. This practice is both an Art and a Science 
whose expertise has withstood the tests of time. You cannot 
be weak or sloppy or stupid, goes the reasoning, if you wish to 
work your Will upon Creation. Only the smartest, the bravest, 
the most refined people are capable of True High Magick, 
and so the rituals and their elaborate preparations discourage 
everyone who lacks the excellence to succeed. 


(This mindset also explains the condescending attitude for 
which High Ritual Magicians are so infamous. Although they 
don’t all feel this way, many such wizards believe that other 
practitioners have not earned the right to work True Magick. 
Lesser mages, to them, are like drunken kids speeding down 
dark mountain roads with Daddy’s car, an expired learner’s 
permit, and the wizard strapped in the back seat, unable to 
avoid the coming crash.) 


Though often associated with medieval Europe, High Ritual 
Magick has many forms, all of them refined by civilized urban 
cultures. China’s ritual magick boasts Confucian complexity, 
and rites from Egypt and Mesopotamia provide the centerpiece 
for the Western occult traditions of Greece, Rome, Persia, Israel, 
and Arabia. Nubia’s ritual Arts remain a closely guarded secret, 
held by the Ngoma as a timeless inheritance. Tibet, India, and 
Japan all have sublime ritual practices, whereas North American 
occultism blends Old World sophistication with New World 
eclecticism. The rites of South and Central America have largely 
been lost, thanks to Spanish conquerors... and yet, in secret 
corners of Mexico, Brazil, Chile, Guatemala, and Peru, sects 
preserve those Aztec, Maya, and Incan practices. 


In all forms, High Ritual Magick demands preparation, 
discipline, and the finest materials a magician can acquire. Such 
practices connect the mage with greater powers - gods, angels, 
demons, elementals, and the faceless forces of the universe - 
and those powers demand respect. The wizard, too, must earn 
respect; such powers do not answer to fools. In practical terms, 
High Ritual Magick is slow and precise. The wizard might call 
upon the results of his prior work in the heat of the moment, 
but those results - enchanted wands, crafted staves, precious 
amulets, mystic scrolls, imprisoned demons, angelic favors, 
priceless statues, carved jade pendants, Otherworldly gates, 
fine robes, imposing tomes - must be prepared well in advance. 


Despite all those trappings, an accomplished Ritual Magus 
understands that it is his Will that commands those elements. He 


does not hope or beg - he commands. Spirits can be bargained 
with, dragons might be conjured, God Himself might slip the 
mage a favor, but in the end all of those parties respect the 
High Magus because, ultimately, he has shaped himself into the 
true instrument of Will. 


Associated Paradigms: A Mechanistic Cosmos; A World 
of Gods and Monsters; Bring Back the Golden Age; Divine 
Order and Earthly Chaos; Everything is Data; Everything's 
an Illusion, Prison, or Mistake; Might is Right; Tech Holds 
All Answers 


Associated Abilities: Academics, Belief Systems, 
Cosmology, Crafts, Expression, Esoterica, Investigation, 
Leadership, Meditation, Occult, Research 


Common Instruments: Books, celestial alignments, circles 
and designs, computers (for modern wizards), cups and vessels, 
elements, eye contact, fashion, gems, gestures, languages (Latin, 
Sanskrit, Mandarin, Greek, etc.), meditation, numbers and 
numerology, offerings and sacrifices, prayer and invocations, 
social domination, symbols, thought forms, True Names, wands 
andstaves, weapons (swords and knives), writing and inscriptions 


Hypertech 

A catch-all term for the hundreds of methods used to unite 
advanced technology with visionary ideas, hypertech represents 
a dynamic approach to science. Despite the rumblings of 
disgruntled old-school mystics, this approach has transformed 
the world we live in. Computers, obviously, reflect the most 
obvious aspects of this Art and Science, but the brute force of 
metallurgy, the explosive powers of internal combustion, the 
harnessed lightning of electronic technologies, and the heady 
physics behind it all drive hypertech and humanity to new and 
exciting frontiers. "Oh, THAT'S not magick," sniff the critics... 
but actually, it is. It’s not Hermetic wizardry, after all, that gave 
us cars, phones, computers, and electronic power... all those 
things, and more, began as hypertech. 


The hypertech practice reflects the genius of the human 
condition - that restless striving to perfect and understand. 
In earlier forms (like those employed by the Order of Reason), 
such “godless” Arts were reflections of deep reverence. Men and 
women of God sought the keys to His Creations, seeing divine 
glory in every twig or flower. The technologies of China, Greece, 
and Persia reflected mystic aspirations too. It’s no accident that 
so many scientific names come from old gods and Classical 
mythologies, and although modern science emphasizes proof 
over faith, there’s still plenty of room for wonder in this world. 


At the core of this practice - in its many applications, from 
cloning and biotech to astrophysics, mechanical engineering, 
chemistry, theoretical physics, and far more - hypertech is 
about potential... finding it, recognizing it, expanding upon 
it to create something even better than what we had before. A 
scientist understands that she doesn’t have all the answers and 
so constantly seeks them out. She’ll spend endless hours in the 
lab or reading journals - not so that she can turn humanity 
into drones, but so that she can bring something better into 
being. Despite its apparent sterility, hypertech retains a visionary 
optimism. 


Although thescientist might believe in some Creator, she's 
not shackled to blind faith. Instead, she employs rigorous tests, 
complicated data, consistent verification, and an Art founded 
not on chance or outside whims but upon tested principles 
and concrete achievements. She's the Progenitor, the Adept, 
the technomancer whose tools reflect the precision of her Arts. 
Unlike her deluded counterparts who practice their weird 
science, this visionary employs solid protocols for dependable 
results. In a way, she’s the High Ritual Magus of our age, making 
wonders with vigorous Science. 


(For more about the range of hypertech potential, see the 
Science Trait and the SCIENCE!!! sidebar in Chapter Six.) 


Associated Paradigms: A Mechanistic Cosmos; A World 
of Gods and Monsters; Divine Order and Earthly Chaos; 
Everything is Chaos; Everything is Data; Might is Right; Tech 
Holds All Answers 

Associated Abilities: Academics, Computer, Crafts, 
Hypertech, Investigation, Medicine, Research, Science, 
Technology 


Common Instruments: Books, brain/ computer 
interface, computers, devices and machines, household tools, 
inventions, laboratories, nanotech, writing, and the many tools 
of technological achievement 


Maleficia 


Certain magicks are deliberately cruel. Cast with malicious 
intentions, they're intended to cause harm and distress. 
Medieval law called such Arts maleficia - “evil-doing” - and 
that’s appropriate. For though most conceptions of witchcraft 
are mistaken, there are people who use bad magick for bad ends. 


When folks think of black magic, they’re referring to this 
deliberately obscene practice... although any form of magick 
can be hurtful, maleficia is intentionally crafted toward 
malignantaims. Curses; possessions; damnations; invocations to 
malevolent powers; infernal pacts, inhuman abilities; violations 
of body, mind, and spirit... such is the realm of maleficia. Other 
forms of corruption, too, can be invoked through this form 
of magick: wealth spells, sexual enchantments, techniques of 
social dominance, and all manner of metaphysical abuses can 
be conjured with help from sinister powers. These practices have 
no set form but range from the petty desecrations of teenage 
devilheads to the arcane ceremonies of ancient Infernal cults. 
Although the Nephandi seem to be the obvious offenders in 
this regard, anyone with a sufficiently bent motivation can 
employ a form of maleficia. The evangelist who calls upon 
his congregation to pray for the death of some hated figure is 
invoking maleficia; the forbidden Hermetic rites for summing 
demons employ it too. The Black Masses present pretty obvious 
examples; what’s less obvious, though, is that the Catholic 
Church itself has a history of Requiem Masses, performed to 
kill living people, and Amatory Masses, intended to compel 
affections upon unwilling people. The Grimoire of Honorius - 
attributed to a Pope - features Masses to be performed for evil 
purposes. Just as any mystic practice can inflict harm, so too 
can any mystic practice become twisted into maleficia. 


Chapter Ten: The Book of Magic 579 


~~ eo 


TN AE 


s 


ga Pal 


As a practice, maleficia features deliberate cruelty and 
perversion. Sex, for example, is a sacrament in certain 
traditions, but malefic practices use sex in its most tortured 
and nonconsensual forms. Sacrifices become as brutal and 
horrific as possible; prayers are spoken backwards; sacred 
symbols and objects are deliberately defiled through acts of 
defiant malevolence. Technology might play a part as well, as 
an instrument of torture, a method of access, or a channel for 
disruptive acts and energies. Music concerts, computer hacking, 
media broadcasts, machines... all could be employed as 
instruments of black magic. 


For obvious reasons, maleficia tends to leave 
nasty Resonance behind. That combination of sick " | 
deeds and ugly intentions poisons everything it 
touches. Rooms, tools, and people feel tainted 
after a malefic rite; even Sleepers can sense 
thatsomething's notrightaboutsuch things. 
The mage can clean up every physical trace 
of the crime, but a metaphysical essence — - 
lingers... often attracting corrupt entities z 
thatpickup where the malefactor left off... 8 ' 

3 


Associated Paradigms: A World 
of Gods and Monsters; Bring Back 
the Golden Age; Divine Order and 
Earthly Chaos; Everything is Chaos; 
Everything’s an Illusion, Prison, or 
Mistake; Might is Right; One-Way Trip 
to Oblivion 

Associated Abilities: Cos- 
mology, Enigmas, Esoterica, 
Expression, Intimidation, 
Melee, Occult, Pharmacopeia, 
Seduction, Torture 


Common Instruments: 
Artwork, blood and fluids, 
bodywork, bones and re- 
mains (often fresh), circles 
and designs, cups and 
vessels, curses, elements, 
eye contact, drugs and 
poisons, gems and valu- 
ables, group rites, music, 
offerings and sacrifice, 
prayers and invocations, 
sex (typically nonconsen- 
sual), voice, weapons 


Martial Arts 


The human machine 
is a miracle whose vast 
potential is hampered 
by undisciplined habits 
and acquired behaviors. 
Martial arts expand upon 
that potential, unlocking the 
deeper physical and metaphysical 


g% 


580 Mage: The Ascension 20" Anniversary Edition 


did Pr 


abilities of body, mind, and spirit. Although such arts, at the 
basiclevels, simply help a person strike or move more effectively 
in a fight, the higher reaches of martial-arts discipline go far 
beyond physical combat, into the realm of mental focus and 
spiritual refinement. 


Although the obvious example of self-perfection through 
martial arts is kung fu (roughly translated as “hard work" 
or "auspicious effort art"), most martial arts have esoteric 
elements. Renaissance fencing features philosophy, psychology, 
and mathematics as well as physical skill; Greek pankration 

emphasizes being "all powerful" in all respects; capoeira 
relies upon the essence of freedom as well as on the 

acrobatic maneuvers for which it's famous. Advanced 

martial arts, therefore, nurture the spirit, hone 

the mind, and turn the body into a 
focus for the powers of each. 


Attheir most metaphysical 
levels, advanced martial arts 
attune a practitioner into the 

Quintessential life force, chan- 
nel it through refined motions, 
and grant incredible - some 
would say inhuman - powers 
through the focus of an art. 
The Akashic practice Do is 
probably the most obvious 
example of this prac- 
tice on a metaphysical 

level, but any mar- 
tial art - even dirty 
fighting - can be- 
come a magickal 
practice with the 
proper mindset 
and devotion. 
(See Chapter 
Nine's sec- 
tions dealing 
with Martial 

Arts and Do.) 
Essentially, the 
artist manifests her 

will through clarity, 
energy, and activity. 

In game terms, she uses 
that artasa mystic focus. 


Beyond their mys- 
tic elements, martial arts 
are also technologies: 
refinements of knowl- 
edge that can be studied, 
repeated, and employed 
with practical effect. Thus, 
Technocrats and other 
technomancers can employ 
martial arts as a focus too. 


ives") o 


g ELOI" desi 


fi 


Regarding all that mystic nonsense as metaphors and mental 
techniques, a technomancer can divorce her martial arts training 
from mysticism and still retain its metaphysical potency. With 
such powers, she can direct Forces, alter Life, rearrange Matter, 
perceive Entropy, channel Prime, enhance Time, and - perhaps 
most of all - refine her Mind to sublime capacity. Although 
she couldn't fly through the air or skip along tree branches by 
manipulating chi (“That’s just mythology!"), she can still rework 
conventional physics and biology through her understanding 
of the fighting arts. 


Associated Paradigms: A World of Gods and Monsters; 
Bring Back the Golden Age; Creation’s Divine and Alive; Divine 
Order and Earthly Chaos; Everything is Chaos; Everything’s 
an Illusion, Prison, or Mistake; Might is Right; Tech Holds 
All Answers 


Associated Abilities: Acrobatics, Alertness, Athletics, 
Awareness, Esoterica, Etiquette, Intimidation, Martial Arts, 
Medicine, Meditation, Melee 


Common Instruments: Bodywork, dance and movement, 
energy, herbs, meditation, ordeals and exertions, symbols, 
wands and staves, weapons, voice 


Medicine Work 


Next to parenting, healing might be the highest human 
vocation. Many mages - mystics and technomancers alike - 
view their Enlightenment as an obligation to heal. To heal 
the planet, heal the people, heal the spirits, heal the Earth... 
perhaps all of them at once, if that’s at all possible. And so one 
of the oldest and most sacred Paths an Awakened person can 
pursue involves the practice of medicine work. 


Simply put, a medicine-person directs his skills and 
energies toward a healing practice. He might be the Progenitor 
physician, the Verbena rootwitch, the Bata'a houngan, the 
Templar medic... it’s not the group that matters, or even the 
medical practice, when it comes to the abilities of a skillful 
mage. A shaman with Life 3 can fix a broken leg as well as a 
Progenitor with the same level of Spheres. For the purposes of 
magickal practice, the term medicine work refers to the intent to 
heal and the choice of techniques that enhance healing, not to the 
specific method a mage uses when healing injuries or disease. 


Human medicine is an ever-evolving technology. Things we 
take for granted as medical facts were unknown half a century 
ago, whereas certain proven truths of conventional Western 
medicine ignore equally proven truths of alternative, non- 
industrialized medicines. A well-rounded healer in today’s world 
would probably understand Western technological medicine; 
Tibetan So Rig techniques; faith-based spiritual methods; Indian 
Ayurveda (“the science of life”); Japanese reiki and Swedish 
massage; the vast synergy of modern Chinese medicine; the 
Persian, Greek, and Arab roots of conventional medicine; 
current holistic theories; experimental machine technology, 
and other techniques besides. Few healers, of course, have 
the time or access to study such a broad range of disciplines 
- many of which clash with one another on a philosophical 
level. Instead, the healer picks a specific approach and then 


directs his attentions... and intentions... toward the path that 
works best for him. 


Thanks to magick (especially the Life, Entropy, Mind, and 
Prime Spheres), any form of medicine can work for an Awakened 
healer who employs that medicine as a focus, so long as that mage 
BELIEVES in that form of medicine. An Iroquois member of the 
Society of Faces would feel as lost in a Progenitor biotech facility 
as a Progenitor would feel when hefting a medicine mask. Both 
techniques work in the hands of a mage who understands and 
trusts those techniques, but few healers trust both of those 
techniques with equal faith. And so, when choosing medicine 
work as a magickal practice, the player needs to define what sort 
of medicine his character employs. (We encourage players to 
research actual medical practices from different cultures. The 
facts are as fascinating as any constructed fantasy!) 


It’s worth mentioning that traditional Native American 
and African mages often abhor the idea of using magic. In 
many cultures, “magick” is either trickery or the influence of 
malignant spirits. Medicine is a more accurate and respectful 
term for whatsuch people do than magick is... hence, the phrase 
medicine man. Many "shamans" actually consider themselves to 
be medicine people, using their Arts to nurture and restore 
the world, not to make it dance to their whims. 


For the practical effects of Sphere-based healing, see Health 
and Injury in Chapter Nine, (pp. 406-409). 


Associated Paradigms: A Mechanistic Cosmos; A World 
of Gods and Monsters; Bring Back the Golden Age; Creation’s 
Divine and Alive; Divine Order and Earthly Chaos; Everything 
is Chaos; Everything’s an Illusion, Prison, or Mistake; It’s All 
Good - Have Faith; Tech Holds All Answers 


Associated Abilities: Academics (healing practices), Art 
(masks, dance, music, etc.), Awareness, Empathy, Esoterica 
(herbalism, energy work, bodywork, healing and meditative 
practices), Medicine, Meditation, Pharmacopeia, Science, 
Technology 


Common Instruments: Artwork, blessings and curses, 
blood and fluids, bodywork, bones and remains, books, 
brews and concoctions, computers, cups and vessels, dance 
and movement, devices and machines, drugs and poisons, 
group rites (operations), herbs, laboratories, languages 
(Latin, jargon, and that weird script doctors use when writing 
prescriptions), meditation, music, offerings and sacrifices, 
prayers and invocations, social domination, voice, weapons 
(surgical instruments) 


Reality Hacking 


Imaginative people can do imaginative things with 
supposedly static structures. Hacking them apart to reconfigure 
those structures, these people use various tools - technology, 
philosophy, art, politics, and, occasionally, magick - to remake 
what was into what can be. With the correct gear and the right 
ideas, you don't even need to be a mage in order to hack the 
dominant paradigm... just ask Osama bin Laden's ghost. When 
you are a mage, however, you can employ those tools to remake 
Reality on a grand scale. 


Chapter Ten: The Book of Magic 


| 
| 
d 


B SERES 7^: 


Typically associated with the Virtual Adepts (and, to a lesser 
extent, the Cult of Ecstasy), the reality-hacking practice can be 
used by any mage with the proper mindset and expertise. The 
core idea - reality is flexible - seems familiar enough these days. 
As a practice, reality hacking uses an array of technologies to 
rework the systems thatgovern our world: its commerce, politics, 
media, memes, connections, faiths, physics, and so forth. By 
concentrating on specific systems and ideas, the mage can start 
remixing expectations into some new and interesting shape. 


Sound like anarchy? Sometimes itis. Many of this practice's 
oldest adherents and principles, however, come from the 
Order of Reason and Technocratic Order. After all, it was early 
Technocrats who hacked the human concepts of the universe, 
God, governments, and other technologies. Technocrats shaped 
fencing (a sword-fighting hack), the physical sciences (an 
elemental hack), exploration (a geographic hack), mass media 
(a consciousness hack), and the space program (a planetary 
hack). It’s no accident that the Virtual Adepts and Society of 
Ether began as Technocratic Conventions. And despite their 
unruly applications of technology, they’re just keeping that 
old hacker ethic alive. 


(Ironically, one could argue that the Order of Reason 
hacked the Traditions by replacing the High Mythic Ages with 
our industrial era. That idea would make a Black Suit chuckle, 
but he wouldn’t disagree.) 


The postmodern reality hacker tends to employ information 
technologies - not simply computers, but also memes, media, 
and other forms of mass intellectual access. As demonstrated 
by 9/11, she doesn't have to be a computer nerd - simply 
a visionary who notes the weakness of a structure and the 
method that exploits it. The transhumanist idea of reality as 
information - epitomized by the Data and Primal Utility 
Spheres (see pp. 524-527) - provides leverage for a reality hacker 
mage. Channeling her ideas and energies through computer 
code, social media, videos, slogans, pranks, guerilla theatre, 
movies and videos, graphic novels, music, fashions, Internet 
memes, and the clever manipulation of vibrant symbols (masks, 
puppets, iconography, remixed media, and so forth), that mage 
can re-contextualize reality as the Masses understand it, then 
take advantage of those new perceptions. It's not as quick or 
gratifying as a thunderbolt, but it tends to be a hell of a lot 
more powerful... and more coincidental, too. 


Like cybernetics, dominion, and the Art of Desire (all 
related practices), reality hacking aims more toward influence 
than raw force. The reality hacker strives to modify the system to 
her advantage, rather than blast it apart. Even so, certain tools 
- like terrorism and atrocity - can be incredibly violent in both 
implementation and results. Even then, however, that violence 
serves as an extension and instrument of the hack; the power of 
terrorism, for example, comes more from the atmosphere of 
dread and fury than from the casualties themselves. Sphere- 
wise, reality hacking favors Correspondence (for drawing 
and exploiting connections), Entropy (for spotting flaws and 
arranging probabilities), Forces (directingor destroying electrical 
systems), Mind (influencing ideas and the folks who have them), 
Life (rewiring the human animal), Prime (drawing, raising, and 


582 Mage: The Ascension 20" Anniversary Edition 


directing energy), and Time (re-contextualizing the perceptions 
of time), and uses instruments that express and subvert those 
principles in the modern world. 


Associated Paradigms: A Mechanistic Cosmos; A World 
of Gods and Monsters; Bring Back the Golden Age; Creation’s 
Divine and Alive; Divine Order and Earthly Chaos; Everything 
is Chaos; Everything is Data; Everything’s an Illusion, Prison, 
or Mistake; Might is Right; One-Way Trip to Oblivion; Tech 
Holds All Answers 


Associated Abilities: Academics (history, philosophy, 
social sciences), Art, Belief Systems, Computer, Expression, 
Government, Media, Politics, Science (psychology as well as 
physical sciences), Subterfuge, Technology 


Common Instruments: Artwork, books, brain/ computer 
interface, computers and IT gear, devices and machines, drugs, 
eye contact, group rites, language, mass media, money and 
wealth, music, nanotech, sex, social domination, symbols, 
thought forms, tricks and illusions, voice, weapons 


Shamanism 


We occupy a living world whose essence is greater and 
more intelligent than we recognize. Whereas common people 
stumble through material illusions, a shaman transcends both 
humanity and illusion. Moving through a world of layers and 
traps, he exists outside the everyday realm. And yet, through 
his guidance, the Sleeping People slumber more comfortably 
and the Awakened Ones remain more aware. 


Perhaps the most abused word in magic, shamanism 
technically refers to a specific type of Siberian spirit-worker. 
Over time, however, it’s come to define anyone who employs 
old-culture traditions to walk between the sublime world and 
its often ridiculous material counterpart. Dying - sometimes 
literally - to thelife heled before he felt Called by the spirits, the 
shaman is reborn in a half-outcast state... mad by the standards 
of his previous society, yet aware of (if not always clear about) 
the true nature of Reality. 


Becausetheshaman traditionallylives between the worlds of 
flesh and spirit, human and animal, matter and essence, sanity 
and dementia, conventionality and chaos, he embodies a living 
crossroads in which those qualities intersect. In many cases, he 
suffers from physical and/ or psychological ailments, a wounded 
healer whose infirmities render him more sympathetic to other 
wounded souls. A shaman often depends upon other people 
and spiritual allies whose aid and guidance help him survive his 
strange existence. In return, he grants his allies healing, insight, 
action in realms they might not be able to reach unaided, and 
a powerful intercessor with parties they may not address alone. 
A soul guide, a prophet, a medicine bringer and spirit warrior, 
if often unpleasant... Path. 


Thanks to noble-savage nonsense, shamanism has a trippy 
popular image that's deeply at odds with the earthy and often 
bizarre nature of the shaman himself. In reality, shamanism 
is a gritty, anti-orthodox vocation, filled with deliberate 
contradictions and slippery concepts of sanity. A shaman often 
inverts ideas of propriety; cross-dressing, speaking in riddles, 


our shaman walks a sacred... 


or acting in deliberately crude or obnoxious ways in order to 
shake up or demolish preconceptions. These tools - as well 
as the usual masks, dances, and trappings one expects from a 
shaman - form the instruments of shamanic Arts. Folks who 
expect the dewy-eyed dreamer of New Age romanticism are in 
for a shock when they meet true shamans... and that shock, 
too, is part of the shaman's toolkit. 


Although shamanism favors a naturalistic viewpoint, 
technoshamanic practices exist in the current era. Connecting 
with urbanized spirits (city-souls, electronic entities, machine- 
spirits, and so on) - frequently through computers, fast-food 
offerings, consumerism castoffs, and other postmodernist 
talismans - the technoshaman blends ancient awareness with 
current technology, acting as a vessel to distill the essence of 
eternity into the power of today. 


Associated Paradigms: A World of Gods and Monsters; 
Bring Back the Golden Age; Creation's Divine and Alive; 
Divine Order and Earthly Chaos; Everything's an Illusion, 
Prison, or Mistake; It's All Good - Have Faith! 


Associated Abilities: Alertness, Art, Cosmology, Enigmas, 
Esoterica, Expression, Lucid Dreaming, Medicine, Pharmaco- 
peia, Streetwise, Survival 


Common Instruments: Blood and fluids, bones and 
remains, computers, dance, drugs and concoctions, elements, 
herbs, household tools, offerings and sacrifice, ordeals, sex and 
sensuality, thought forms, toys, True Names, voice, weapons 


Voudoun 

If “shamanism” is the most abused word in magick, then 
Voudoun mightbe the mostabused practice. Drawn from a fusion 
of Central African faiths, Native American practices, European 
iconography, and the humid atrocity of American slave culture, 
the collection of “voodoo” creeds - Macumba, Obeah, Candomblé, 
Voudoun, Santeria, Delta and Lower Appalachian Hoodoo, the 
various flavors of Urban-American Voodoo, and their many 
offshoots - continues to command uncanny fascination in the 
modern world. Distorted by a combination of secrecy, poverty, 
racism, psychological warfare, cultural marginalization, and 
certain unnerving elements that actually do exist within those 
practices, the popular image of Voudoun magick reflects its 
distinctly American character. 


Essentially, a Voudoun mage’s practice revolves around 
finding and revering allies in a treacherous world. Arriving in 
chains for lives of forced labor after a hellish passage in sea- 
borne underworlds, the Africans who were transported to the 
Americas had little to draw upon except faith, courage, and 
rage. Ripped away from their families, many of them lacked 
even a common language. From the bits and pieces of their 
new lives, these people crafted creeds that reflected the hopes 
and horrors of that world, peopled with new families to replace 
the ones they had lost. In that world, the worst thing that could 
happen was slavery beyond death... so the curses and creatures of 
Voudoun lore focused on imprisonment, servitude, crossings, 
hunger, defiance, and escape. Old gods, new spirits, and tales 
of elevated mortals attained the identities of Loa: the god-spirit 


kin of Voudoun practitioners. And so, even though slavery has 
been “officially” banished from the Americas (many folks, of 
course, know better...), that synergistic survivor creed remains 
a vital methodology throughout these lands. 


Characterized by prayers, offerings, shrines, designs, 
blessings and maledictions, physical prowess, psychic awareness, 
bright colors, and sudden violence, Voudoun practices reflect 
their eclectic origins. Whereas elaborate Arts like High 
Ritual Magick favor wealth and perfection, Voudoun remains 
eminently practical. Sure, certain devotees are rich, especially 
these days; the practice itself, however, employs whatever 
resources a person has to work with. Faith and trust outweigh 
arcane rituals and ostentatious displays. Loyalty means more 
than titles or gold. Rewards and punishments come swiftly... 
often with quirks of sardonic humor attached... and newcomers 
get tested with fierce irony and ominous threats. In many 
regards, the intentionally eerie nature of Voudoun presents 
a giant KEEP OUT sign to outsiders... most especially white 
ones. For obvious reasons, a practitioner wears many masks 
and keeps many secrets. 


Beyond those masks and secrets, our Voudoun practitioner 
nurtures passionate connection. Priestesses become “Mama,” 
and priests become “Papa.” Far from being distant, sublime 
godheads, his Loa patrons are powerful yet accessible cousins 
whose touch is a prayer or offering away. Anyone who needs a 
favor can come asking for it... and although the price of that 
favor might not be as pleasant or easy as he might have wished, 
it does tend to be granted in one form or another... 


Despite its shared roots with faith, shamanism and 
witchcraft, Voudoun has a distinct culture whose methods 
and doctrines don’t always play well with others. The Loa and 
related spirits certainly manifest through their human devotees, 
but those relationships are more familial than the ones often 
shared (and endured) between shamans and their spirit allies. 
That element of family is an essential, and typically neglected, 
element of the Voudoun mage’s Arts. Given that the practice 
originated with family-oriented people who were severed from 
everything and everyone they'd known before, it’s not surprising 
that blood - figurative and otherwise - holds such a vital place 
in Voudoun lore and practice. 


Associated Paradigms: A World of Gods and Monsters; 
Bring Back the Golden Age; Creation's Divine and Alive; 
Divine Order and Earthly Chaos; Everything's an Illusion, 
Prison, or Mistake; Might is Right; One-Way Trip to Oblivion 


Associated Abilities: Art, Athletics, Awareness, Belief 
Systems, Carousing, Crafts, Empathy, Intimidation, Lucid 
Dreaming, Medicine, Meditation, Streetwise 


Common Instruments: Artwork (vévés), blessings and 
curses, blood, bones and remains, cards and dice, cups and 
vessels, crossroads, dance and movement, drugs and poisons, 
elements, eye contact, fashion, group rites, herbs, household 
tools, knots and rope, languages, meditation, music, offerings 
and sacrifices, prayers and invocations, sex and sensuality, 
symbols, True Names, voice, wands and staves, weapons, writing 


Chapter Ten: The Book of Magic — 583 


TN AE 


saf 


ip. San 


NE ZT 


f 


AN 
DX 
aX.) 
N N 
: 


Weird Science 

Folks who think that “science is boring" know nothing about 
science. Underneath the lab coats and brain-cracking equations 
run currents of curious wonder. And though cold-eyed Techno- 
crats favor a controlled approach to the Scientific Arts, certain 
visionaries refuse to be so confined. Would you call them mad? 
Perhaps... but their dedication keeps the hope of Science alive! 


Unlike most other technomagickal Arts, weird science isn't 
based upon repeatable results. Oh, sure, the mad scientist wants 
to be able to craft armies of robotic servitors or fleets of dirigible 
warships... and he may well be able to create them too, once a 
favorable prototype has emerged from his laboratory. However, 
that Inspired Scientist (don't call him a “mage” - that's ridicu- 
lous!) is more engaged by the spirit of inquiry and potential than 
by the devotion to repeatable craftsmanship. As a consequence, 
his creations often feature glaring flaws and Paradoxes that will 
be smoothed out, of course, in later iterations... if he ever gets 
around to making them, that is. 


Weird science, by definition, defies the bounds of 
possibility. Its crazy ideas fuel crazy creativity. Theories that 
no rational scientist would entertain guide the creation 
of devices and creatures whose very existence violates the 
Consensus: jetpacks, death rays, quirky robots, outlandish 
vehicles, Atlantean sonic technologies, spacecraft, mechanical 
appendages, psychic enhancement gear, lab-grown allies, 
devastating war machines, and whatever other strange gadgetry 
a mad scientist can imagine. And yet, this isn't some sort of 
"magic" - heavens, no! Every piece of odd technology depends 
upon theories so unconventional yet sublime that they MUST 
be true, if only for the sake of an imaginative universe. 


As with other tech-based practices, weird science requires 
serious work in the lab before working results appear. An 
Enlightened Scientist might spend months or years honing 
his creation before revealing it to the world. Yet once that 
innovation has been achieved, he can often replicate it quickly, 
often with the help of skilled (if dispirited) minions. Weird 
science also allows the Scientist to alter tech with sudden bursts 
of inspiration, MacGyvering rickety inventions that last just 
long enough to accomplish a single task. And so - because 
he's no sort of wizard, you imbecile! - the mad scientist needs 
tools and materials close at hand in order to work his wonders. 
True Science is indeed miraculous, but it's not some kind of 
magic. No, not at all... 


Associated Paradigms: A Mechanistic Cosmos; Bring Back 
the Golden Age; Divine Order and Earthly Chaos; Everything 
is Data; It’s All Good - Have Faith; Might is Right; Tech Holds 
All Answers 


Associated Abilities: Academics, Crafts, Esoterica (various 
so-called disproven scientific theories), Energy Weapons, 
Hypertech, Research, Science, Technology 


Common Instruments: Armor, books, bones and remains, 
brain/ computer interface, celestial alignments, computers and 
IT gear, devices and machines, elements, gadgets, inventions, 
laboratories, languages, numbers and numerology, toys, vehicles, 
weapons, writing and inscriptions 


584 . Mage: The Ascension 20" Anniversary Edition 


Witchcraft 


Witch. One of the more venomous words in the English 
language, the label “witch” can send a person to a hideous death. 
Even now, when the Burning Times seem more like myth than 
history, the popular imagination equates witches with warty evil hags 
cackling over poisonous, foulsmelling brews. Why would anyone, 
then, want to use something as quaintly horrific as “witchcraft”? 
Because those who understand it know that it works... not only as a 
magickal practice butalsoasa form of reverence for the natural world. 


The equally loaded term “witchcraft” covers a lot of 
ground, from the diabolical maledictions of medieval legend 
to the reclamationist neopaganism of the modern era. As a 
Mage practice, however, the term refers to a nature-oriented, 
practical craft, as opposed to the scholastic abstractions of 
High Ritual Magick, alchemy, and so on. Traditional witchcraft 
is a folk-oriented low magick practiced by common people 
who need discernible results: healing, fertility, divination, 
luck or misfortune, prosperity, clarity, physical prowess, and 
intercessions between the people and their gods that are far 
more intimate than what can be found at the local temple. 
The disputed origin of the term witch is “wisdom,” although 
other possibilities include words meaning “twist,” “knot,” or 
“knowledge.” And so, witches throughout time have been said 
to know things... often things that proper people could not or 
should not know. 


Today’s witchcraft features a postmodernist brew of 
traditional European wise-craft; 19"-century literary occultism 
and 20-century mystic fusions; pre-Christian elements from 
Greek, Norse, Celtic, Hindu, Slavic, Roman, Egyptian, and 
Mesopotamian cultures (with prodigious cultural appropriations 
from Native American, African, Romani, and occasionally Asian 
cultures); repurposed Christian and Jewish practices (especially 
Catholicism and the Kabbalah); postmodernist philosophy, and 
New Age takes on quantum physics; mass-media iconography; 
and tons of pure invention wrapped up ina bright bow of fantasy 
media, political activism, and technological polyculture. This 
high-eclectic synergy often incorporates computers, the Internet, 
pop psychology, chaos theory, and other elements that would be 
entirely unrecognizable to old-school wise-crafters. Nevertheless, 
it speaks to people on an elemental level... and yes, as a mystic 
practice, it’s as effective as any other tool on a mage’s workbench. 


In all its forms, witchcraft has an outlaw mystique - due 
both to constant persecution and a defiantly sinister stance. 
Today’s witch might practice holistic medicine and nonviolent 
politics, butshe still exists outside of mainstream respectability... 
often with a Fuck You attitude. Whatever style of witchcraft she 
prefers, that Art/ Craft incorporates potent symbols - Old 
Gods, nature spirits, blades, circles, wands, robes, very dark or 
bright colors, occult iconography, seasons, shadows, chalices, 
ashes, the four Classical elements, and so on - that reach into 
the subconscious territory beyond a mainstream comfort zone. 


Our 2l*century witch might favor dark clothes, body 
art, and a swaggering subculture image, or cloak her Arts in 
a middle-class facade that conceals her elemental devotions. 
She could follow a strict Witch’s Rule or proclaim herself a 
mystic anarchist. In more or less all cases, she reveres Nature 


and diversity, channeling her Will through harmony with light 
and shadow, death and life. Though epitomized by the Verbena 
Tradition, she isn't necessarily Pagan and doesn't always wear 
her Art on her sleeve, so to speak. Regardless of her tools or 
devotions, though, her witchcraft remains eminently practical, 
focused on everyday miracles and visionary craft. 


Associated Paradigms: A World of Gods and Monsters; 
Bring Back the Golden Age; Creation’s Divine and Alive; Divine 
Order and Earthly Chaos; Everything is Chaos; Everything's 
an Illusion, Prison, or Mistake; It's All Good - Have Faith; 
Might is Right; One-Way Trip to Oblivion 


DES 
nr 


oe ANA A 7 O 


KIT 


Cy 
[i 
y 
n 


IX La 


V ame LI LL S 
QI 
— M 


Le 
NE 


T 


LS N 
AV "Y 


j Practice of conscious activity. The practitioner doesn't just 


Associated Abilities: Academics, Animal Kinship, Art, 
Awareness, Crafts, Medicine, Meditation, Occult, Pharmacopeia 


Common Instruments: Artwork, blessings and curses, 
blood and fluids, bodywork, bones and remains, books, brews, 
cards, celestial alignments, circles, crossroads, cups and vessels, 
dance, drugs and poisons, elements, eye contact, group rites, 
household tools, knots and ropes, music, offerings, sex and 
sensuality, social domination, symbols, True Names, wands 
and staves, weapons, writing and inscriptions 


Yoga 
Beneath the popular exercise trend rests a potent 
metaphysical practice. Named from a Sanskrit word 
that means union, balance, joining, and (by extension) 
yoke, yoga employs mental, physical, and spiritual 
disciplines to refine a higher state of being. 
Through advanced levels of yoga, a practitioner 
unlocks the greatest human abilities, eventually 
transcending his human limits and achieving 
enlightenment... first temporary, and then 
perpetual. Dedication to yoga strips away the 
illusions of physical existence. In communion 
with Absolute Reality, the True Self - the center 
of consciousness (Atman or Purusha) - comes to 


comprehend the Unity of All. 


Although its historical origins may be dis- 
puted, yoga derives from a collection of practices rooted 
in the Indus-Sarasvati cultures of ancient India. Collected 
into the Vedas - books of knowledge - these practices and 
Observations refined several forms of ritual, meditation, 
vocalization, and physical exercise, all dedicated to 


mending the fractured state of human existence. In 
the Classical Yoga period, those practices mingled 
with the Upanishads: scriptures of dynamic unity. 

> By 1900, Western occult traditions had begun 


to incorporate yogic disciplines into their own 
practices. (The Council of Nine, of course, under- 
64 stood such practices long ago.) Through mastery 
2 — of those disciplines, an experienced yogi or yogini 
> © (male or female practitioner) can see the essential 
state of Reality... and can work with it as well. Yoga, 
therefore, isn't simply a state of meditation but also a 


contemplate her navel; with deep awareness and conscious 
devotion, she commits herself to action. 


Details about yoga could fill their own book. In a practical 
sense, though, a yoga practitioner pursues intense physical, 
mental, and spiritual study; combines learned wisdom with 
personal epiphanies; supersedes old limitations; and trans- 
forms herself into an instrument oftranscendence. Through 
such refinement, she can attain superhuman abilities, proj- 
ect her consciousness outside of her body, and reveal the 
illusions of material reality as tricks of the mind... and, by 
extension, master earthly forces like gravity, time, matter, 
and the elements - in game terms, all of the Nine Spheres. 


Chapter Ten: The Book of Magic — 585 


(A related tradition of practices that often incorporate 
yogic disciplines is known collectively as Tantra: “weaving,” 
“loom,” "activity," or “essence.” Although many devotees 
of one still practice the other, however, yoga and Tantra are 
not the same things. Both share a heritage, a dedication to 
transcendence of physical and mental limitations, and a view 
of the Whole beyond the illusions of separation. Generally, 
though, yoga unifies apparently separate elements into a 
conscious, transcendent whole, whereas Tantra accesses 
transcendent energies through sublimating physical reality. 
For obvious reasons, various mages incorporate elements of 
both traditions into their practices. For an example, see Lee 
Ann's activities in the Prelude.) 


Often described as "the science of body, breath, mind, 
soul, and universe," yoga can be considered a metaphysical 
technology. If nothing else, the physical and mental disciplines 
involved in yoga have proven benefits to the human organism. 
Thus, technomancers and even Technocrats can pursue a yoga 
practice, although its more esoteric levels defy pure materialism. 
Bythe early 21" century, the Technocracy has accepted the useful 
elements of yoga and incorporated certain aspects of yoga into 
its training programs. (Again, see John Courage’s remarks in the 
Prelude.) And so, although you won't see Black Suits defying 
gravity and throwing bolts of pure Kundalini energy because of 
their mastery of yoga, the techniques of breathing, strength, and 
flexibility influence the new-millennium Technocrat’s pursuit 
of Life, Mind, and Prime Procedures. For traditional mystics 
(like Chakravanti and Sahajiya), such use of yogic discipline 
is anathema; for the devotees of Westernized yoga, however, 
that acceptance provides the punch line for a wondrous joke 
at the Technocracy’s expense. 


Despite the utility of books, scriptures, designs, and various 
medical and sometimes psychoactive concoctions, yoga is a 
largely self-contained practice. The physical body becomes 
a vessel for the transcendent Self. A devotee tends toward 
extraordinary good health and vitality, incisive perceptions, 
and a big-picture perspective on things. She might be capable of 
apparently impossible physical feats of endurance and flexibility, 
and she can - at advanced levels - sidestep little things like 
physics. The foundation of her practice, however, involves 
correct breathing, centered consciousness, and reaching past 
apparent limitations. As the guru Bikram advised his students: 
This is going to hurt. Don’t be afraid. 


Associated Paradigms: A Mechanistic Cosmos; A World 
of Gods and Monsters; Bring Back the Golden Age; Creation’s 
Divine and Alive; Divine Order and Earthly Chaos; Everything’s 
an Illusion, Prison, or Mistake; It’s All Good - Have Faith; 
Might is Right; Tech Holds All Answers 


Associated Abilities: Athletics, Awareness, Enigmas, 
Esoterica, Expression, Medicine, Meditation, Survival 


Common Instruments: Bodywork, circles and designs, 
dances and movement, energy, languages (Sanskrit), meditation, 
music, ordeals, prayers, sex and sensuality, symbols, thought 
forms, voice (mantras, the Om), writings and inscriptions 


586 Mage: The Ascension 20" Anniversary Edition 


Instruments: 
The Tools of Focus 


Belief envisions, practice inspires, and tools perform. All 
three elements allow a mage to focus Will and knowledge into 
Effects. And although any human activity can provide a tool 
for an imaginative mage - so long as that instrument fits the mage’s 
beliefs and. practices - certain tools hold honored and popular 
places in magickal practices of all kinds. 


As suggested by its root word instruere ("to prepare"), an 
instrumentis a tool or set oftools that prepares an act of magick 
or hypertech. That instrument doesn't have to be a physical 
object - it could be a dance, a song, a prayer or invocation, an 
intense glance, a scent, a formula, a gesture or word or handful 
of ash. The potential variations among such tools are more or 
less infinite. If an object or activity can be used to capture an 
intention and bring it into being, then that object or activity 
can be used as an instrument. 


Symbolic Power of the Instruments 

Many tools carry symbolic weight, granting them 
significance beyond their practical utilities. Sure, a sword can 
kill you, but the mystique of certain swords can cut deeper than 
the blade itself. There’s a huge symbolic difference between a 
katanaandabutcher’s knife, and that difference often influences 
a person’s choice of instruments. In game terms, such tools 
tug at Mythic Threads, adding their symbolic presence to the 
raw Will-power of the mage. 


By extension of that symbolism, certain instruments 
define certain groups: Etherites have their goggles; witches 
have their wands; agents of authority have their dark suits and 
mirrorshades, and all those trappings create a sense of group 
identity. For many people, this sense of identity bonds them 
to the group. Symbolic instruments, then, can be like gang 
colors, offering a shout-out to your sect of choice. 


Tools and Time 


As mentioned elsewhere throughout this chapter, 
instruments demand time and effort... and certain tools demand 
more time and/ or effort than others. A person who dances to 
focus his intentions can’t cast a spell in a three-second turn; one 
who employs intense rituals may need an hour or longer, and 
an artisan-magus could prepare his Effects for days or weeks 
before the magick manifests. That's why so many practices 
depend upon creating Wonders (as per the Background of that 
name) or else employ quick-use tools: amulets, guns, enchanted 
blades, and the like. It takes time and effort to focus Will into 
magick. If you rush the process, things go poorly... resulting in 
Paradox, fast-casting modifiers, and other obstacles. 


In game terms, then, your mage might need several turns 
in order to cast his Effect, with the amount of time based 
upon the tools in question. For that reason, your mage might 
want a wide selection of instruments to choose from. Maybe 
he doesn't have time to perform an elaborate hoop-dance right 
now... but that pouch of tobacco will serve as a quick offering 
for his totem spirit until he's got the time to set things right. 


Remember, too, that mages don't choose their tools 
based on convenience, but rather upon what they believe they 
need to do in order to alter reality. A mad scientist toils in her 
laboratory to create a portable transmutation ray, then carries 
that ray around with her, aims it, and turns it on before the 
Effect starts changing things. It would be more convenient, 
in game terms, for her to simply glare at an enemy and turn 
him into a newt. Even if she has Life 5 on her character 
sheet, however, she wouldn't do things that way because she's 
à scientist, not a witch. Sure, she probably accepts that witches 
have power; that kind of power isn't her style, though... and 
thus, it does not work for her. 


Eventually, certain mages learn to BE the focus rather 
than to NEED the focus. And at that point, they're able to 
discard tools, as described earlier in this section. Still, as we 
explained in the sidebar about the one-inch punch, you can't 
ditch your instruments just because you think it's possible to 
do so. Magick is an extension of the mage, and tools direct 
that mage's beliefs and bring his magick into being. 


Standard Instruments 


Despite the march of science, certain symbols have 
become so deeply ingrained in the Consensus that they could 
be called standard instruments. Such tools provide the default 
focus for mystic or hypertech training and practices. The 
Common Practices listed in the group entries in Chapter 
Five represent the practices and instruments that members 
of those groups employ. The various factions and mentors 
teach their students with such tools, and most mages use 
them for a lifetime. 


In game terms, a standard tool offers no bonus or penalty. 
You might incur a penalty if you work without one, or receive 
a bonus if you use one in an especially significant manner 
(see p. 588). For the most part, though, these instruments 
simply provide the appropriate toolkit for a mage’s practice. 


Personalized Instruments 


Certain mages employ personalized or unique tools - a 
lucky baseball, rowan wand, hand-built guitar, and so forth. 
Such personalized instruments resonate with the mage who 
employs them. There is, perhaps, a touch of Resonance 
between such symbols and an individual character. In game 
terms, a personal tool reflects that character’s connection 
to a Sphere - a bridge between artist and Art. 


For your character’s affinity Sphere (as described in 
Chapter Six), choose one personal instrument that fits his 
practice and that Sphere. A Progenitor Genegineer might 
connect to Life through a mutagenic cocktail of chemicals, 
whereas a Bata’a houngan unites himself with that same 
Sphere through a gift of whiskey, three cigars, and a virgin 
rooster for Baron Samedi. The personal tool represents your 
mage's original training and connection with the Sphere in 
question. In return for sticking close to your roots, you can 
reduce by -1 the difficulty of a roll that employs that Sphere. 
After all, that instrument is significant to your mage, so he 
employs it as if it were a significant tool. 


SN 
AN 
A 


N 
N 
S 
a 
À 


P 

S 
‘a 

Q 


= 


jw» 


tH) 


TT 


HL 


Chapler Ten: The Book of Magic 597 


Sa 


Optional Rule: 
Significant Instruments 


Earlier in this chapter, Step Two describes Pulling 
Mythic Threads - that is, manipulating symbols with 
powerfulsignificance. Asan optional rule, an especially 
significant instrument — ornate Tarot cards, a Latin 
prayer — tugs on the fibers of the Tapestry. In game 
terms, such an instrument could reduce the Arete roll 
difficulty by -1 ormight make an otherwise vulgar Effect 
coincidental underthe proper circumstances. After all, 
many people — Sleeper and otherwise — invest belief 
into things like Tarot cards or prayers and will readily 
accept a miracle that follows seven Hail Marys and 
a heartfelt genuflection. 


The same tool, however, cannot be used for both 
purposes; eitheritreduces the difficulty or else it makes 
something that would normally be considered vulgar 
into something that could be considered coincidental. 


Significant instruments mustbe used in significant ways. 
In game terms, your mage needs to impress the power 
ofthat symbol upon her audience. A mere Tarotreading 
doesn’t really count as a significant focus — the cards 
alone are standard instruments for occult practices (see 
previous page). In order to receive the -1 difficulty 
bonus, both the player and the character need to 
work the Mythic Threads attached to the instrument in 
question. A prayer should be spoken with great faith and 
clarity among the faithful; a gun must be large, scary, 
and presented with a memorable soliloquy. (Quoting 
Dirty Harry, though, would probably spoil the Effect.) 
An ordeal would have to be impressively vicious, a 
dance impressively performed, a curse impressively 
vile, in order to count as a significant focus for your 
Will and the Consensus’ belief. 


As for rendering vulgar Effects into coincidental ones, 
theinstrument MUST stillprovide a believable rationale 
under the local belief system. A glowing magic wand 
at a Harry Potter film festival would be acceptable as 
some weird special effect, but if that wand starts firin 
lightning bolts or levitating cars, then all bets are off. 
Miraculous healing thanks to some holy water and a 
really great prayer? Possible. Making a tank vanish 
in the middle of a fight? No tool can make that feat 
seem possible, although an impressive tech-based 
weapon could certainly blow one up without violating 
the modern paradigm. 


Onique Instruments 

In the place closest to a mage's heart, you might find a 
unique instrument. This tool really is one of a kind, and if the 
mage loses it, he also loses a vital connection to his Arts. Unlike 
other kinds of tools, a unique instrument must be something 
your mage can lose: a fiddle crafted by your dead grandfather, 
a locket with your mentor's last portrait, a shirt given to you 
by a now-lost lover, and so forth. 


Game-wise, a unique instrument reduces the difficulty of 
your Arete roll by -1 when you work with a particular Sphere. 


588 . Mage: The Ascension 20^ Anniversary Edition 


ThatSphere is tied to the instrumentin question; ifyour magick 
fiddle, for instance, is attuned to the Time Sphere, then only 
Effects that use the Time Sphere will benefit from that bonus. 


If that tool is both personal and unique (or significant and 
unique), then it reduces the difficulty by-2. Only your mage can 
use that instrument in such a way. That fiddle might sound 
great, but it truly sings in your mage's hands alone. 


If your character loses that unique instrument or finds 
herself working without it, then she's essentially Working 
Without Focus, as described on (pp. 566-567). If it gets 
destroyed, then the bonus is gone for good. From that point 
onward, she's working without focus until she can transcend the 
need for at least one tool by raising her Arete by one more dot. 


Common Instruments 


When picking out the instruments that suit your mage, 
check out the following entries. People, after all, do not select 
their most important tools without good reasons for using 
them. Most instruments have symbolic and cultural significance 
as well as practical applications. Once you start to recognize 
such factors, you realize how deep a mage’s toolkit really goes... 


Common instruments include: 


Armor: Protective devices can shield a mage and her allies 
from harm. Such instruments range from self-powered exo-suits 
and enchanted plate armor, hypertech fabrics, or specially 
reinforced clothing, to the bulletproof “ghost shirts” or woad 
body-paint designs intended to protect warriors in battle. 


As a tool for Awakened focus, the armor in question must 
be created or modified by the Spheres to provide additional 
levels of protection. One point of Quintessence, invested into 
the armor with Prime 2 or better, can make that armor resistant 
to aggravated damage. For details about armor, see the Combat 
section in Chapter Nine. 


Artwork: Drawings, paintings, CGI, sculptures, graffiti, and 
so forth allow a mage to capture his intentions in a visual medium. 
Oneoftheoldestmystictools (as shown in prehistoric cave-paintings 
and goddess figurines), artwork often draws upon the principle of 
connection: by depicting your subject, you attach your intentions 
and desires to it through the art. Artwork also influences the 
human condition by appealing to people (or disturbing them) 
when they recognize the symbolic energy of a piece. 


Blessings and Curses: Bestowing favor or inflicting bad 
luck - especially through the power of gods or spirits - remains 
a potent form of magick. And so, when people see witches, 
clergy, gamblers, and hoodoo-folk call upon God, Fate, and 
Fortune, they're inclined to believe in the results. In game 
terms, blessings and curses tend to be coincidental. After all, 
superstition and religious awe are universal, even in these 
supposedly civilized times. 


Blood and Other Fluids: Sweat, tears, blood, semen, saliva, 
pus, urine, bile, marrow, sap... through such fluids flow the 
essence of life. Sure, they seem disgusting to most folks, but 
mages - especially ones who practice medicine work, biotech, 
or primal magick - recognize their power. DNA, viruses, life 


force, the generative capacities of living things - all manifest 
in such organic fluids, so many practices employ those liquid 
instruments... possibly distilling them down to Quintessential 
Tass, painting with them, drinking them, drawing them out of 
the body, releasing them in acts of gory sacrifice, or otherwise 
opening an organic vessel and letting the magick flow. (See 
also Brews, Food, Offerings, and Sex.) 


Bodywork: Massage, energy-sharing, chiropractic medicine, 
acupuncture and acupressure, yoga, and other disciplines of 
body manipulation allow a person to influence mental and 
physical health, stimulate organic functions, establish or 
reinforce intimate bonds between the practitioner and his 
subject, and simply help people feel better about themselves. 
As a result, bodywork forms a centerpiece for several mystic 
practices, especially ones that - like martial arts, shamanism, 
witchcraft, yoga, and certain types of medicine work - favor 
vitality over external tools. 


Bones, Skins, Organs, and Other Remains: Like bodily 
fluids, the physical pieces ofa living (or once living) thing contain 
potent magickal significance. After all, such remains facilitate 
life, and so they also focus the life of a spell. As a result, they 
often get converted into ritual instruments of many different 
kinds. Books might be written on flayed skin; dusts can be 
ground from powdered bone; items could be crafted out of 
organs or skeletal remains. It's gruesome, sure - but it's also 
quite traditional. Creepy mystics aren't the only folks who do 
this sort of thing, either... are they, Dr. Frankenstein? The literal 
structures of life play important roles in magick, science, and 
religion, no matter how macabre that role might seem. 


Books, Scrolls, and Periodicals: Is print obsolete? Not even 
close. Although e-books and PDFs comprise a wider range of 
texts now than they did even a decade ago, the printed word 
retains a mystic significance that those digital media have yet 
to achieve. 


In older days, books were like magickal items: rare, 
expensive, exclusive to a certain class of people (those who 
could read), and able to transmit arcane lore through an 
apparently supernatural method. Mages, then, were an elite 
class simply because so many of them had, and could employ, 
books. Since the advent of mass publication in the late 1700s 
and mass literacy in the 1800s, most of the glamour has faded. 
And yet, when people seek deeper truths and fictions, they still 
turn to da Vinci codes, boy wizards. and Middle Earth. Even 
the rougher voices on the socio-political fringe publish books 
in order to seem more respectable. Talk is cheap; writing is 
respected. 


2]*-century mage periodicals range from e-books of shadows 
to SF/ fantasy lit, computer manuals, magazines and e-zines, 
occult tomes, aged grimoires, ancient scrolls, downloadable 
PDFs, print-on-demand texts, graphic novels, and even game 
books like this one. Many feature the occult lore of ages, whereas 
others present pop philosophy, subversive concepts, historical 
information, cataloged facts, and any other subject that can be 
presented in written form. Within the last 30 years, incredibly 
rare arcane texts have popped up on big-box bookstore shelves 
all around the world, so any mage who takes herself seriously 


has a library of some kind. (See the Library Background in 
Chapter Six for more details.) 


Brain/ Computer Interface: An emerging technology 
among the Masses, BCI is a common tool among certain 
Awakened factions, especially the Virtual Adepts, Iteration 
X, the Syndicate, and the NWO. Microtechnology - usually 
a bush of carbon nanotube bundles spread throughout the 
brain - transmits electrical signals from the brain, interprets 
them through a computerized interface, and allows for physical 
manipulations or virtual functions through brain power alone. 


Enlightened BCI lets the user tap into computerized 
systems through mere thoughts, manipulate cybernetic gear, 
access wireless Internet networks, and record or transmit 
impressions into or out of the brain. Essentially a technological 
synthesis of telekinesis and telepathy, BCI requires specialized 
equipment and training to employ. Electrical surges can damage 
or even destroy it; neurotoxins disrupt its functions; and radio 
transmissions can hack into the interface, cause it to go haywire, 
or override the primary user’s commands. As an instrument, 
it’s invisible to the human eye but discernible to electronic 
monitoring gear. And although it allows for a hands-free 
approach, its limitations become pretty obvious when the user 
tries to employ it in areas without advanced tech, regions with 
tech-hostile realities, or places without net access. 


Because it literally messes with your brain, many mages 
consider BCI anathema. Even among allies, the debate about 
such technologies can get pretty heated. Does BCI turn its 
user into a tech-addled posthuman, or is it simply another step 
in human progress, like language, printing, or the Internet? 
Regardless of such objections, brain/ computer interface is 
a viable tool for the 21%-century technomancer - borderline 
coincidental so long as it's used invisibly, and potentially game- 
changing for the future of humanity. 


Brews, Potions, Powders, and Other Concoctions: 
Blending various ingredients into potent concoctions, the 
archetypal witch's brew and its many permutations - goofer 
dust, corpse-powder, dragon's blood, beer, wine, love philters, 
mystic potions, and the diverse medicines, foods, and beverages 
found across the world - present an obvious tool of magickal 
intent. Regardless of the purposes or composition involved in a 
given concoction, the process of turning many things into one 
thing reflects a sort of magic. For that reason, mythology often 
credits gods and wise-folk with the creation of beers, foods, 
and medicines. In game terms, any sort of mage can use such 
refreshments. Holy water, love potions, hypermeds - they're 
all refinements of the same basic idea: mix it up, drink it down, 
and watch things change! 


Cards, Dice, and Other Instruments of Chance: 
Probability holds a sense of wonder, even for the Masters of 
Entropy whose Arts direct it, to a certain degree. The fickle 
hand of chance represents the randomness principles of the 
universe, so its talismans - dice, tokens, thrown bones, drawn 
straws, divination sticks, and, of course, the symbol-flashing 
cards - reflect command of destiny. Fate appears to speak 
through these instruments, and they become potent tools of 
omen and prophecy. 


Chapter Ten: The Book of Magic 589 


Neo 7^: 


saf 


Traditionally a caster mixes up the tokens into an 
apparently random selection, then draws a certain number of 
them in order to find out what he needs to know. That mage 
could cheat, of course, removing the random element from the 
task. Still, instruments of chance present a dramatic focus for 
intentions - witness the gambling-hall scenes in Run Lola Run 
or Casino Royale - especially when big things depend upon the 
turn of a friendly card. 


Cards, given their visual focus, are especially vivid 
instruments - particularly the symbolic portents of Tarot or 
other oracular cards. Even normal playing cards, though, can 
be incredibly evocative, reflecting cosmic tales of sex, violence, 
desire, and royalty in a few simple icons that find their way 
into popular mythology. 


Celestial Alignments: What's your sign? Long before books 
or machines became common tools, mages read, focused, 
and calculated the schedules for their rituals by the dance 
of planets and stars. Even now, when modern science has 
supposedly disproved the old cosmologies - at least on the 
mortal side of the Gauntlet - the old mystique of horoscopes, 
the brilliant possibilities of Hubble telescope photos, and the 
eldritch mysteries of deep space continue to influence mystic 
and scientific practices, conjuring insights and miracles when 
the stars are right. 


Circles, Pentacles, and Other Geometric Designs: As 
the archetypal symbol of unity, the circle shows up in mystic 
practices everywhere. Enclosing workspaces, sigils, ritual areas, 
and other regions in circles, spell casters secure that space 
within spheres of their intentions. Meanwhile, other circular 
designs - rings, belts, linked hands, dancing circles, even circular 
movements and sung rounds - provide similar enclosures that 
seal an intention with an activity. 


Other geometric shapes - triangles, squares, hexagrams, 
pentacles, and so forth - seal different sorts of activities. 
Symbolically, those shapes (which appear in scientific formulae 
too) represent cosmic principles by mathematical designs. 
Squares reflect stability, rectangles present expansive yet secure 
areas, crosses signify intersecting forces, triangles direct energy, 
and combinations of those designs - as seen in yantras, mandalas, 
sand paintings, and other ritual diagrams - combine several 
forces into unified wholes... wholes often surrounded bya circle. 


Certain ritual practices, especially in High Ritual Magick, 
demand elaborate designs that must be traced and crafted to 
exacting standards. Such designs can take hours or even days 
to create, and they often become permanent parts of a ritual 
space. In symbolic architecture, the space itself might be crafted 
into the design - a common practice among Freemasons and 
otherartists of sacred geometry. Temples, cathedrals, Chantries, 
and other important buildings become massive works of 
symbolism... which, when you think about it, says volumes 
about the mystic dimensions of Washington DC. (See also 
Artwork and Formulae.) 


Computers and IT Gear: The essential tech of the 21* 
century, computers and other elements of Information 


590 . Mage: The Ascension 20" Anniversary Edition 


Technology form the basis for Consensus Reality in our age. 
For obvious reasons, then, mages use computers for everything 
from data storage to social transformation. Not long ago, such 
machines were toys for a privileged few. Now, almost everyone 
within the industrialized world has at least access to a computer, 
and many folks use them on a daily basis. 


Magickally speaking, computers store and manipulate 
data like handy household gods. Using arcane calculations 
and alchemical technologies, they transform every sphere of 
life they touch. The industrial world depends upon computers 
nowadays - they run cars, manage banks, link people, and allow 
for a global community that, within living memory, used to 
be impossible. These portals of Hermes let tech-savvy mages 
sidestep physical reality, not only through the Digital Web itself 
but through common miracles like smart phones, laptops, and 
streaming media. And so, in our new millennium, a mage can 
use a computer for damn near anything if she's good enough 
at what she does. 


Connected to the computers themselves, the ever-growing 
network of clouds, sites, sectors, and connections holds an 
expanding universe of virtual potential. And though the 
gleeful prognostications of early cybervisionaries bear little 
resemblance to the Internet we know today, that technology 
is just a few decades old. What might happen when and if 
the Masses catch up to the Awakened in terms of Internet 
Enlightenment? That potential, and its practical applications, 
still seem very much like magic. 


For game rules dealing with computer technologies, see 
The Book of Secrets. 


Crossroads and Crossing-Days: Intersections are powerful. 
Areas and times in which one element or energy crosses over 
another one, or even several, herald passages, transitions, and 
transformations. Clearly, such transitions are magickal - liminal 
spaces where options and choices multiply. As a result, crossroads 
andtransitional periods - midnight, dawn, New Year's Eve, certain 
holidays - provide focus for mystic workings. Rituals often seem 
most significant when performed in such places or times. 


Cups, Chalices, Cauldrons, and Other Vessels: Practically 
and symbolically, the many vessels we create to hold and carry 
things - especially water, the liquid upon which human life 
depends - hold potentsignificance for both mystic and scientific 
practices. Cups, goblets, chalices, and cauldrons have deep 
associations with birth and renewal, feminine energy and fluid 
potential. For examples, look no further than the Holy Grail, 
the witch's cauldron, Baba Yaga's pot, or the singing bowls of 
Tibet. On the technical end, vats, beakers, créches, and test 
tubes contain their own mystique... witness the phrase "test- 
tube baby” or the image of vat-brewed clones. And so, mages 
of many kinds use vials, bottles, pots, and beakers to work their 
Arts, often combining those instruments with brews, water, and 
various concoctions in order to turn one thing into another. 

Dances, Gestures, Postures, and Other Movement 
Practices: Movement unites the body, mind, and life force into 
a flowing whole that breaks physical stasis and opens channels of 


vital energies. Dance - often driven by Music (see below) - sends 
thebody into ecstaticflight. Postures and katas - specifically those 
taught in yoga, t'ai chi, and various martial practices - program 
muscle memory into efficient poses while freeing the mind to 
pursue focus or meditation. Gestures - arm waves, hand signs, 
mudras, genuflections, and so forth - direct manual dexterity 
into symbolic displays, as peaceful as the "fear not" mudra or as 
incendiaryas Hitler’s salute. From bowing to ballet, such activities 
convey deep ritual significance through physical discipline. In 
especially rigorous forms - advanced yoga, breakdancing, classical 
ballet, and so forth - those disciplines demand physical vitality 
and constant practice, channeled through cultural symbolism, 
aesthetic appeal, and just plain fun. And so, the various styles of 
dance, gesture, and movement form essential elements of mystic 
and technological practices, directing a person’s intentions and 
energies through the instrument of the body itself. 


Devices and Machines: Humanity’s great gift is our use of 
tools. It's clear, then, that such tools - from simple machines 
like bows and arrows to complex machines like death rays or 
printing presses - hold symbolic power beyond their practical 
utility. Humanity's machines are a form of magick, epitomizing 
the Will to transcend our limits and transform our world. 
Technomancers are literally defined by their reliance upon 
machines, but even the most traditional shaman can use a 
loom as a creative instrument, directing his intentions through 
whirring shuttles, levers, and gears. 


For more details about the uses of technology, see Chapter 
Nine's section The Technological World. 


Drugs and Poisons: Like the Brews and Concoctions 
described above, various drugs, poisons, venoms, and so 
forth change one state of being into another. In the case of 
psychoactive drugs, that state might involve radically altered 
consciousness. Practices from primal shamanism to psychedelic 
transhumanism use mind-altering drugs to cleanse the doors 
of perception and open a mage to new possibilities. Poisons, 
meanwhile, harm or kill inconvenient people - a nasty but 
traditional practice among alchemists, witches, and assassins. 
Such substances make excellent tools for Entropy, Life, and 
Mind Effects and range from natural toxins to hypertech drugs. 


Chapter Nine's section Drugs, Poison, and Disease 
features in-depth rules for the effects of toxins in your game. 


Elements: Fire, water, earth, and air - perhaps adding 
metal, wood, glass, plastic, and electricity, depending on your 
point of view - all play important roles in almost every sort 
of practice. From their symbolic meanings (solid as stone, 
fiery passions, earthy groundedness, etc.) to their practical 
applications through Forces, Matter, and (for plants) Life Arts, 
the elements can become a mage's primary instruments. 


Depending on her practice, your mage might employ 
elements through spiritual connection, scientific physics, angelic 
and demoniccontrol, sympathetic magick, or even a personal tie 
to the living world. Through her Arts, that character can shape, 
conjure, alter, manipulate, merge into, or otherwise control 
the forces that make up our world... a literally elemental talent 
that in many ways defines the Art of Wizardry. 


Energy: The life force forms a significant element of mystic 
focus. Through practices like Tantra, yoga, and other forms 
of energy work, a person can perceive and manipulate that 
life force, directing it to his needs. That energy, in turn, fuels 
martial arts, sexual disciplines, bodywork, and other practices. 


For mages with the Prime Sphere, this instrument focuses 
Quintessence-based magick. However, characters without the 
Prime Sphere can also focus energy as an instrument, so long 
as that person’s practice includes energy work as a possibility. 
For more details about working with energy, see the Prime 
and Primal Utility Spheres. For related instruments, see 
Bodywork, Dance, Eye Contact, Group Rites, Meditation, 
Music, Ordeals, Sex, and Social Domination. 


Eye Contact: By using these windows to the soul, a mage 
can charm, frighten, seduce, bewitch, curse, intimidate, or 
otherwise enchant someone else. Folks have feared the Evil 
Eye for centuries and cultivated an extensive body of lore 
- banishment gestures, hex signs, spitting on the ground, 
and so forth - in order to escape its influence. These days, 
though, people often want you to look them in the eye. And 
so, flirtatious glances, poisonous glares, dominance-establishing 
staring contests, puppy-dog eyes, and other optic rituals become 
potent instruments for magick and technology. 


Fashion: Clothes can make the mage. From the social 
grace of a bespoke suit (that is, one that’s tailor-made for the 
individual) to the fierce warnings of gang gear or the playful 
flirtations of a pretty dress, fashion plays a subtle yet pervasive 
part in social interactions. Your mage could craft reinforced 
clothing into armor; adopt disguises; don ritual gear (robes, 
skins, body paint, etc.); display a uniform; cosplay familiar or 
original characters; or simply use high fashion or street wear to 
invoke a particular effect. Especially when that clothing holds 
symbolic weight - like priest’s robes, biker jackets, military 
uniforms, or fetish gear - fashion becomes a potent focus for 
Mind powers, Spirit rites, and Matter-based protection from a 
dangerous world. 


On that note, the lack of clothing - either bared body 
parts or total nudity - constitutes its own type of fashion. 
Witches and shamans often go skyclad (naked) in their rites, 
whereas other mystics take oaths to bare or cover certain parts 
of their bodies. Veils, burqas, scarves, headdresses, bare feet, 
naked chests, gis, saris, club fashions, turbans, clothes made 
from certain materials (silk, fur, even meat)... all of them evoke 
cultural significance, concealing or displaying certain elements 
of the wearer’s body while sending signals about the person 
underneath. 


Food and Drink: Even mages need to eat. And beyond 
the good taste and practical nutrition involved with food and 
drink, those meals have symbolic significance as well. Sharing 
meals means sharing energy - it's an intimate communion 
even in the age of fast food and store-bought chow. Ritual feasts 
hold places of honor in every culture: Thanksgiving, Passover, 
potlatches, and holiday dinners combine spiritual significance, 
good food, and social bonds. Even alone, however, food and 


Chapter Ten: The Book of Magic 


Ne 7^: 


drink can be important, mingling bodily needs with mystical 
intent and chemical ingestion. 


Formulae, Equations, and Sacred or Advanced 
Mathematics: Math has been called the universal language of 
the cosmos. Its esoteric applications can seem as arcane as any 
wizard sritual...and many mystic rituals do, in fact, feature complex 
numerology and brain-shaking mathematics. For Technocrats - 
especially those from Iteration Xand the Syndicate - mathematical 
models help predict future events (in short, focus Time magick), 
plot out connections (the Correspondence Sphere), determine 
esoteric chemistry (Life principles), and employ physics in 
counterintuitive ways (that is, to use Entropy, Forces, Matter, 
and Prime). Older mystic practices employ sacred numerology, 
angelic formulae, and the dizzying principles of non-Euclidian 
geometry. So if it’s true that mathematics bind the universe 
together, then it’s easy to understand why math plays such a 
vital role in so many practices. 


Gadgets and Inventions: Nothing beats the personal touch. 
As mentioned earlier, machines provide a vital edge to mages 
who want to get things done. Machines created by the mage 
himself, however, embody a bit of that creator’s Enlightenment, 
manifesting it as a potentially powerful device. 


Strictly speaking, a gadget is a minor machine that performs 
a specific function once and then burns out. An invention 
may be any device that’s been hand-crafted by the inventor 
himself; a one-of-a-kind machine, it’s probably the experimental 
prototype fora planned line of similar devices, with all the bugs 
and quirks that such prototypes display. Unlike the capital-D 
Devices described later in The Toybox, these creations don’t 
necessarily have innate technomagick built into them. As focus 
instruments, they provide mechanical vectors for the creator's 
Enlightened Science. 


Because such devices share a personal connection to their 
inventor, these tools count as personal and unique instruments 
(see pp.587-588) when they're being used by the mage who 
created them. They count as simply unique instruments in the 
hands of allied characters, and they probably don't work at all 
for characters who don't share the inventor's view of reality. 
In game terms, a mage using his own inventions and gadgets 
reduces his difficulty by -2, his trusted associates reduce it by 
-1, and strangers find themselves unable to make heads or tails 
of the device. 


Technocrats who enjoy a special relationship with Q 
Division might wind up with experimental gadgets and 
inventions - see the Secret Weapons Background in Chapter 
Six. Etherite allies and other mystic characters could be trusted 
(or tasked) with a special gadget from a technomancer whose 
imagination exceeds his courage. Hopefully, that inventor 
takes the time to explain how the machine's supposed to work; 
otherwise, the guinea pig might find herself with a lump of 
worthless junk in her hands just when she needs it most... 

Gems, Stones, and Minerals: Diamonds are forever. Gold 
is good, and jade incarnates Heavenly goodwill. The mystic 
properties of precious stones, ores, and minerals echo down 
through legend, slang, and alchemical lore. Mages who know 


Ma$e: The Ascension 20^ Anniversary Edition 


how to tap into these properties employ them in rituals, build 
them into instruments, wear them as jewelry, and otherwise 
keep them closeat hand. Technology, meanwhile, employs those 
properties too. Did you think it was an accident that gold is so 
vital to the world's economy or that diamonds find their way 
into so many industrial machines...? 


Group Rites: Smart mages realize that raising power in 
groups directs the collective will and imagination of that group 
toward a specific purpose. Circle-dances, music concerts, plays, 
protests, prayer meetings, and other gatherings provide focus for 
mystic rites. Technomancers understand the power of groups 
too - why else would factories and cubicle farms be so damned 
effective? 


Generally, a mage whips her group to an emotional frenzy 
and then channels their energy into her intended purpose. 
As that energy reaches a peak, she plays the crowd like an 
instrument, bringing things to a climax as she casts her Effect. 
The Allies, Assistants, and Cults section (p. 532) and the 
Acting in Concert section (pp. 542-543) detail the in-game 
effects of sympathetic crowds; for certain practices, however, 
the presence of a group is not just helpful but essential to 
success. (See also the optional-rule sidebar for Management 
and Human Resources, p. 595.) 


Herbs, Roots, Seeds, Flowers, and Plants: Growing 
things hold power, especially when you want to perform Life- 
based magick. Plant-based materials can be essential to other 
instruments like brews, laboratories, and drugs, and they 
provide the roots, so to speak, for practices like witchcraft, 
shamanism, and many forms of medicine work. By gathering, 
drying, curing, eating, grinding, or otherwise employing these 
botanical substances, a mage can distill the essence of Creation 
into her Arts. 


Beyond its practical properties, each sort of plant holds 
symbolic importance; in most cases, the different portions of a 
plant have significance as well. Holly sprigs, elderberries, acorns, 
mandrake roots... even now, popular culture immortalizes 
ancient plant lore. A creative player can learn about the 
properties of different plants and herbs, then bring both 
the practical and symbolic elements of botanical tools to the 
gaming table. 


Household Tools: Especially among the practical Arts, 
household tools - pitchforks, hammers, nails, brooms, ovens, 
horseshoes - hold traditional power as magical implements. 
The same holds true for technological tools, as well... witness 
the atavistic terror that’s invoked by a chainsaw. 


Because magick so often depends upon directing energy 
and intentions toward a goal, household tools have all kinds of 
uses. Six silver dollars might be hammered into place around 
your property to keep the cops away; a specially brewed floor 
wash might cleanse tainted Resonance; a Roomba (with or 
without a shark-dressed cat) could patrol your Chantry-house. 
And when the spells are done, those tools serve double duty 
around the home. A witch, after all, can use her broom to 
fly to the gathering and then sweep the house clean once she 
comes home again. 


Knots and Ropes: There's a reason the phrase spellbinding 
exists. Long before Velcro, buttons, or carabiners, people had to 
tie or weave things together. Because the principle of contagion 
focuses on connecting spells, subjects, and casters by a single 
strand, knots and ropes (as well as thongs, strings, threads, and 
so forth) feature heavily in spells. The metaphorical Tapestry 
and the concept of string-theory physics both draw upon that 
connection, and so the acts of binding things together, weaving 
intentions with materials, and undoing knots to release their 
energy all serve practical as well as symbolic purposes in magick. 
And once you understand that fact, you see deeper significance 
in Celtic knotwork, knitting, the arcane arts of rope bondage, 
and the pervasive imagery of mystic spiders and Pattern Webs. 


Laboratories and Lab Gear: Although you can't usually 
carry a laboratory around with you (although certain portable 
labs can be stuck inside a vehicle, trailer, or suitcase), such 
places of labor provide essential instruments for technological, 
alchemical, and elaborate ritual practices. Generally, a mage 
employs his laboratory to refine other tools and spells for his 
practice, then uses the results of that lab work as his portable 
instruments. Still, without that lab, he'd be more or less 
worthless. You can't grow clones, install cybernetics, or refine 
base materials into perfection without a good lab. 


By extension, lab equipment - beakers, crucibles, 
centrifuges, generators, analyzers, and other sundry (though 
expensive) tech that procures results - constitutes an essential 
array of tools for the practicing scientist or technician. Even 


old-school mystics use labs occasionally, though they might 
refer to them as dungeons, workrooms, sanctuaries, and so forth. 
Within such space, a mage can work through difficult puzzles, 
experiment with methods, and enjoy a fairly secure space where 
Consensus interference is a bad memory. 


(An established laboratory space makes an obvious 
Sanctum, as in the Background Trait of that name. See Chapter 
Six for details.) 


Languages: Words are a form of magick; after all, they 
shape abstract thoughts into reality by communicating them to 
other beings and thus opening their minds to your own. In a 
communal form, language shares thoughts and - by extension 
- broadens the potential of reality for everyone concerned. 
Words, it is said, opened the gulf between animals, spirits, and 
human beings... and although animals and spirits clearly have 
their own forms of language, the flexible precision of human 
words has certainly marked a major step in our development. 


But words are bigger than that. According to many legends, 
the Divine Source (by whatever name you prefer to call it) 
spoke words in order to bring the universe into being. Certain 
words and languages echo that divine command and can thus 
make things happen. Hebrew, Sanskrit, Arabic, Mandarin, and 
Latin (among others) supposedly capture the essence of godly 
speech, whereas other languages like Greek, Urdu, and Hopi 
encompass sublime concepts that elude other human tongues. 


Mundane languages can alter reality too, especially when 
those languages get rearranged, re-contextualized, redefined, 


Chapter Ten: The Book of Magic 593 


Memes 


A playful pun on gene and memor (Latin for "mindful"), the term meme reflects a “mental gene" of an idea that replicates 
itself through symbols and beliefs. Memes spread by appealing to wants, needs, aspirations, or fears within a receptive 
audience. Often paired with visual symbols (especially in the Internet form of meme, which combines an image with an 
idea), a meme inspires thoughts; thoughts breed activities; activities create change; and that change often spreads the 
meme. Thus, the concept alters reality to its own benefit. 


Most memes come and go quickly; others latch onto a moment in time and circumstances, grow there, and then fade 
away as the moment passes. Greater memes thrive in mass consciousness, seeding changes that can shift the course 
of history. "Survival of the fittest” is a meme... one misattributed to Charles Darwin even though it contradicts Darwin's 
actual ideas. "Give peace a chance" is another meme, and the Golden Rule has survived as a meme for over two 
thousand years despite the human tendency to do its opposite. Most memes focus on a simple phrase or image ("Do as 


thou wil") that acts as a hook for a much larger idea (Understand that Will is the conscious choice behind your actions, 
and then act in accordance with your chosen Will so that you might bring the world into accord with your ideals). For 
obvious reasons, then, many people misinterpret memes, altering them to fit their own way of looking at things. And so, 
in return, the meme changes as it grows. 


Mages use memes all the time; hell, Mage itself is a meme wrapped in other memes. Mythic Threads and memes 
complement one another — the symbol conveying the idea, the idea deepening the significance of the symbol. Mage 
characters employ meme-tools and practices to focus meme-ideas that spread memes... and yet they can eventually 
realize that their memes are prisons that they must transcend in order to meet their ultimate meme of Ascension... a meme 
about which most of them disagree. On many levels, Mage is a game about competing memes, a game that uses memes, 
undercut by the meme that all memes are intrinsically flawed. 


We now return to our regularly scheduled game rules. 


And yeah - that phrase involved a meme or two as well. 


or otherwise altered in order to change the meaning attached 
to the words. Hip-hop rapping presents a perfect example of 
such remixed language, breaking down the expected rhythms, 
spellings, and context of words in order to invoke an alternative 
truth. Internet jargon does the same thing, as does legalese. 
By altering the common tongue, a person (mage or Sleeper) 
can change the realities it describes, making codes that admit 
or exclude certain people, seeding new concepts out among 
the people, or invoking certain states of mind by forcing the 
audience to acceptunusual modes of communication. And then 
there's the anti-language of unfamiliar babble that still sounds 
like it means something important. (See the Voiceentry, below.) 


Spoken words also have a sonic component that literally 
resonates throughout the world, changing the landscape in 
accordance with the speaker’s wishes. Words of power - amen, 
aho, ohm, and the like - convey both their interpreted meaning 
and the resonant power behind the sound itself. Therefore, 
language - both spoken and written - forms a vital element of all 
mystic practices. (Again, see Music, Voice, and Writing, below.) 


Mass Media: As suggested by the name, media becomes a 
medium through which ideas and impressions spread from an 
artist to her audience. The bigger the medium, the larger its 
audience and the further the reach of that idea. Early on, media 
consisted of a storyteller and the members of her tribe; later, 
it expanded to sacred ritual theatres. Each new expansion of 
technology allowed ideas to go further and reach more people. 
With the advent of mass printing and distribution, followed 
by sound- and image-recording technology, radio waves, and 
rapid international travel, media become the dominant tool for 
shaping the Consensus. Memes (see the sidebar) can now spread 


504 . Mage: The Ascension 20^ Anniversary Edition 


across the world in seconds. And so, for the 21*-century mage, 
mass media becomes an essential tool when altering reality. 


As a magickal instrument, mass media can take many 
forms: music concerts or recordings, TV and radio broadcasts, 
Internet posts, viral videos, roleplaying games, remixes, mashups, 
bestselling books, theatrical productions, movies of any scale... 
if they reach a large audience, then they're all mass media. Such 
media provide excellent venues for coincidental Mind Effects 
- the audience wants to receive a message, and therefore they're 
already receptive to it. Such messages can occasionally seed new 
Mythic Threads too - just Google Harry Potter, Twilight, or Obama. 


Since the earliest large rituals, mages have used mass media to 
make things happen. The Syndicate, NWO, Cult of Ecstasy, and 
Celestial Chorus are the obvious masters of media, but any group 
or individual can employ it. (Rumors and evidence suggest that the 
Nephandi might be the greatest media masters of them all.) Given 
thevast reach provided by the Internet, data files, home-production 
technology, and thevarious things you can do with them all, anyone 
with a computer and Internet access can employ mass media. And 
though the Internet's signalto-noise ratio makes it hard to create 
large and lasting impressions, a savvy person can use a single cell- 
phone picture to start waves rolling across our world. 


Meditation: An intrinsic part of almost every mystic practice 
(and many technological ones as well), meditation involves 
quiet reflection through which a person screens out everyday 
distractions in order to connect with her inner self. Through 
meditation, a mage focuses her intentions, sorts through her 
circumstances, and often arrives at the next step she needs in 
order to move forward. 


NOS 


Certain folks extend their Will through the actions of other people. By managing and directing those other people, that 
sort of influence can turn human resources into instruments of magick. Now, we're not talking about transforming code- 
monkeys into flying monkeys... although that, too, is possible, albeit really vulgar and a major violation of HR policies. 
Instead, an optional rule may - at the Storyteller's discretion — allow certain Mage characters to use people as an 
instrument of their Arts. 


A specialty of Syndicate bosses (see Convention Book: Syndicate, pps. 71-72) and other mages who favor social acumen 
and hypereconomics, the Management and Human Resources instrument gets a pack of underlings to perform your 
magick for you. Generally, these employees and devotees are Sleepers, not mages in the Awakened sense. What they do is 
totally within normal human limitations. Properly directed, though, they can change Consensus Reality in subtle yet significant 
ways: buying shares to tip the stock market, posting videos that promote an idea, revealing a theory or concept that tilts the 
Consensus through popular appeal, spreading rumors that destroy a target's reputation, using skills (medicine, transportation, 
fighting, finance) that the mage rega ds not possess, and other everyday activities that have larger outcomes than people 
realize. It’s a "just say the word and it's done" sort of magick that parlays social influence into altered reality. 


As an instrument, management and human resources demands time, patience, and connections. The average schmo 
cannot snap his fingers and have a magical cabbie deliver him instantly from New York to DC. Ah — but a manager with 
cloutcan call Transport Services and have a helicopter waiting nearby within minutes; two or three hours later, he’s gone 
from his executive suite in Manhattan to the steps of the Supreme Court, where an escort's waiting to usher him into a 
meeting with the judges who'll decide a case at the heart of U.S law... and thus, reality is changed. In game terms, the 
player could say that he used management as a tool of the dominion practice, focusing his belief in political power to 
perform a Correspondence 3/ Mind 3 Effect. No Paradox, little risk — that mage plays by Reality's rules, at the cost of 
a bit of time, indirect action, and some socially leveraged power. 


(No, that mage does not use magick to conjure a helicopter and pilot — he’s using resources that already exist. For details, 
see the sidebar Axis of Coincidence, p. 533.) 


Social power is essential to this option. A mage using management and human resources needs to have at least three dots in 
at least two of the following Backgrounds, plus a concept that allows him to boss people around and expect them to obey: 


Necessary MannoementiBacie 
Allies (to do favors) 

Backup (to deploy underlings) 

Contacts (to utilize social leverage) 

Cult (as per Backup) 

Fame (to get folks to help you) 

Influence (pretty obvious) 

Rank (reflects command and control) 

Resources (because when money talks, people jump) 
Retainers (that’s what they’re for, after all) 

Spies (to perform the supposedly impossible) 


Those underlings cannot do things that normal people could not accomplish. Turning folks into frogs is beyond this 
instrument, although turning them into fish food is totally do-able. Management takes time, too — you can say "from my 
lips to God's ears," but that "god" still acts on a human schedule. This rule’s not meant to allow players to craft lawn- 
gnome armies or blow up cities with a few well-placed words. Still, social power is a form of magick, and its effects (and 
Effects) within our world can be miraculous. 


Often simplified into mere relaxation, meditation actually 
runs much deeper than that. Given the hectic, distraction- 
filled world we live in, though, meditation’s certainly a useful 
tool for relaxation as well as focus on greater things. Mages 
use meditation to connect to Primal Force, bridge minds and 
emotions, reach out to higher (or lower) powers, perceive their 
surroundings on a sublime level, access their inner resources, 
and plan the next move in their activities. As a tool, then, 
meditation works for just about anything, so long as the character 


has time to stop moving, focus on the meditation, and screen 
out distractions long enough to find what she seeks. It doesn’t 
work well, obviously, in high-stress situations, although - given 
time - a character can use meditation to reduce her stress. 
Traditionally depicted as a person sitting in a lotus position 
while humming Ohm, meditation can take many different 
forms. Postures, katas, games, prayer, running, chanting, dance, 
sex, music, even certain forms of fighting can all function as 
meditation. The vital element is the mindset of the person 


Chapter Ten: The Book of Magic — 595 


meditating. If sheviews her practice as a meditative connection, 
and if it takes her where she needs to go, then almost anything 
can be a form of meditation. For further details, see the 
Meditation Ability in Chapter Six. 


Money and Wealth: Money itself is a magic(k) trick. 
Essentially a symbolic token of trust, money defines a person's 
valyou within society. Societies, too, get defined by how much 
they're worth, so human and social realities are shaped by 
something that has no intrinsic value beyond what people think 
it means. (That trick's even more profound when you consider 
virtual money; burning dollar bills generate very little heat, 
but numbers in a database generate no heat at all.) Obviously, 
then, money provides a magickal focus for folks who know how 
to use it... and no faction understands money as well as the 
Syndicate does. 


As a magickal tool, money has two potential forms: 
physical cash and virtual trade. Cash - paper money, coins, 
tokens, and so forth - allows the mage to pass along an Effect 
by passing along the cash. A $20.00 bill could carry a mind 
Effect that reminds someone of his mother; a Spanish piece of 
eight could bear an ancient curse; a defaced dollar bill might 
feature the message THIS IS NOT YOUR GOD stamped in red 
ink, focusing a Mind or Entropy Effect that degrades people's 
trust in social institutions. Cash often holds Resonance too, 
especially if it's been tainted by criminal acts or emotional 
desperation. As any mage knows, blood money is a real thing 
when you understand Resonance. 


Virtual trade focuses Mind and/ or Entropy Effects that 
get people to believe that abstract numbers determine their 
fate. Checks, credit and debit cards, credit ratings, bank 
statements, and approval processes reflect uses of virtual trade. 
Such tools can be extraordinarily effective and dangerous. At 
the time this section was originally written, in real life, che 
United States government was temporarily shut down over 
an imaginary crisis built around virtual values that have no 
physical counterpart, only the emotional reality of what people 
think a bunch of numbers mean. Societies can rise and fall 
over such ideas, so the practice of hypereconomics (see The Art 
of Desire/ Hypereconomics) manipulates virtual trade on a 
scale far beyond the possibilities of physical cash. 


Music: Oneoftheoldest magickal tools, music harnesses the 
powers of sound, art, memes, social influence, voices, symbols, 
and - in one way or another - many of the other tools on this 
list. A full exploration of the esoteric potential of music runs 
far beyond this space, and although its most obvious adherents 
include the Celestial Chorus, Bata'a, Dreamspeakers, Cult of 
Ecstasy, and Hollow Ones, any group or mage can use music 
as an instrument of focus. 


As a general rule, music's vibrations carry the spell caster's 
intentions into the world. That music can be broadcast to a 
mass audience, performed for a smaller audience, or created in 
solitude for personal Effects. For obvious reasons, music takes 
time to perform but makes an ideal instrument for rituals, 
especially when a number of characters are working together 
to weave the Effect. 


596 Mage: The Ascension 20" Anniversary Edition 


Depending upon the character, his audience, and the scope 
of the Effect, that music can range from quiet humming to a 
full-scale orchestral symphony. Lullabies, rock operas, chamber 
music, plaintive solo flute, vocalized chants... if there’s a way 
to perform music, then there’s a mystical practice associated 
with that type of performance. 


Nanotech: Composed of miniscule, self-replicating 
machines, nanotechnology involves the study and design of 
productive engines on the molecular and atomic level. To 
Consensus reality, such technologies are largely theoretical; to 
technomancers - most especially the innovators of Iteration 
X and the Society of Ether - they’re an essential tool for 
Enlightened Procedures. 


Although all groups have been holding back that level of 
technology from the Masses (the consensus is that the Masses 
can’t be trusted with it, and that’s probably correct), nanotech 
forms a common instrument for Life and Matter Effects... 
most especially those Procedures that either build or repair 
structures or organisms. Technocratic healing Procedures 
often involve nanotech patches, and machines that grow out 
of nowhere actually spring from high-intensity (read: vulgar) 
nanotech clusters that create material structures faster than the 
human eye can follow. 


That speed, combined with the high level of energy and 
material resources involved (in game terms, the amount of 
Quintessence they consume), keep nanotech out of wider use. 
Although favored Technocracy personnel employ nanotech 
instruments in many Threat Level A responses, the risks and 
requirements of existing nanotech... most especially the awful 
potential consequences of unregulated proliferation (read: 
someone else using the stuff)... assure that such innovations 
will remain restricted to certain agents and application within 
the foreseeable future. 


Numbers and Numerology: Numbers hold power. As 
mentioned above under the Formulae entry, that power can 
be unlocked through arcane mathematics. Sometimes, though, 
all you need is a single number - nine, for example - to seal 
your mystical intentions. 


On a related note, the occult practice of numerology 
draws connections between specific numbers and the deeper 
levels of Creation. As such, it provides a venerable focus for 
Correspondence, Spirit, Prime, or Time Arts, acting as a tool 
for understanding the ties between one thing and another. 
And so, beyond the baroque patterns of number theory, simple 
numbers or numerical correspondences (Bible verses, racing 
horses, sports-team player numbers, etc.) can be remarkably 
potent tools when they get assigned to something you're trying 
to accomplish. 


Offerings and Sacrifices: Often, the best way to prove that 
you really want something involves giving up something else 
in order to obtain your goal. Thus, sacrifice (“to make sacred") 
holdsa precious, though controversial, place in mystic practices. 
Essentially, a person offers up something precious - property, 
behavior, living things, even her own life - in order to seal a 
deal with the Powers That Be. 


Typically associated with maleficia, sacrifice has an understandably bad rap. Slitting Fido's throat in order to summon 
devils is a terrible idea for all kinds of reasons. And yet, the custom of offering things up has deep spiritual roots in even the 
most virtuous traditions. Jesus, Raven, Odin, Prometheus... all of them sacrificed themselves in order to achieve a greater goal. 
Mortal devotees - Awakened and otherwise - use sacrifice as both a tool and a display of spiritual commitment. Even atheists 
understand the value of such offerings; it takes money, after all, to make money. 


In game terms, a sacrifice involves giving up an offering as a tool in accomplishing the Effect. The nature and severity of 
that sacrifice depends upon the mage, her practice, and the goal she wants to achieve. Using the Prime Sphere, a mage could 
also harvest Quintessence from a sacrifice. But although live offerings have literally vital significance within many cultures, 
killing something in order to further your own ends raises obvious moral and legal questions, especially in our current era. 

For more details, see the sourcebook How Do You DO That?. — 


Ordeals and Exertion: Pain has a marvelous way of focusing your 
attention. From the gruesome splendor of the Lakota sun-dance to 
the more prosaic practice of cutting, people employ techniques of 
significant anguish as methods for either getting out of their 
heads or, in contrast, getting “under the skin” to find the deeper 
layers there. Many mystic practices (and certain technological 
ones, too) employ agony as a tool for focus. 


Athletic exertions, too, count toward such goals. 
Marathons, pumping iron, cage-fighting, extreme sports... 
they all take you out of the routine and into the moment 
and thus provide focus through intense experience. 
Physically, such exertions are ordeals - challenges 
that take a person to her limits and show her how 
much she’s capable of doing. And so, for certain 
mages (especially Akashics, Thanatoics, Ecstatics, 
shamans, and Technocrats), the practice of 
intentional exertion provides a physical and 
symbolic way to “break on through” and 
reach new levels of reality. 


Prayers and Invocations: Reaching 
out to higher or lower powers for 
support, a person can, with any luck, 
secure aid from the force in question. 
Among religious people, that force tends 
to be the god they worship or intercessors like saints, 
Loa, bodhisattvas, or guardian angels. Certain 
desperate folks, however, pray to devils or rival 
gods - a heretical but surprisingly common 
practice. Prayer could be considered a form of 
meditation too, especially when it's part ofa — , 
daily ritual. For religious mages, prayer is THE 
instrument of choice. No other focus works as 
well or brings a devotee closer to his god. Y 


if 
ig 


n 


H 
| 
X 


Invocations aren't always prayers, but they | 
still call in potent forces. Essentially, the mage 
speaks names or words of power (see Languages 
and Voice) in order to make things happen. 
Materialist mages do this too; it's amazing how 
effective certain phrases ("Nothing to see here," 
“Death before dishonor,” "It's a fact — you can look 
it up") can be when you say them with 
intention. An invocation speaks Will 
into activity, so buzzwords and battle - 
cries figure prominently in the Arts 


of Change. 


H 


Chapter Ten: The Book of Magic 507 / 


 — P € 


r wp 


r, 
A 


" 
n. 


4. 


Sacred Iconography: The Qur'an. The cross. The pentacle. 
The Tau. Icons and scriptures. Prayer wheels and hell-money. 
The rich iconography of human religions provides an essential 
focus for mages of faith. Depending on the character’s creed, 
the symbols in question could be brandished while casting an 
Effect; employed in rituals; worn simply as a reflection of faith; 
or possibly - for enemies of that faith - desecrated or destroyed 
in order to insult the creed in question, mock the power of its 
god(s), or co-opt that religion’s resources in order to take them for 
oneself. In either case, those symbols contain potent emotional 
symbolism in addition to their potential mystic power. 


Sacred materials almost always contain a strong Resonance 
from that faith. In certain cases - like the legendary power 
of the cross - that Resonance focuses the invested power 
of millions of believers... which may provide a metaphysical 
reason for the force such icons have against certain enemies of 
that faith (like, say, vampires). Employed by a mage from the 
appropriate religion, a powerful instrument of faith - holy water, 
sanctified earth, a famous shrine, and so on - could contain a 
bit of Quintessence that it lends to the mage in question. Holy 
symbols tend to make certain Effects coincidental when they're 
performed among faithful Sleepers, too; a group of devout 
Catholics won't be surprised to see a priest perform a miracle. 


Sex and Sensuality: Sex is fun. Sex is scary. Sex is the most 
intimate thing you can share with another person, short of killing 
or giving birth. Hence, sex and sensuality (that is, close but 
not necessarily sexual contact) hold places of honor and shame 
among many mystical and technological practices. Certain 
disciplines - LeftHand and Westernized Tantra, Gardnerian 
Wicca, Taoist sexual alchemy, the reclaimed Qadishtu tradition, 
and other forms of sacred eros - employ sex acts to focus life 
energy and dedicated magicks. Others simply stage orgies and 
Bacchanalia as tools for ecstatic worship, mysticism, and release. 


As the entries about Bodywork and Energy suggest, sex 
rituals provide intimate contact for mystics both Awakened 
and otherwise. Sometimes regarded as communion between 
masculine and feminine polarities, other times used to break 
down concepts of gender and identity, occasionally corrupted 
intoviolation (especially in maleficia), and frequently employed 
as initiation (particularly in the Cult of Ecstasy, the Verbena, 
and certain Hermetic lodges and religious orders), ritualized 
sexuality mingles the primal essence of all parties involved. 
Given that level of contact, such practices share Resonance 
and make ideal instruments for Life, Mind, and Prime Arts... 
although, as certain lovers can attest, sex has a way of making 
Time move faster or slower for you, too. 


Social Domination: The superior person does notwaiton 
the whims of others. That person - male or female - moves the 
world through force of personality. He might not be a tyrant - 
he might, in fact, be most effective when he isn't one - but his 
word commands respect. Mages are superior people, and the 
most dominant of them use that knowledge to impose their 
Will upon the people in their lives. 


The art of “alphaing” people isn't necessarily what folks 
think it is. Although Alpha-Male/ Bitch types do tend to get 


their way in the short term, people resent them for it, often 


598 Mage: The Ascension 20" Anniversary Edition 


screwing them over out of vindictive spite. The most effective 
dominant people make people glad to be in their service. They 
inspire love as well as respect, and they garner long-term loyalty 
as a result. 


Sometimes, though, short-term results are enough to work 
with. A bully can impose dominance upon people, turning 
them into agents of his Enlightened Will. And really, let's not 
kid ourselves: abusive bastards run corporations, governments, 
cults, and even Traditions. The word sociopath is so loaded 
these days. We'll simply call those people movers and shakers: 
they move, and you shake. 


As a magickal instrument, social dominance plays out 
through command of group situations. Rank, eye contact, 
imposing body language, and sometimes threats provide the 
obvious tactics, but a seriously dominant person evokes that 
impression by simply being there. Presence and eloquence work 
far better than brutality, so a mage who uses domination - a 
prized skill in the Technocracy, butuseful in every other faction 
too - directs his Arts (typically Entropy, Mind, Life, and Prime 
Effects) through force of personality, social cues, and the ability 
to back up his commands with Will when need be. 


Forobvious expansions on this idea, see the Might is Right 
paradigm and the practices of dominion and the Art of Desire. 


Symbols: Technically, every instrument on this list is a 
symbol. As an instrument in its own right, however, a symbol 
takes a powerful image or omen - a flag, a glyph, a raven, etc. 
- and then directs a practice and Effect through that vehicle. 
The mage who unleashes a Mind Effect by unfurling a flag (or 
burning it) employs a symbol as a tool of his practice. Folks who 
wear significant symbols - like Captain America or Batman 
- evoke the power of that sign, adopting its mystique as their 
own. Mages do this sort of thing all the time; after all, doesn't 
a wizard look more impressive in his brocade robes and rune- 
carved staff than he would if he were simply wearing jeans? 


Thought Forms: Behind every potent symbol, there's 
supposedly a level of psychic reality. The belief and life force 
invested in that symbol - and connecting it to the thing it 
supposedly represents - grants a level of reality to that symbol 
and the principles behind it. In modern occultism, that reality 
is sometimes called an egregore: a “watcher” that attains a sort 
of sentience because people believe in it. 


Although various practices disagree about the nature 
of egregores (are they independent spirit entities, psychic 
constructs, imaginary concepts, quantum-particle activity 
principles, or simply human mind games invested with belief?), 
these thought forms become instruments for various practices, 
most especially chaos magick, crazy wisdom, shamanism, 
reality hacking, some forms of High Ritual, the Art of Desire, 
hypereconomics, and - as certain postmodernist mages would 
argue - every form of magickal practice, particularly the religious 
ones. 


(You could think of an egregore as a meme-god; some 
occultists, in fact, would argue that both memes and gods are 
egregores, and that no distinction between the three of them 
exists. Yes, mages argue about some pretty weird shit.) 


In game terms, a character uses a thought form by 
constructing a symbol, either in her imagination or in some 
physical and/ or social form, and then meditating upon it. If 
she can convince other people to invest psychic energy into 
the symbol, so much the better - a potent egregore becomes 
a stronger instrument. By calling upon that symbol as she 
casts a spell, either through meditation or invocation, she 
can focus her intentions through it as she would any other 
sort of instrument. It works because her belief has granted 
reality to the thought form, creating something from nothing. 
And so, although the mage appears to be working without an 
instrument, that instrument is actually something she holds in 
her head, believing - rightly or otherwise - that it has external 
reality as well. 


Beyond the egregores of various mass-media constructions 
(Mickey Mouse, Team Edward, even Axe body spray), an 
especially pervasive thought form rules the 21* century: the 
Corporate Citizen. Employed to devastating effect by the 
Syndicate, Nephandi, and other corporate-culture mavens 
(Awakened and otherwise), the Corporate Citizen has become 
the most powerful political force of our era. Wearing many 
different masks... one hopes... this thought form channels 
immense energy for the people who understand how to 
use it as an instrument. A CNN press pass can focus potent 
applications of the Mind Sphere; a Koch credit card could 
channel access to incredible amounts of wealth, and the Axe 
citizen might indeed facilitate Life-based enchantments. The 
idea that there could be many different entities spawned from 
Corporate-Citizen thought forms - each with its own powers 
and agendas - is too frightening to contemplate... and yet, it 
might also be the truth. 


Toys: Magick need not always be serious. Playful items - 
tops, blocks, dolls, toy soldiers, little cars, games, and so forth 
- often find their way into the Arts, especially when those Arts 
are being practiced by Marauders, kids, street mages, Awakened 
parents, geek-culture mavens, and consistently young-at-heart 
folks like Willy Wonka or Mr. Magorium. 


Toys can be creepy too, of course... especially the ones 
that come to life when you sleep, watch you after midnight, 
or seem to know a bit more than you'd like them to know 
about things you'd rather not have ANYONE find out about. 
Ouija boards, creepy dolls, action figures with working guns... 
such tools provide hours of fun for mages whose idea of play 
is rather sinister... 


Tricks and Illusions: “It’s an ILLOOOOSION!” Mages 
who've learned how to hide their Arts in plain sight can at least 
try to pass off their Effects as stage trickery. If the magician in 
question hasan arsenal of real-life tricks - ones that don'tactually 
employ True Magick but sleight-ofhand and misdirection - it’s 
far easier to then convince the Masses that the flying car or 
teleportation jump was simply another cool illusion. 


On a similar note, pranks, gags, pratfalls, traps, con-jobs, 
and other tricks can be useful tools for the mystic or hypertech 
Arts as well. A well-executed prank or scam is kind of like 
magick to begin with; if the grifter just happens to employ 


real magick to make her tricks more effective, well, then she’s 
simply very good at the game. Gamblers and survivalists can 
put Correspondence, Entropy, Life, Mind, and Matter to good 
use by wrapping such Effects up in tricks and traps. And as for 
illusions, Mind excels at getting folks to see what they want to 
see, not necessarily what's really going on. 


Certain Social Abilities provide excellent dice pools for 
this instrument; for details, see the Art, Blatancy, Expression, 
High Ritual, Seduction, and SubterfugeTalents in Chapter Six. 


True Names: To name something is to define it; to name 
someone is to have control over them. For this reason, among 
others, mages often hide their identities, taking on craft names 
and adopted monikers that differ from their full birth names. 
The New World Order, of course, has access to any legal record 
they care to check... which gives them an edge when they want 
someone's True Name. From a technomagickal standpoint, an 
American's Social Security Number might work just as well 
as... or better than... her True Name if the mage wants to hold 
power over that citizen. 


In game terms, the Storyteller may rule thatan enemy with 
someone's True Name - that is, her full legal name, perhaps 
with childhood nicknames attached - might act against that 
person as if the enemy has a unique personal instrument (2 to 
casting difficulties). That option might be a bit too powerful for 
comfort; then again, such power could underscore the point 
that we take privacy too lightly in this era... 


Vehicles: KITT. Blue Thunder. Chitty-Chitty-Bang-Bang 
and every car ever driven by James Bond. Modern mages 
know how to get the most out of that cornerstone of our era: 
the magic vehicle. And though such conveyances tend to be 
Wonders in their own right, a tinkerer or driver can work his 
Arts through any properly maintained machine. 


Enchanted vehicles aren't always modern machines. 
Coachmen used to be infamous for their apparentgiftfor driving 
coaches between worlds, and High Artisans gained renown for 
their devastating war machines. Sailing ships, ironclads, old 
diving bells, skates, even surfboards can provide a focus for 
transportation magicks. 


For rules dealing with vehicles, inventions, and repairs, 
see The Technological World in Chapter Nine. 


Voice and Vocalizations: Vibrations from the human 
throat focus astonishing Effects. From singing or recognizable 
words (see Music and Language, above) to the wordless cries, 
gibberish, or evocative singing techniques collectively known as 
glossolalia (“babbling tongue”), vocalizations feature prominently 
in mystic practices. Both the terms gibberish and jabber come, 
it has been said, from the 8"-century Arab alchemist Jabir 
ibn Hazyan, who disguised his forbidden formulas in terms 
so incomprehensible that would-be translators referred to his 
work as “Jabir-ish.” 


In mystic practices, non-linguistic utterances and nonsense 
phrases often evoke sublime states of mind because they seem 
significant even though they defy discernable language. The 
“speaking in tongues” so popular in prophecy and evangelism; 


Chapter Ten: The Book of Magic 599 


~~ eo 


TN E 


saf 


ga Pal 


Vision Quests 


Although it's too involved and self-contained to function as a practical tool, the vision quest forms an important rite of 
passage within many mystic traditions. Essentially, a mystic pits herself against challenges both internal and external, 
removing herself from the everyday world and facing extreme deprivation in an effort to reach new insights and triumph 
over limitations. 


Almost mandatory for shamans and common among Ecstatics, Thanatoics, witches, neotribalists, and other people 
beyond the fringe, a vision quest typically involves prayer, fasting, and a retreat from every familiar thing. Most often, 
the quester goes off into the wilderness with as little food, water, and equipment as she's willing to dare. Certain cultures 
favor vision quests without any food or clothing whatsoever — the quester depends upon survival skills, luck, and the 
kindness of her gods. Danger... up to and including the possibility of death... is an essential feature of the vision quest. If 
it was easy, then it would mean nothing. 


Psychoactive entheogens often play a role in the quest; even without them, the mystic might endure hallucinations from 
hunger, thirst, exhaustion, and exposure. Vision questers tend to pass into the Otherworlds, either mentally or in an 
extra-physical sense. Spirits both real and delusional arrive to test the mystic. Totems often choose their favored mortals 
through such ordeals. Failure to pass such tests can mean madness, illness, death, or — if you're lucky — a nasty detour 
that forces the quester to call upon her deepest inner strength. 


If and when a quester returns, she often brings back tokens of her experience: feathers, stones, scars, and so forth. If a 
spirit has favored that person, then that patron leaves the mystic with a token of its esteem. It's possible to fail a vision 
quest, of course... to get lost and require rescuing, to disgrace yourself by cheating, and even — perhaps worst of all - to 
endure the whole thing and learn nothing from the experience. 


In game terms, a vision quest could be a solo adventure in which a single character goes off to test herself. The 
Environmental Hazards systems in Chapter Nine can provide rules for such scenarios, most especially the sections 
regarding weather, starvation, falls, poisons, and drugs. See also The Otherworlds rules in that same chapter and 


the Bestiary and Totem Spirits sections of Appendix I. 


the channeled speech or singing of mediums and trance-artists; 
the passionate cries of sex, euphoria, and pain... all of them work 
as tools of magickal focus. Even primal sounds - snarls, growls, 
whining, and so forth - can contain mystic influence. And 
although hypertech practices tend to frown upon indecipherable 
words, the cyborg who snarls as he aims his chain-gun might 
not need Spheres in order to get his point across! 


Wands, Rods, and Staves: Harry Potter’s crew understands 
the mythic quality of wands and wizard-staves. Acting as 
extensions of the mage’s arm (and, symbolically, his Will and 
other parts of his anatomy), these instruments become common 
yet formidable tools. Best of all, they can be practical in the 
everyday world as well. Although a wand won’t do much for 
you beyond directing mystic spells, a rod or staff could serve 
as a walking stick, prop, or weapon... especially for mages who 
spend lots of time in the wilderness, where hiking sticks get 
plenty of use. 


Weapons: Tools of ill omen tend to find their way into 
Awakened hands, often becoming channels for Entropy, 
Forces, Life, and Matter Arts. Any Sphere, of course, could 
manifest through a weapon: Spirit-crafted bullets to shoot at 
ghosts; Time-enhanced guns that fire at phenomenal speed; 
Correspondence arrows that fly impossible distances, Warrior- 
Princess throwing discs that seem to fly of their own accord; 
or swords or staves so imposing that only Mind magick could 
explain their mystique. A canny mage doesn’t even need to 


600 Mage: The Ascension 20" Anniversary Edition 


enchant their weapon in order to use it as an instrument for 
Arts; a simple Mind-push tacked onto a witty soliloquy could 
do the trick. (*Drop. Your. Sword.") 


Chapter Nine's Combat section features extensive rules 
for weapons and Sphere-enhanced combat techniques. Here, 
let's simply say that weapons - from a witch's athame to a Black 
Suit's gun - are among the most popular tools for magickal 
focus. Even outside combat situations, a sword or dagger holds 
potent ritual significance. (See also Armor, Devices, and 
Offerings and Sacrifices.) 


Writings, Inscriptions, and Runes: Writing isa magickal act. 
Long before literacy became a common trait, the man or woman 
who could read and write understood the secret lore of texts and 
scriptures. Even now, the act of physically writing something down 
(or carving or engraving it into a surface) gives that magick a sense 
of permanence. It was for this art that Odin hanged himself on 
the World Tree, that Chinese calligraphers spent their days in 
meditative bliss, that monks and friars, scribes and nuns devoted 
themselves to copying holy words in sacred texts. And even now, 
asmart blog post or text message can change somebody’s world. 
True, there’s a huge difference between cutting bloody runes 
in your flesh, scribing an illuminated scripture, and texting a 
Twitter observation. Any and all of these methods, though, can 
focus magickal intentions. Hell, even writing a roleplaying book 
could be considered an act of Will... 


Part VIII: Adjustments, 
Procedures, and Rotes 


The diverse powers of the Awakened are without 
measure. Despite vast collections of rotes, 
Procedures, and other such applications of the 
Arts, each mage is his or her own spellbook, 
crafting Effects to suit the circumstances of 
that moment. Even so, every Awakened and 
Enlightened group has special tricks and rituals 
that its members use when necessary. The 
following section presents a very brief look at 


the established Effects of the Awakened world. 


For easy reference, each of the following entries has been 
listed by the highest Sphere(s) involved in the Effect, then by 
the next-highest Spheres, and so on. Many of these entries have 
optional components that can be added on by a mage who knows 
the proper Spheres. Remember that a character needs to know all 
of the essential Spheres involved, and must have the dots required 
in those Spheres, before he can use a listed Effect. Bruce Foster, 
for example, must have at least two dots in Forces before he can 
try HotShotting his guns. He doesn't have to have Mind 2 as 
well; if he does have it, though, then he could add the Mind-based 


intimidation factor to his attack. 


The following Effects and spells display only a small sample 
of Awakened possibilities. For more extensive acts of magick, see 
the Common Magickal Feats chart, the sourcebook How Do 
You DO That? and the many books in the Mage: The Ascension 
line. Note that older books might have different systems, thanks 
to the rule changes between editions. When in doubt, use the 
rules in this edition to determine what an Effect can do. 


Enlightened Adjustments 


Subtle acts of Enlightened understanding and manipula- 
tion, Adjustments remain coincidental except under the most 
extreme or skeptical circumstances. Although the Syndicate 
and New World Order specialize in such workings, other 
technomancers can employ them too. With minor variations 
in practice and instruments, a mystic mage can use these Ad- 
justments as well - probably under another, more poetic name, 
but with the Spheres and systems intact. 


Black Card/ Little Black Box 
(ee Correspondence/ ¢* Forces/ «e Mind) 

If you've watched an action thriller within the last decade or 
two, then you've seen this trick in action: The security expert/ 
thief/ superspy takes out a little black box or card, hooks it into 
(or passes it through) some part of the security system, stands 
back, and lets the lights flash and the numbers blur by until the 
digital locks open and the system lets her in. Real-life systems 
don't work that way, of course, but a little technomagick can. 


System: Game-wise, the little black box trick allows a mage 
with Correspondence 2, Forces 2 and Mind 2 to attempt to hack 


controls she couldn't possibly reach, so long as those controls 
are networked into the place where the she's using the box or 
card. The mage still needs to successfully hack the system and 
must make the requisite rolls with the requisite skills - see 
Hacking on the Dramatic Feats chart in Chapter Nine, p. 
403. Technically, this sort of thing should be vulgar magick; 
the black box, however, renders this trick coincidental. After 
all, the character's just using advanced technology to crack 
the system. You see that sort of thing in movies all the time... 


Hot-Shotting 
(ee Forces; possibly with «e Mind) 

Anyone who's ever watched a movie from the last few 
decades recognizes the ominous “CHK-CHK” of a cocked 
shotgun, the click of a pistol's hammer, the "SHHHING" 
of a drawn blade, or the clack of a rifle-bolt slapping 
into place. By modifying her weaponry and then playing 
upon the psychological effect of media-instilled dread, a 
Technocratic operative can get her target to stand down, 
increase the efficiency of her attacks, or project a storm 
of fire so intense that only the strongest Reality Deviants 
can stand against it. 


System: A correctly trained operative - that is, one with 
the right Spheres - can use a simple Crafts roll to modify her 
weapon so that it makes more noise and gets a bit of extra 
kinetic kick. The Forces Sphere enhances both the sonic timbre 
of the sound and the kinetic damage of its strike. The resulting 
effects upon the target could be seen as psychological warfare, 
skillful applications of physics, or both. 


Each success reduces the difficulty for the agent's next 
attack by -1, and adds one automatic success for the Forces 
Sphere. If she so chooses, the player may apply that bonus to 
an intimidation-based attack (to get the target to surrender 
withouta fight); to damage (thus hitting the target harder than 
usual); to targets (allowing her to hit more than one of them 
with the next attack); or to a mixture of them all. For details, 
see the Optional Dividing Successes Rule, p. 538. 

The addition of Mind 2 turns the Hot-Shotting Adjustment 
into an explicit psychological threat. In this case, the ominous 
sound is enough to make most targets surrender right away. 
The player rolls against a difficulty of the target’s Willpower; 
if her successes equal or exceed the target’s Willpower, then 
the target gives up without a fight. If not... well, then, that first 


shot still has a lot more force to back up the agent’s argument. 


Hands of Death 
(eee Life, ee Forces, or both; possibly with 
ee Entropy and/ or ¢* Prime added) 


The refined technologies of martial skill allow fragile human 
beings to defy the apparent laws of physics and biology. Thanks 


Chapter Ten: The Book of Magic 


In previous editions, Effect referred to single-Sphere 
spells, and rote referred to spells with more than one 
Sphere involved. Procedure, Adjustment, and spell 
all referred to either option. For clarity's sake, Mage 
20 refers to all workings as Effects, uses rote or spell 
to refer to pre-prepared mystic workings that have a 
sense of history, and Adjustmentand Procedureto refer 
to Technocratic and technomagickal rotes that have 
official sanction within the affiliated: groups. 


to the indisputable gifts of such accomplishment, a man or 
woman can punch holes in walls, shatter planks or stones, and 
cripple or kill a foe with one well-executed blow. There's no 
magick involved, of course - merely the proven applications of 
science. And so, although such arts will not allow a person to 
fly around like some Hong Kong action hero, they do permit 
a sufficiently trained person to deal out unspeakable amounts 
of damage with hands and feet alone. 


Outside the ranks of skilled martial artists, Technocrats 
(and other mages too) can employ cybernetic enhancements, 
anatomical knowledge, and sheer attitude in a quest to lay their 
opponents out in bloody heaps across the floor. And unless 
the act becomes so outrageous that it defies belief, such attacks 
remain impressive... yet coincidental. 


System: An agent's kicks, punches, and strikes inflict 
damage as per the Damage or Duration chart, with one 
automatic success from the Forces Sphere. Most often, this 
Effectuses martial arts asan instrumentanda practice, although 
other options have been noted above. Forces adds to the kinetic 
impact of a blow, and Life targets the opponents Pattern. A 
coincidental blow does not inflict aggravated damage, but a 
truly theatrical (and typically vulgar) blow might. 


As options, the martial artist might also add Entropy to 
spot weak points and thus reduce armor, Durability, or soak 
rolls by one level per success, or add Prime to charge his fists 
with chi energy and thus inflict aggravated damage. The first 
option is not vulgar, but the second one is. 


Right-Click 

(eee Mind/ *** Data; often with * Forces, ¢ Life, * 
Matter, * Prime, ¢* Dimensional Science, or any 
combination of the above) 

The Information Age opens many doors, especially when 
you know how to knock right. Originally created by either the 
Virtual Adepts or New World Order (both groups claim the 
bragging rights), this trick allows a person with access to the 
correct information - usually through a cybernetic uplink, 
BCI, or some other interface like the datacrawl described in 
the Prelude and Appendix II - to pull up pertinent data about 
people, places, and things. 


A mental rightclick grants access to thesource of information, 
typically through the Internet, a home-based data collection, or 


Mage: The Ascension 20" Anniversary Edition 


both. The data appears like a readout in the mage’s mind’s eye, 
offeringsurface dataaboutwhatever the mage happens to be looking 
at when he focuses his mental cursor over it and activates the right- 
click. That data generally covers only the most basic information, 
although a truly skilled operator (that is, someone with a high 
Arete/ Enlightenment Trait and a lot of successes) can uncover 
surprising amounts of information about the subject in question. 


System: Mind 3 scans the surface thoughts of sentient 
subjects, while a connected Mind 1 multitasking Effect lets the 
mage process the information without distraction. Data 3 - an 
essential element of this rote! - grants remote access to computerized 
information; without it, the mage is simply a telepath. 


Meanwhile, the other optional Spheres allow the mage to 
trace energies with ultraviolet or infrared scanning abilities (Forces 
1); spot the state of health in living things and detect their body 
heat signatures (Life 1); scan the physical properties of an object 
(Matter 1); employ X-ray vision on structures or organisms (Life 
1/ Matter 1); note flows of Quintessence energy (Prime 1); or 
employ a combination of the above. Each additional type of 
vision beyond the first one, however, adds +1 difficulty to the 
character’s perception rolls, due to the overlapping visual fields. 
A simple data scan works normally, but adding heat-signature 
vision, X-ray vision, and infrared visual capabilities to that data 
scan adds +3 to the viewer’s difficulty as well. 


For targets who have social media pages, Twitter feeds, 
and so forth, the mage can read their latest updates, pull 
up pictures they have posted, et cetera. From a purely 
psychological perspective, this can provide a devastating edge 
for a technomancer who wants to play nasty. Someone who 
checks into Foursquare can be tracked with the Right-Click once 
the mage has had a chance to right-click on her at least once. 
Until and unless she stops feeding her location into the global 
database, the technomancer can access her current location. 


In order to employ this rote, the character must focus his 
magick through some data-based technological instrument (cell 
phone, cybernetic implant, VDAS, etc.) that can access a larger 
database. Thanks to the definition of this Effect, however, 
it does not allow the character to scan something that’s not in a 
computerized database. That’s not because the Spheres can’t see 
a given phenomenon but because you can't access information 
if there's no information to access. 


AttheStoryteller's option, a technomancer who has access 
to a database of extraphysical entities - that is, spirits - can use 
Spirit 1 to right-click that information too. Certain members of 
the Order of Hermes have been building Umbrood databases 
for just this purpose, and the Void Engineers have extensive 
files on the things their group has encountered. As mentioned 
below, however, such files might not necessarily be accurate... 


Unless the right-click interface has been configured to 
cross dimensions with Dimensional Science 2, this rote cannot 
be employed from the Otherworlds. This restriction does not 
apply, however, if the characters are in the Digital Web. 

Because no one can see it except for the person using the 
interface, a Right-Click is coincidental. The level ofinformation 
access is based upon the number of successes rolled: 


Successes Level of Information 

One Surface data (name, vital statistics) 

Two Simple dota (social-media updates, web 
posts, common schematics) 

Three Uncommon data (social-media backlog, 
web-post archives, phone logs, rare 
schematics) 

Four Hidden/ buried data (criminal records, 
voting info, obscure or protected schematics) 

Five Classified data (medical records, personal 
files, protected info from personal computer, 
classified schematics) 

Six + If there's data available, the character can 


access it. 


Really large amounts of data might take several turns 
to scan... perhaps even an hour or more for subjects with 
overwhelming amounts of information. 


Note that the information accessed by a right-click might not 
necessarily be accurate. Even the NWO has flawed data, so the 
Storyteller should feel free to feed false information to a player 
who employs this rote. 


Hypernarrative Influence 
(eeee Mind; possibly with «« Entropy added) 

Mass media programs its audience to accept certain 
messages as intrinsic truths about life. People have become 
so indoctrinated by the concept of a “hero’s journey” that the 
Masses often see themselves as players in some vast heroic saga. 
Other so-called hypernarratives - tropes and stories so familiar 
that they've become part of the cultural lexicon - include the 
romantic comedy, the sitcom, the slasher movie, the buddy 
movie, the chick flick, and the wacky-hijinks caper. (Faerie tales 
appeal to the hypernarratives as well, but Technocrats avoid 
playing on those tropes if they can help it...) 


By employing certain phrases (“Let the girl go — I'm the one 
you want!”), archetypes (Gay Best Friend), or tropes (Enemies 
Become Allies), a skillful agent can induce another character 
to follow the script and live out that role. Essentially, the agent 
calls upon media-instilled social programming and then gives it 
a push with Enlightened Psychodynamics (the Mind Sphere). 
Unless the target consciously understands that he's being fed 
his lines, he falls into the role and fulfills the hypernarrative's 
demands. 


System: The Mind Sphere influences the target to follow 
the script. A successful Manipulation * Art or Expression roll 
triggers the desired behavior. Generally, this Effect lasts for one 
scene, although the player can extend its effects by spending 
successes on Duration and then play a particular role (lover, 
villain, sidekick, etc.) for a while. 


Thanks to pervasive media culture, this Effect is 
coincidental unless the target comes from one of the very 
few cultures that are not familiar with mass-media tropes. But 
familiarity, as the saying goes, also breeds contempt: a failed or 
botched roll - or successful resistance from a savvy target - can 


deflate the hypernarrative because the target has recognized 
the cliché (^SERIOUSLY?!? Did you really just SAY that?”) and 


refuses to go along with it. 


By adding an Entropy element - generally established by 
invoking the hypernarrative and calculating the odds of probability 
- the agent can influence events that support the hypernarrative. 
Guns mightrun outofammunition, cars could explode, beautiful 
strangers or random cats wind up distracting the target, and other 
pop-media coincidences manifest at just the right time to fulfill 
the hypernarrative. In this case, a successful Enlightenment roll 
tilts the probabilities of coincidence (see the Axis of Coincidence 
sidebar, pp. 533-534) in favor of a media-inspired event. The 
agent cannot control that event - that's the Storyteller’s job; still, 
things will favor an appropriately dramatic (or comedic) twist of 
fate... not that Technocrats believe in such things! 


For a staggering selection of hypernarrative devices, check 
out the TV Tropes Wiki at http://tvtropes.org/pmwiki/pmwiki. 
php/Main/HomePage. 


Teehnocratic Procedures 


Sometimes, you need to haul out the Big Guns. And so, 
although the following Procedures are refined and standardized 
techniques among the Technocratic Union’s ranks, they lack 
the pristine subtlety of Adjustments and may risk the Paradox 
Effect under many circumstances. 


Even when she chooses to be vulgar, though, a Technocrat 
still needs to use practices and instruments in order to make 
such things come to pass. As noted elsewhere, a Technocrat 
believes so strongly in the principles behind her Procedures 
that she cannot perform them without the proper tools and 
techniques. A Progenitor (to use an example out of a very old 
Mage chronicle) cannot simply wave her hyper-scalpel and cut 
someone who's several yards away; she MUST have a valid 
scientific reason for the things she can do. Unlike those mystic 
Reality Deviants, she doesn’t make the Consensus dance to her 
whims but rather employs advanced principles of technology 
to make things work her Will. 


Sanitize Evidence 
(ee Maltter/ °» Forces, and/ or eeee Prime) 

When it's time to clean up a mess - bloodstains, bodies, 
bullet holes, and other evidence of regrettable havoc - a 
Technocratic Sanitization Squad comes in with special devices 
and supplies. Within a short time, the Sanitization Squad 
reconstructs the damage, destroys evidence, and recycles waste 
products into useful energies (through Forces or Prime), leaving 
nothing behind to disturb the Masses' calm. 


System: Processing a scene of mayhem takes time... and 
thus, in game terms, it usually requires an extended roll. Each 
Enlightenmentroll made when conducting a Sanitize Evidence 
operation reflects one hour of uninterrupted work, and each 
success renders 10 pounds of matter into pure energy. Extreme 
carnage demands extreme measures. And so, when a large area 
needs to be sanitized, several trained Technocrats employ this 
Procedure at once, dividing up the task between them. 


Chapter Ten: The Book of Magic — 603 


eo 


Ne No 7^: 


oe ee 


4 4M S 
LN c ox 


Even using impressive machinery, this Procedure is vulgar, so 
it's essential to keep the scene clear of innocent bystanders and nosy 
cops. For thatreason, this sortofoperation also includes teammates 
who employ the Secure the Scene Procedure to keep the area clear 
of prying eyes and note important bits of evidence that need to be 
catalogued and then purged before the Masses learn too much. Due 
to the unstable nature of converting matter into energy, a botch 
with this Procedure immediately invokes the Paradox Effect, usually 
with a catastrophic explosion or meltdown of the gear. 


Secure the Scene 
(ee or eee Mind/ * Forces/ * Matter; possibly with 
eee Forces added) 

The ugly fallout from Reality Deviant insurgencies (and 
the necessary containments thereof) requires Procedures that 
keep the Masses and their mundane law-enforcement agencies 
in the often-literal dark. And so, when drastic operations or 
Consensus-shattering events pose a threat to the security of 
essential illusions, wise Technocracy operatives invoke the 
Secure Scene Protocols, sealing up the area while scanning for 
evidence that must, for obvious reasons, be purged. 


A few hazard signs or strips of police tape activate a 
Psychodynamics Procedure that warns people away from the 
area. Usual security measures simply broadcast a subtle Stay 
away impulse, whereas high-intensity measures keep all but the 
most determined trespassers at a distance. 


604 Mage: The Ascension 20" Anniversary Edition 


Meanwhile, the agents on the scene operate scanning gear 
that detects evidence and damage. Forces 1 and Matter 1 percep- 
tion Effects pick up traces of blood, gunpowder, and other residue 
that might not be visible to the naked eye, allowing the agents to 
record and then eliminate the messy aftermath of those events. 


System: In order to Secure the Scene, a Technocrat needs 
to score at least three successes on a coincidental magick roll. 
Large areas might need five successes or more. 


As noted above, Mind Sphere Effects discourage trespassers 
from entering the secured area; the Mind 2 variation suggests 
avoidance, and the Mind 3 version actively drives people 
away. In order to enter the scene, a character needs to make a 
Willpower roll that scores more successes than the operative 


who established the Effect. 


The scanning element, meanwhile, reduce by -1 the 
difficulties for all of the Perception + Alertness rolls the agents 
make to detect evidence of the recent events. Thanks to those 
enhanced perceptions, the agent(s) can see into the infrared and 
ultraviolet spectrums, might spot fingerprints, and could note 
hairline cracks and other traces of evidence or damage. Given 
time, the Technocrats can catalog and then purge that evidence, 
often with the Sanitize Evidence Procedure described above. 


Generally, this Procedure does not conceal the area 
from outside observation - it drives people away, but the 
space itself remains visible. By bringing in the appropriate 
cloaking-field projectors, however, the Technocrat(s) can add 


a Forces 3 blackout component that warps light and sound 
around the secured area, essentially rendering it dark and 
silent to casual observation. This additional protocol doesn't 
project an actual illusion - that's an entirely different Effect. 
The blackout field, though, shrouds the location in darkness 
while baffling sound waves to muffle the acoustics within that 
space. A sufficiently skilled and equipped operative can set up 
all three components - the Mind field, the scanners, and the 
light/ sound baffling effects - in a single burst of activity. The 
blackout field, however, adds another three successes to the 
overall total required, which also adds another layer of time 
and complication to the Effect. It's also a vulgar Procedure 
unless it's activated in near or total darkness. 


Dimension Bomb 
(eee Dimensional Science; possibly with «+e 
Forces/ ** Prime added) 

Nasty things wait on the other side of the Dimensional 
Gauntlet. And so, Technocrats who understand the weird 
physics of Dimensional Science can send surprises into that 
realm to deal with said nasty things before they can pass through 
and disrupt our material home. 


Generally the Dimension Bomb Procedure involves 
calibrating a specially designed grenade or other sort of explosive, 
then phasing it through the Gauntlet to explode harmlessly 
on the other end. Although this sort of attack has lost favor 
somewhat since the Dimensional Anomaly occurred (rumors 
suggest that the Anomaly originated with a large Dimension 
Bomb that was somewhat more... efficient than expected), it's 
still a useful tactic when dimension-hopping were-things start 
popping into or out of Consensus space. 


System: With a successful roll, the operative can push a small 
explosive device through a hole in the Gauntlet and phase-shift 
it into the weird matter of the Otherworlds. Once there, it has 
the usual effects for such a device. Failed rolls or botches, how- 
ever, have a nasty tendency to hold the object between worlds, 
inflicting the damage on both sides of the Gauntlet. 


The Forces 3/ Prime 2 variation uses the bomb as a focus 
for a Forces-based explosion. Higher Ranks of Forces can be 
used for larger explosions. Each success that isn't spent getting 
the bomb through the Gauntlet acts as Forces-based damage, 
described on the Base Damage or Duration chart. (If it takes 
three successes to get through the Gauntlet, for instance, and 
the player rolls six successes, then the bomb inflicts six health 
levels of damage.) In either case, the roll's difficulty is the 
Gauntlet rating, which makes this Procedure far more effective 
in low-Gauntlet areas than in high-Gauntlet ones. 


Allversions of this Procedure are vulgar, and Paradox damage 
typically involves blowback damage from the blast. For details 
about Explosions, see the section of that name in Chapter Nine. 


Golden Gunman (*** Time/ ¢* Forces) 
The joys of high-octane action movies can be yours with 
the proper expertise! Pulling out two impressive handguns (or, 


in hand-to-hand variations, two blades, clubs, or other flashy 
weapons), askilled operative can commit stylish acts of mayhem. 


System: Time allows the operative to take multiple actions 
with both hands while avoiding the penalties described in 
Chapter Nine’s Combat section. Each attack gets rolled 
normally, and the operative may target several different attacks 
at several different enemies. The Forces Sphere, meanwhile, 
allows the operative to flip through the air, make amazing 
leaps, and blaze away with several guns while somehow negating 
the recoil of such heavy firepower. Best of all - thanks to the 
popularity of such cinematic stunts - this physics-defying 
Procedure tends to be coincidental. That said, a botched roll 
or Paradox backlash leads to spectacular mishaps and tragedies 
worthy of John Woo’s most melodramatic excesses. (Where the 
hell did all those doves COME from, anyway...?) 


Optional Rule: 
Social Conditioning and Re- 
programming 

Certain forms of influence aren’t subtle. The Technocratic 
Union’s sophisticated practice of Social Conditioning (referred 
to in Chapter Five) adjusts people for the greater levels of reality 
employed bythe Technocracy. In its most delicate forms, this Condi- 
tioning allows an unEnlightened person to accept, and occasionally 
employ, the advanced technologies used by the Union. Stronger 


levels of Conditioning reinforce the loyalty of errant operatives 
or convince Reality Deviants to accept the Technocratic truth. 


At their ultimate extent, those processes reprogram the 
subject’s personality, replacing free will with obedience. Despite 
common misconception, the Union doesn’t use this drastic 
measure often. If nothing else, it’s resource-intensive, and it 
often leaves the recipient more or less useless for anything other 
than manual labor and low-priority tasks. 


Because Conditioning restricts a character’s free will, 
Social Conditioning remains an optional rule when it’s used 
against a player character. If the player chooses to go along with 
Social Conditioning, then the Storyteller can pass notes to 
her and give her subtle hints about what her character should 
be doing as a result of her programming. For extra levels of 
treachery, the character may be Conditioned offstage, in a 
process that only the player and Storyteller know about. That 
way, the character could begin to subvert her group, based on 
the implanted Conditioning. 


Social Conditioning implies an organized, refined, and 
resource-intensive program of reeducation. No individual mage 
or independent cabal can use these rules - they must rely upon 
the usual influence-based methods. Although the Technocracy 
employs the most effective forms of Social Conditioning, the 
Nephandi and other groups occasionally use similar processes 
on captives and converts, with the differences noted below. 
If the Nephandi in question also happen to be Technocratic 
PsychOps, however, then that captured character - and all of 
her associates - could be in very serious trouble. 


Chapter Ten: The Book of Magic — 605 


Conditioning Levels 


Social Conditioning follows 10 stages, each one more 
intrusive than the last: 


Stage One - Indoctrination: The character becomes a 
willing convert. 


Stage Two - Submission: That convert allows minor 
magickal Effects to be used on her, without resistance. 


Stage Three - Suspicion: Following the dictates of her 
masters, the character regards peopleas allies or enemies. 


Stage Four - Ostracism: If the masters declare someone 
anathema, the convert will shun that person. 


Stage Five - Pacifism: The masters instill a code word 
that can immediately make the convert cease all violent 
activities. 


Stage Six- Conspiracy: The masters can implant a code 
word that initiates covert activity against someone who’s 
been chosen as an enemy. 


Stage Seven- Alliance: The Conditioned character trusts 
the masters implicitly; their allies become her friends, 
and their enemies become anathema. A Sleeper at this 
level is no longer a witness against vulgar technomagick 
used by the masters, and a mage becomes a total convert 
to the masters’ paradigm. 


Stage Eight - Rejection: If so ordered, the character will 
forget anyone she has been told to forget; those people 
literally disappear from her memory, at least for a while. 


* Stage Nine - Devotion: The convert will betray anyone 
or anything for the sake of her masters. 


Stage Ten- Reverence: “He had learned to love big Brother.” 


For Socially-Conditioned characters, the player ought to 
keepa record of her character’s current level of indoctrination. If 
she chooses to fight it later, see Breaking Conditioning, below. 


Conditioning Systems 


Story-wise, Social Conditioning involves isolation 
from outside contact, followed by intensive psychological 
indoctrination. A willing Sleeper or eager technomancer might 
simply receive a subtle but pervasive orientation program 
that introduces him to the wonders of the Union and its 
hypertechnology. Unwilling Sleepers, Reality Deviants, and 
agents who appear to have broken their initial Conditioning 
all receive a drastic program: PsychOps place such people into 
complete isolation within a heavily controlled environment, 
then begin performing elaborate psychological treatment, 
invasive Mind Procedures, and perhaps worse. (See the Chapter 
Five entry regarding Room 101.) 


606 Mage: The Ascension 20" Anniversary Edition 


Teaming Up: In most cases, Social Conditioning is a 
group effort. For details, see Acting in Concert, p. 542. 


Sleeper Cults: A dedicated group of unEnlightened 
Sleepers could also try to instill a weaker version of Social 
Conditioning. In this case, the dice pool comes from the 
cult leader’s Charisma + an appropriate Ability (Belief 
Systems, Esoterica, Expression, Politics, Seduction, etc.), 
and the difficulty for the roll is the target’s Willpower + 5. 
Other rolls, however, can lower the initial difficulty - see 
Enhanced Conditioning, below. If that first attempt fails, 
however, then the dice pool for subsequent attempts at 
Conditioning may come only from additional enhanced 
conditioning attempts... and those put the cult at risk for 
kidnapping charges, and possibly worse. 


Initial Processing: System-wise, Social Conditioning 
involves a Mind 3/ Prime 2 Effect. The agent(s) behind 
the Conditioning use their Enlightenment (Arete) 
against a difficulty of target’s Willpower + 3. Each 
success eliminates one point of the subject’s temporary 
Willpower. If the roll fails, then the Processing may 
continue, but at +1 difficulty for each subsequent 
attempt. A botch foils the Processing forever. 


Once the subject’s Willpower has been temporarily 
eliminated, he reaches the first level of Conditioning. 
For a willing character, that’s the end of the story. 
Initial Processing wins him over to the cause. If he’s 
not willing, however, or if the PsychOps want to instill 
major Conditioning, then the process continues... 


Reinforcing the Programming: From there, the 
Conditioning agents continue the program, often with 
Mind 4 instead of Mind 3. For Technocratic PsychOps, 
each roll reflects one day of that process. For non- 
Technocrat Nephandi, each roll reflects two days; for 
other groups, each roll reflects a week. 


Each level of Conditioning beyond the first requires one 
success on an extended and resisted roll, difficulty 6; the 
PsychOps agents continue to use their Enlightenment, 
and the player under Conditioning rolls his permanent 
Willpower. The contest reflects the struggle between 
the target’s subconscious will and the PsychOps' skill 
at breaking through such obstacles. 


Enhanced Conditioning: PsychOps excel at both the 
carrot and the stick. To reflect the various methods 
of encouragement, the PsychOps can use mundane 
Attribute + Ability rolls to lower the difficulty of that 
extended roll. Social graces could involve persuasion, 
seduction, eloquence, and other soft techniques, and 
brutal methods could involve intimidation, beatings, 
sensory deprivation, and other forms of torture. 


2a ESA | 


e “Resistance is Futile!": The subject can also try to 
resist the Conditioning; for details, see the entries for 
Resistingand Torturein Chapter Nine's Dramatic Feats 
section. If the player succeeds, he manages to fight off 
the programming for the period covered by that roll; if 
hebotches, he breaks. (See Things Man Was Not Meant 
to Know, p. 407.) 


If any of the PsychOps botch a Conditioning roll, the 
subject cannot be Conditioned... only eliminated. 


Breaking Conditioning 


Social Conditioning doesn’t have to become permanent. 
Certain Technocratic groups - notably the Friends of Courage, 
the Harbingers of Avalon, Project Invictus, and many Void 
Engineer groups - specialize in breaking such Conditioning. 


* Individual Resistance: If the character strives to break 
free, the player can spend a point of Willpower, then 
either roll her current Willpower (difficulty is the 
level of Conditioning) or perform a successful Mind 3 
Effect upon herself. Each success eliminates one level 
of Conditioning for that scene; five successes or more 
breaks it for good. 


e Reconditioning: Another group that understands Social 
Conditioning techniques can overwrite the previous 
Conditioning with their own. Again, each success 
replaces one level of Conditioning with that group’s own 
Conditioning. If, for example, the Friends of Courage 
overwrite a Black Suit’s programming, that Black Suit 
becomes equally loyal to the Friends of Courage. That’s a 
good thing if the group behind the reconditioning process 
happens to be the Friends of Courage... and a really bad 
thing if it happens to be a Nephandic infiltration sect! 


Mystic Spells 
and Traditional Rotes 


In the more traditional applications of the Arts, magick 
remains unashamed of its reality-bending nature. A mystic 
practitioner doesn’t have to stage mind games with himself in 
order to justify what he does - he simply does it. Still, there's a 
lot to be learned from those who have done such things before. 
And so, the various Awakened factions share spells, rotes, and 
rituals that help a mage accomplish various feats, from growing 
talons to saving data that appeared to be lost. 


Unlike Technocratic Adjustments and Procedures, the 
following rotes appear to be exactly what they are: acts of 
magick. Although certain spells are more subtle than others, 
they tend to be vulgar magick in most regions of the modern 
world, unless they're focused through technology or concealed 
within apparently mundane activities. Still, the mages who 
employ them remain proud of such legacies. After all, if you're 
gonna be a mage, then you might as well indulge yourself and 
enjoy the magic! 


The Bullet-Catch 
(ee Forces/ ** Life/ «« Time) 

For masters of the martial arts, the ability to catch an 
arrow, knife, or spear in flight provides a legendary measure 
of practical skill. No one can catch bullets that way, though... 
or can they? The Akashic Tradition, of course, refined such 
techniques back when the Five Metal Dragons brought their 
hated firearms to the battlefields of China. And although the 
velocity and stopping power of such weapons has increased 
geometrically since those early innovations, anything is possible 
with a sufficient understanding of the Way. 


System: By adding a Forces 2/ Life 2/ Time 2 Effect to the 
Arrow Cutting feat (see Chapter Nine, p. 428), a Tao-shih can 
indeed catch bullets. Forces slows the bullet's kinetic energy, 
Life hardens the skin against the projectile, and Time quickens 
the character's reflexes to incredible speed. 


To perform such feats, an Akashic mage who's aware of 
the attack can cast the Effect, focus it through Do, and then 
roll his Dexterity + Do as if it were a dodge against the gunfire. 
If he scores more successes than his attacker, he catches the 
bullets before they can hit him. Whether or not this stunt is 
vulgar magick depends on where the martial artist is at the 
time. Although it would be vulgar in most places, it might be 
considered coincidental in regions that accept a superhuman 
martial-arts paradigm. 


Awaken the Inanimate 
(eee Spirit) 

Our world is innately alive. This animistic viewpoint - an 
intrinsic part of shamanic practices - asserts that every object, 
place, or being has a spiritual element within itself. Most sprits 
slumber peacefully, dimly aware of their surroundings but more 
or less inert. An animist, however, can wake them up, granting 
fresh vitality to supposedly inanimate things. 


As mentioned in the Chapter Nine sections about 
Awakening Substances see (p. 443), an awakened object works 
better than a normal, sleeping one. An awakened computer 
works faster and more efficiently; an awakened glass makes its 
drinks taste sweeter; an awakened car might literally go that 
extra mile if you treat it well, and so an animist knows how to 
get a little extra edge out of essentially material things. 


Obviously, a mage wants to get on that spirit's good side. 
To do so, she talks to it, chants while holding it, polishes it 
or tinkers with it or does whatever else the object in question 
might need in order to feel recognized. Maybe she reads her 
favorite book by candlelight to awaken the spirit within its 
pages, or she might clean a mirror while asking respectful 
questions about what it sees. In time, a favored object learns 
to recognize the mage and begins giving her small favors in 
return. A happy dagger might never cut its owner; a favorite 
sweater might look good and feel right and never snag or tear. 
Although most of these favors remain small and coincidental, 
a powerful shaman can rouse the spirits to perform clearly 
impossible acts: offering advice, running without fuel, locking 


Chapter Ten: The Book of Magic 607 


~~ eo 


out trespassers who try to break into an awakened house, and 
other sorts of paranormal phenomena. 


Awakened objects also have presence within the spiritual 
realm. An awakened knife, for example, can slice ephemera 
and accompany its mage into the Otherworlds. An awakened 
house retains its material substance on the other side of the 
Gauntlet, and it might even have a lower Gauntlet than the 
area around that house. (Storyteller's option, unless the mage 
uses Spirit 4 to lower the Gauntlet herself.) A favored toy might 
glow in the Umbra... or perhaps even speak to the mage. In all 
cases, the awakened object or area has a stronger Resonance 
than an object or area that remains asleep. 


System: Rousing an object typically requires an extended 
ritual - five successes or so for small objects, 20 or more for 
large areas or complicated machines. In most cases, the mage 
invests that object or place with her own Resonance, literally 
giving the spirit a part of herself. Typically, this spell remains 
coincidental. Ifthe mage tries to rouse thatspiritto do obviously 
uncanny things, however, then the Storyteller may decide 
that she's invoking vulgar magick instead. As noted above, an 
awakened object exists in the Umbra as well as in the physical 
world and can be taken along with the mage if and when she 
travels into the Otherworlds. 


Chain of Whispers 
(eee Mind/ ** Correspondence) 

A few words in the right ears (or the wrong ones) can 
change a person's world. Hailing from the courtly intrigues of 
Renaissance Europe, this enchantment turns a simple rumor 
into a force of social destruction. 


To begin the spell, the mage tells something (true or 
otherwise) to a "trusted friend." Whatever that secret might 
be, its nature is innately scandalous. Although the spell caster 
begs her friend nottoletthatinformation slip, the spell actually 
compels the friend to pass the secret on to someone else... who 
tells someone else... who tells someone else... and so on, and 
so on, and so on... 


System: Playing off the perverse urge to do forbidden 
things, this Chain of Whispers wraps the desired message in a 
magickal compulsion to share that secret freely. Mind implants 
the compulsion to spread the word, and Correspondence pulls 
the information from person to person; once that secret has 
been told, the urge to pass it on goes to the next person in the 
chain. Each success rolled compels two people to share the 
information... but after that, the natural human tendency to 
gossip keeps the secret in circulation long after the spell itself 


has faded. 


Initsoriginalform, the Chain of Whispers required human 
speech and personal contact; these days, though, a phone 
call, text message, or Internet post can pass the word along. 
Mass media spreads gossip around as well, but the forbidden 
nature of the spell loses its potency when too many people get 
the message quickly. Unless the secret is clearly ridiculous and 
easily disproved, this spell remains coincidental. A character 
can resist the urge to pass it on (a simple Willpower roll would 


608 Mage: The Ascension 20" Anniversary Edition 


be sufficient), but because so many people love great dirt, most 
folks won't even bother trying to keep their mouths shut. 


Penny Dreadful's Bright New Penny 
(eee or eeee Matter/ e* Prime/ ee Time) 

Crafted by the notorious Penny Dreadful, this spell restores 
old rubbish to its original, pristine state. By recalling bits of 
trash as the useful things they had once been, the mage returns 
the old items to their original splendor. 


In its earliest versions, this “bright new penny” trick used 
an antique tablecloth to conjure food and vintage place settings 
from the memories of meals that had previously been served 
upon that tablecloth. As impressive as it was, however, this 
application proved to be a magnet for Paradox. Later on, Penny 
created a more coincidental version of the spell that helped 
her find perfectly preserved antiques in the strangest of places. 
Since then, it has become a fixture of Hollowers’ enchantment 
and street-orphans’ survival tactics. 


System: Using Time and Matter, the mage looks backward 
to the item’s original form. Prime energy fuels the new Pattern, 
and Matter 3 restores the object to its pristine condition. Matter 
4 recreates it from scratch. Simple, battered items are easy to 
repair, but elaborate restorations or fresh conjurations require 
three successes or more. 


As noted earlier, this spell can be either vulgar or 
coincidental, depending upon how the mage decides to reveal its 
effects. For suggestions about the line between “Wow — where’d 
THAT come from?" and "Seriously — where DID that come from?” 
check out Axis of Coincidence, pp. 533-534. 


Psychic Interface 
(eee or esee Mind/ ** Data/ ** Forces; possibly 
with «« Spirit instead of Data) 

A specialty of certain Virtual Adepts, Black Suits, 
cybershamans, tech-savvy Hermetics, and the mysterious 
Mirainohmen, the discipline of psychic interface allows a reality 
hacker to manipulate computer-based information with his 
mind alone. Entering a light trance, he focuses on his vision 
of the data stream or reality code (essentially tapping into the 
Matrix through psychic contact or brain/ computer interface) 
and begins to work with the code. By successfully doing so, 
he can access and alter information, control IT-based systems, 
surge or short out the electrical impulses of a computer-based 
network, and possibly - if his psychic bond comes by way of 
computer spirits - commune with entities composed of raw 
information. 


System: Practically speaking, the psychic interface lets 
computer-savvy mages access computers without actually using 
their hardware. Focus-wise, a mage with this discipline (strictly 
speaking, it’s not a rote) can add meditation to his selection 
of instruments and then use it in place of computers and IT 
gear. Most Technocrats still employ tech-based instruments 
(implants, Glass-tech, or similar contraptions) in order to focus 
her psychic interface, although practitioners of the cybernetics 
practice can simply commune with The Machine. Tech-smart 


mystics can meditate their way into the Computer Mind as 
well, whereas technoshamans bargain with the spirits, employ 
IT-based rituals, access a specifically dedicated computer system 
(in game terms, a unique and personalized instrument) from 
a distance, or otherwise use Spirit Sphere magick instead of 
the Mind Sphere. 


The Data Sphere is essential for this kind of interface; 
mere Correspondence lacks the essential ties to the essence of 
computerized reality. The Mind Sphere, meanwhile, projects 
the mage's consciousness into the Computer Mind. The Forces 
Sphere allows that character to manipulate electrical systems 
from a distance, and the higher-level Mind 4 variant lets him 
project himself into the Digital Web without using hardware 
to do so. 


In order to employ this discipline, a character must have at 
least four dots in Computers, a specialty in Psychic Interface, 
and at least three dots in Meditation. Whether such access 
is coincidental or vulgar depends upon what the mage does 
with it. Simply linking yourself into a computer system from a 
distance so you can scan or hack its information is essentially 
invisible, and is thus coincidental. Staring at a computer from 
across a room and making it print up documents or explode 
would be vulgar anywhere outside of a dedicated Technocratic 
facilityorother computer-mage stronghold, although obviously 
body-based interface technology (like a smart phone or Google 
Glass) would probably pass for coincidence in a tech-savvy 
region. Downloading yourself into the Digital Web is vulgar 


NW KA 


to begin with, and communing with tech-spirits would look, 
if nothing else, really fucking weird. 


Talons 
(eee or eeee Life; possibly with «« Matter, 
** Prime, or both added) 


Humans are such soft and fragile things, lacking the claws 
that distinguish other predators. Thanks to magick, however 
- or to cybernetic technomagick, anyway - a mage can grow 
claws (or, with Life 4, install them on another character) that 
make up for that silly lapse in "intelligent design." 


In itssimplestand most traditional form, this spell extends 
the bones within the subject's fingers, and perhaps his toes as 
well.Strengthening them into practical talons, the mage charges 

them with personal Quintessence, granting those claws 
a paranormal sharpness. Other applications graft steel, 
bone, or other substances into the subject's limbs. Cyborgs, 
shapechangers, war wizards, and other combative types make 
deadly use of such appendages, and although the spell's roots 
are rather primordial, its effects never go out of style. 


System: Life 3 grows the claws on the mage's own hands, 
and Life 4 allows him to grow them on - or attach them to 
- another character. Matter 2 allows the claw-crafter to work 
other substances into those Talons... an essential element for 
cybernetic enhancement. Prime toughens and charges the 
claws, often with a glowing nimbus of Quintessential power 


Chapter Ten: The Book of Magic — 609 


\ 
! 


T m m 


if the mage wants to show off his handiwork. Normally, the 
claws inflict lethal damage; the Prime 2 component makes 
this damage aggravated instead. In all cases, this rote allows 
the character to use the Claw maneuver described in Chapter 
Nine's Combat section. 


Witch's Vengeance 
(eeee Entropy, *** Life/ ««« Time, or all three; 
usually with Correspondence or Data added) 

The fearsome powers of a furious witch manifest in this 
ancient war-spell. Crafting an elaborate poppet, painting, or 
other image of her victim, the spell caster mutters maledictions 
at that person, establishes a bond between the image and the 
real-life target, and then tears into the image, burns it, melts 
it, or does some other horrible thing to that stand-in for her 
victim. Meanwhile, the victim suffers crippling pains, catches 
fire, withers into a skeletal mass, watches as his skin peels 
off in strips, or otherwise endures a theatrically awful fate. 


Despite its witchy name, this spell has many cultural 
variations: the curses of angry shamans, furious clergy, mystic 
assassins, Romani elders, techno-punks, bitter artists, and 
other folks who have a literal bone to pick with their victims. A 
frightening Data-based variant, Ticktock Man, allows a distant 
technomancer to age his victim from a distance. So long as he 
holds a bit of that target’s personal information and has the 
requisite amount of dots in Data (Correspondence), the mage 
can input a number of years into his Trinary computer, get a 
fix on his target, and then use Life and Time to age his target 
from a distance. 


System: Different Spheres inflict different sorts of harm. 
Entropy corrupts the victim with age or leprosy, Life demolishes 
the victim’s body in any number of horrifying ways, and Time 
(combined with Life) lets the attacker age her target according 
to the Feats of Time Magick chart. Unless the mage employs 
the Correspondence Sphere (and has at least one dot for 
every dot in the damage-causing Sphere), she must touch the 
victim in order to set the curse in motion. All of these attacks, 
of course, are incredibly vulgar, but they can be alarming for 
really obvious reasons. 


The Notorious Vampiric Lawn Chair 
(eccece Life/ eeeee Matter) 


A feat more spoken of than actually performed (if only 
because so few mages have Mastered Life and Matter well 
enough to enact such radical transformations of both), this 
legendary spell transforms a dreaded undead entity into 
domestic furniture. Variations include soap bubbles, trees, 
household pets, and - in one infamous urban legend - a bag 
of flaming poo. Despite such rumors, though, the realities 
involved in this sort of metamorphosis make the idea more 
theoretical than practical. 


According to rumors, both Caeron Mustai and his 
arch-rival Porthos Fitz-Empress had several pieces of Kindred 
kindling in their studies, although this seems unlikely, given 
the risk of said furniture turning back into vampires at 


Ma$e: The Ascension 20^ Anniversary Edition 


inopportune times. Certain vampires have claimed - rightly 
or wrongly - that mages turned them into chairs and other 
inanimate objects... typically using that claim to justify the 
nightmarish fates they inflicted upon those mages afterward. 
It was speculated that the Massasa Wars were sparked by such 
disgraceful transformations... and in at least one verified 
case, that speculation is true. The vengeance worked upon 
the Hermetic Master in question - who dared to turn a flesh- 
crafting Tzimisce into a commode - remains an object lesson 
for mages with more skill than sense. 


System: Seriously, this is a truly stupid spell. No mage with 
the Sphere aptitude and Arete to perform it is likely to ignore 
the many complications involved in such a prank - to wit: 


* It’s vulgar. Really vulgar. As in, there is no way to possibly 
justify this by paradigm-level vulgar. Paradox is inevitable. 


* [t'sgotto overcome the innate resistance a vampire has 
tosuch spells. (See Night-Folk Counterspelling, p. 546.) 


e [tmustinflictenough successes, after countermagick, to 
bring that vampire from full strength to Incapacitated. 
For a young vampire, that would demand at least four 
successes (eight health levels); the same feat might 
demand five, six, or even more successes if the mage is 
trying to convert an elder Kindred. 


* [f you're using the divided successes option, then the 
player must devote at least that many successes to the 
transformation damage. That means that a four-success 
roll will change the vampire into a lawn chair for one 
turn. After that, the lawn chair becomes a vampire 
again - and the mage had better have a good escape 
spell handy at that point, or his name becomes “blood 
bag." 


e [nordertoeffectalasting transformation, the player must 
either spend or roll additional successes, as shown on 
the Base Damage or Duration chart. Turning a young 
vampire into a chair for one day, for instance, would 
require at least seven successes. 


* Tuning an undead vampire into some other form of 
inert material demands Matter 5. "Vampire" is not listed 
on the Periodic Table of Elements, so transforming that 
substance into different forms of matter requires full 
Mastery of that Sphere. 


e Vampires with the Protean and Vicissitude Disciplines 
can transform back to their original form with very little 
trouble. The vampire must spend one Blood Point for 
each success the mage rolled. Every point negates one 
success on the Arete roll, and the vampire changes back 
when those successes are all negated. 


* The transformed vampire is still a vampire, and that 
vampire remains conscious. Said vampire may use any 
Discipline that doesn’t require moving her limbs. If the 


bloodsucker has minions within summoning distance, 
things might go rather poorly for the mage. 


* A Kindred on the receiving end of this spell - whether 
or not the spell succeeds - must make a Frenzy roll at 
difficulty 8 (outright humiliation, plus dire peril). For 
players unfamiliar with Vampire: The Masquerade, 
this means that the vampire will flip her shit unless she 
makes a successful roll, and anyone within reach will 
become wallpaper in very short order. 


* Avampire who gets turned into wooden furniture may 
be set on fire, for the usual amount of damage. If the 
spell lasts long enough, that vampire might be left out 
in the sun, again taking the usual amount of damage 
each turn. Thatburning Kindred automatically goes into 
frenzyand may immediately change back into her normal 


—  —(ÓÁ 


form by expending her entire blood pool, assuming that 
she has enough blood left to do so. If not, she burns. 


* Vampires hold immortal grudges. Any mage who 
transforms a Kindred into furniture will be blood-hunted 
by that vampire, her allies, and probably other vampires 
as well. (A blood-hunt, for non-Vampire players, is 
essentially a zero-mercy undead APB.) After all, examples 
must be made, lest other mages get the wrong idea. 


e When, not if, those hunters find the mage, their revenge 
will be as gorily theatrical as possible... and when it comes 
to gory theatrics, it’s hard to beat an angry vampire! 


Any mage dumb enough to brag about doing this sort 
of thing (whether he can actually do it or not) deserves his 
impending sadistic demise. 


Part IX: Reality Zones 


Clearly, people do believe in magic. 


Oh, the party line about technology ruling the 
world is popular enough. And there is truth to 
it. But people still believe in magic. Maybe they 
call it “miracles,” or “god,” or simply read about 
itin the pages of this month's best-seller or their 
favorite website... but they DO believe. And so, 
the Technocracy isn’t the only group that holds 
sway over the Consensus of mortal faith. 


As it says in Mage 2™ Edition, magick is never 
“just part of the landscape.” Although it might seem more 
rigid at certain times and places than at others, one fact every 
mage understands is that reality is never fixed into a certain 
form. Although the mystics of the early Revised Edition era 
felt a profound crisis of faith and feared that magick is dead, 
the truth of Awakening allows every mage to rework reality 
to a certain degree. The boundaries of coincidence show just 
how much flexibility a given region of reality can bear. And 
within certain reality zones, some types of magick are more 
coincidental than others. 


Options for Reality 


Like many other elements of Mage 20 Anniversary 
Edition, the reality-zones concept is optional: 


e Your group could use it to determine the sorts of Effects 
and practices that are coincidental or vulgar; 


* You might simply ignore it and assume that the entire 
world operates under Technocratic Reality; 


e or you could deepen the game and allow your players 
to change their world by creating paradigm shifts that, 
in turn, alter capital-R Reality and literally change the 
rules in their favor. 


The choice between those options, ultimately, is yours. 


Reality Zones 
Within the Game 


Simply put, magickal Effects that fit a place or culture 
work better than ones that go against its grain. If Jodi Blake 
wants to incite mass murder, for example, she’ll have an easier 
time doing that at a protest rally than at a Buddhist temple. 


In game terms, a reality zone affects a mage in one of two 
different ways: 


* Acceptance: Effects and practices that fit in with a 
reality zone are usually coincidental and might - at 
the Storyteller’s option - lower the difficulty by -1 if 
the Effect or practice suits the tone of that area. (See 
Appropriate Resonance on the Magickal Difficulty 
Modifiers chart.) 


* Rejection: Effects and practices that clash with a reality 
zone tend to be vulgar and might add +1 to their difficulty 
if they go against the local atmosphere. (See Opposed 
Resonance on that same chart.) 


What does that mean? Simple: if your beliefs and actions 
suit a reality zone, that zone accepts your magick; if you go 
against the grain, the local reality rejects you. 

In short, it's easier to work with Reality than to go against 
the flow. And if you want to change things, then that task is 
easier if you work with what you have than it is to force your 
Will down Reality's throat. 


Working in the Zone 


From a game and story standpoint, reality zones encourage 
players and their characters to be clever and resourceful - to 


Chapter Ten: The Book of Magic 


i 
LI 


1 
= 


Example: Jodi's Riot 


Working within a reality zone involves imagination, observation, and strategy. In game terms, it’s an excellent opportunity 
to put Traits like Academics, Belief Systems, Esoterica, Media, or Politics to good use. 


For an example, let's take Jodi's would-be riot. If the Nephandus comes flying in on a demon, eating babies and throwing 
blood on the crowd, she’s being ridiculously vulgar. Reality will smack her first, and the Sleepers will probably stomp her 
afterward. Nowhere on Earth is that kind of shit okay. 


So let's say she’s in a Technocratic Reality zone. Picking her tactics carefully, Jodi ingratiates herself with several influential 
people, seduces them with subtle Mind Effects, and then grabs a bullhorn and begins to work the crowd. Choosing a 
particularly angry pack of protesters, she shouts slogans that match their frustrations. Because dominion is Jodi's favored 
practice, she uses some tools of that practice (eye contact, group rites, social domination, voice) to focus some large- 
scale — yet still subtle — Life and Mind Effects that push everyone over the edge. A few minutes later, violence explodes 
and Jodi’s work is done. No one has seen her perform a single act of magick, and the resulting violence is absolutely 
coincidental. 


In a Localized Reality zone, she'd choose tactics that suit the beliefs of folks nearby. Say she’s in a Buddhist temple, a 
zone of harmonic energies and social stability, based around beliefs of disconnection and personal discipline. Starting 
a riot here will be more difficult... so instead of tossing around blood and fury, she begins playing upon the insecurities, 
fears, and repressions within the temple community. A little Life-Mind sexual temptation, a few distracting thoughts 
placed in various people’s heads, maybe a touch of Matter when no one is looking, to warp the temple’s bell chimes 
into discordant, irritating sounds. And then, she plants the scapegoat: a would-be lover, a bumbling initiate, the person 
who doesn't fit in, or the local folks who live outside the temple. Maybe she steals something or kills someone, pointing 
evidence toward the scapegoat. A few Mind-pushes here and there, and soon the harmonious monks are shedding 
blood. Again, the Nephandus triumphs without ever showing her hand. 


In a Primal Reality zone, Jodi sets herself up as an old-fashioned sorceress. Conducting her usual seductions through 
sex-and-blood rituals, she ingratiates herself into a local community. The Old Gods must be placated, so Jodi blends 
her maleficia practice with the same sort of domination she used in the other examples. Now, though, she invokes those 
Old Gods, offers traditional sacrifices, and shows her worthiness by pitting herself against the elements through ordeals 
and vision questing. Perhaps with the help of malignant spirits, or simply through the usual seductions, she manages to 
turn the community against itself. Once again, though, her Arts and tactics follow the set of reality. Instead of shouting 
through a bullhorn or warping temple bells, she’s sacrificing doves and watering the soil with blood. 


One mage, one goal, three approaches. All of them can either work or fail, depending upon how they're done. 


work within the zone rather than to fight the program and Earthly Foundations 


probably lose. Some things are almost always vulgar, no matter who’s 


The sections below offer four essential reality zones: doing them, where they’re doing them, or how they’re being 
done. In game terms, acts that violate these Earthly Foundations 


e Earthly Foundations: Certain laws of Earth's reali 
b "y contradict the baseline reality for Earth. 


physics are more or less fixed. You can go against them, 
but no matter who you are or what you do, those efforts e Sudden Large Alterations of Physical and Metaphysical 
will almost certainly count as vulgar magick. Mass or Space: Stacking places on top of one another, 
disintegrating large structures, changing large masses 
of physical matter into large emissions of energy (i.e., 
explosions), radical transformations of one physical 
form into another (that is, people into stone or vampires 
into lawn chairs)... such things disrupt Reality on a 
fundamentallevel. Even when performed by technology, 
such large-scale alterations are never truly safe. The 
horrific consequences of nuclear detonation could 


* Primal Reality: Technology holds little influence in be seen as manifestations of the Paradox Effect; so 


Primal Reality places. The laws of mystic Old Ways still could environmental pollution, climate change, organ 
dominate what is and is not possible. rejection, electromagnetic pulses, cancer, and other 


aftershocks of technological disruption. The bigger the 


* Technocratic Reality: Here, the laws of scientific 
technology dictate what is and is not acceptable within 
the zone. 


e Localized Reality: In certain flexible areas, reality 
depends more upon specific local beliefs than on a rigid 
set of rules. 


In game terms, a given zone either accepts or rejects a Effect, the larger the consequences... and no matter who 
3 LULA NT . * 
mage's activities. The more she can play within the rules of a you are or how you work your magicks, no mage acts 
zone, the more successful she will be. without consequences. 


6l2 Mage: The Ascension 20" Anniversary Edition 


Obvious violations of normal physical laws: Water 
running uphill, people flying around, free-floating 
molecules abruptly manifesting as solid mass, turtles 
suddenly movingatcheetah speed... such gross alterations 
of Earth's primary physical laws tend to incur Paradox. 
Certain long-term projects - like airplanes, flying 
ointments, and martial arts - might be able to bend 
those principles a bit, but the act of investing that much 
time, energy, and devotion to a task still recognizes that 
those principles exist. Simply ignoring them - say, by 
jumping offa roof while believing you can fly - is a good 
way to get your ass kicked, either by Paradox (if you do 
fly) or by physics (if you don't). 


Cross-dimensional rifts: Whether you see the Gauntlet as 
aspiritual barrier or the membrane between dimensional 
spaces, it clearly exists fora reason. When folks go through 
it, Reality responds. The Avatar Storm metaplot could 
be seen as one huge Paradox backlash - one so vast that 
every mage alive felt the shock. Even if the Avatar Storm 
never happened in your chronicle, it's a slap in the face 
to Reality at large when a person opens gates between 
the worlds. 


Messing with the time stream: Although perceptions of 
time are fluid (a fact that allows mages to peer backwards 
or forwards through time), the actual actions that occur 
in time cannot be altered easily. Time-trained mages 


know that such alterations are possible, but those actions 
are never coincidental unless Reality itself performs 
them... and even then, there are consequences from that 
alteration. 


Technocratic Reality 

Throughoutour world in this 21* century, the Technocratic 
vision of reality holds the coincidental edge, not simply 
because of the Union's indoctrination (although that does have 
something to do with it) but because science-based technology 
is rooted in following the laws of Earthly physics. Unlike faith 
and magic, it's based upon repeatable, verifiable, consistent 
results, not mere Enlightened Will, so it tends to work more 
reliably than mystic magick does. 


Note that mystics can, and do, use technological tools in 
their practices. A wizard can use a cell phone, and a shaman 
can mow his lawn. Although hardcore primitivists reject all 
but the simplest technologies, most 21*century mystics accept 
Technocratic Reality by default. (Whether that's a result of 
brainwashing or practicality is a subject for lively debate...) 


The Industrialized World: Science-based technology has 
made the world into a better place for most human beings. 
Central heating, advanced medicine, info tech, toilet paper... 
the Masses really are better off now than they were during the 
High Mythic Age. And so, as a result, people have faith in the 
blessings of technology - not just in the devices and Procedures 


Chapler Ten: The Book of Magic 613 


of the Technocracy, but in everyday miracles like cars, soap, 
and running water. 


Thanks to those factors - as well as the large-scale paradigm 
enforcement on the part of the Order of Reason and its various 
descendants - the majority of the industrialized world accepts 
miraculous technology as coincidence. A jetpack will get your 
mage further than a broomstick will, and guns can do what 
wands cannot. Mystic Effects, then, have distinct disadvantages 
when it comes to getting away with magick. 


Scientific and Technological Installations: In places 
dedicated to technology, that technology reigns supreme. 
Even the weird science of the Etherites and Adepts dominates 
coincidence in thelabs and workshops devoted to those pursuits. 
Mystic magick is almost always vulgar in such places, and even 
the more extreme forms of technomagick could be considered 
vulgar if they contradicted the purposes of a specific laboratory. 
A HIT Mark at MIT would attract the wrong sort of attention 
from the thousands ofstudents and faculty members who realize 
just how impossible such technologies are in their reality. So 
when you're trying to figure out the edge between coincidence 
and vulgarity near a science lab, ask yourself whose version of 
science dominates the localized belief. After all, the paradigm 
difference between Arkham University and UCLA is pretty 
damned big. 


Localized Reality 

Despite the apparent laws of physics, Reality often is 
fundamentally irrational. Vampires, spirits, gods, and magick 
did not simply fade away because a few textbooks overruled their 
existence. Certain things can never be quantified or proven, 
so large portions of the material world remain in an either/ or 
state, with malleable reality and greater margins for coincidence. 


Gamewise, the following contested territories have more 
flexibility with regards to mystic practices and miracles of 
faith. Technology, on the other hand, might be considered 
more vulgar in certain areas; a haunted house, for instance, 
could throw Paradox at technomagick and accept witchcraft 
as perfectly normal. 


Localized realities extend from small areas (a house, a field, 
an underpass) to communities of several hundred people (a small 
town) or areas of several dozen miles. Higher populations - or 
really low ones - tend to lead a localized reality toward either 
Primal or Technocratic extremes. This localized reality syndrome 
allows mages to create Sanctums and Chantries, whereas Sleepers 
spread faiths, build churches, maintain cultural traditions, and 
use art, education, and technology to change their world in 
small yet significant ways. 


Urban Decay: When Entropy settles into the cracks of 
man’s creativity, the apparent solidity of tech-based reality 
breaks down. Slums, ruins, abandoned factories, derelict homes, 
disaster areas, urban warzones, the old parts of town... anyone 
who spends time in such areas realizes how precarious reality 
can be. Even the biggest, most modern cities on Earth have 
places where a shaman, houngan, priest, or witch can still get 
the Old Ways to work despite the laws of scientific technology. 


Mage: The Ascension 20" Anniversary Edition 


Irrationality Zones: That’s even more true in places where 
rationality fades: haunted houses, sacred spaces, holy lands, SF 
conventions, religious revivals, battlegrounds, murder sites... 
places where the reasonable facade of scientific progress gives 
way to primal chaos or counter-rationality. In such irrationality 
zones, mystic Arts and outrageous coincidences have the upper 
hand over science-based technologies. 


The Technocracy isn’t blind to this effect... and has, in fact, 
taken it into account. One of the reasons that flamboyant cyborgs 
and Men in Black make such effective agents in such places is 
because those figures hold archetypal powers that go beyond mere 
science. The Black Suits, in particular, share a symbolic mystique 
that puts them far outside the bounds of rational technology and 
into the realm of myth. The apparently supernatural techniques 
of such agents remain coincidental in certain types of irrationality 
zones. After all, those agents are essentially walking legends with 
their own sorts of magick to command. 


Unlike the Mystic Regions mentioned below, an 
irrationality zone can be wildly scientific too. A steampunk 
workshop or robotics lab could seem so counter-rational that it 
shuts down both magick and conventional scientific principles. 
On arelated note, that irrationality might bring down a curtain 
of disbelief so thick that the people inside it refuse to accept 
anything outside their chosen view, even when a rational person 
would admit the evidence of her senses. (For details, see Types 
of Quiet: Denial, pp. 557-558.) 


Borderlands and Crossings: Certain times and places slip 
between the rational and irrational worlds. Crossroads, holidays, 
dawn and dusk, the edge ofa forest, mirrors, fogs, cliffs or caves, 
even the threshold of a house - they’re transitions between 
states of being. For mages who understand them, such places 
can be avenues for coincidence as well. A witch at midnight on 
Halloween, for example, can get away with things that Paradox 
would strike her down for doing in broad daylight on either side 
of that holiday. A Storyteller may consider certain thresholds 
in time and space to be more open to coincidence than usual. 


Rural Areas: The further you get from the big city, the 
more primal and irrational the world appears to become. 
Farmlands, frontiers, distant houses, small towns in the middle 
of nowhere... such places tend to follow the rules of the people 
who live there. And if those people believe in ghosts or miracles 
or Babe the Blue Ox, well, then the local reality will probably 
accommodate that view of the world. The big-city stranger with 
his cell phone and Internet might just find that those things 
don’t work 'round here; meanwhile, the faith-healing preacher- 
man really can perform miracles when he acts according to 
God’s Will. For that reason, among others, mystic mages often 
move to rural areas where the culture suits their own beliefs. 


Regions of Faith: The greatest showdown of the 21* century 
isn’t the battle between magick and technology but the divide 
between religious faith and material rationalism. In this fight, 
the boundaries of coincidence and vulgar magick depend less 
upon whether or notsomething is “magical” than upon whether 
or not people accept it within their religious views. People 
all over this world can, and do, accept fundamentally (and 
fundamentalist) irrational ideas that contradict pure science. 


And so, a mage who shares the dominant culture's faith has 
an edge over one who does not. 


The Digital Web: Although it's not the wild-west zone it 
once was, the Digital Web still features a dynamic flux of tech 
and magick. As the section in Chapter Nine explains, the Web 
considers certain types of Effects and practices to be perfectly 
normal, whereas it shuts down other kinds of magick with 
Whiteouts and other quirks. No one truly owns Web-based 
reality, though lots of people still like to think they do. In 
truth, the Web is very much its own universe, with laws and 
principles that apply only within its expanse. 


High-Resonance/ Synergy Zones: Certain places have a 
different "feel" than others. For various reasons, such places 
have a type of energy about them. Las Vegas has a high-roller 
atmosphere that encourages risks and excess; Auschwitz holds 
a misery that every living thing can feel. The Resonance and 
Synergy sidebar describes various types of Resonance and 
Synergy thata mage can either use or contradict. As mentioned 
above, a player who works with that energy will have an easier 
time than one who goes against it. 


Realms: Each Realm is a reality unto itself. The physics of 
one Realm might differ considerably from the principles of other 
Realms, each Realm following the essence of its specific place. A 
Chinese Hell, an animistic Nature Realm, the Machine-Haven 
Autocthonia, and the Umbral Realm of Forces all run by very 
different rules, and none of them bears much resemblance to 
Earth's reality. 


That's all especially true of Horizon Realms - places 
specifically created by mages to suit a particular paradigm. The 
Hermetic stronghold Doissetep obviously favored Hermetic 
Arts; the Copernicus Research Center catered almost exclusively 
to Void Engineer techniques. Within those regions, reality is 
what its creators make it to be, accepting and rejecting magicks 
accordingto those creators' wishes. Opposing magicks are almost 
always vulgar, and the appropriate Arts remain coincidental. 


Realms also tend to reflect a lot of Resonance, echoing 
the deeds and natures of their primary inhabitants. In addition 
to the realityzzoning that makes rival forms of magick vulgar, 
trespassers also find that their magick is more difficult to cast in 
such places. A Man in Black, for example, would be operating 
at a disadvantage in a Cult of Ecstasy Horizon Realm like the 
Balador Pleasure Dome; even if his Mind-based Procedures 
are essentially coincidental, his Authoritarian Resonance goes 
against the spirit of that place. As described above, folks who 
go against the flow suffer penalties, whereas those who go with 
it reduce the difficulties for their Effects. 


Primal Reality 


Some regions never fell to Technocratic domination. Insuch 
places, mystic Arts still have the edge, and technomagick tends 
to be vulgar if it works at all. Primal mages insist that Earth has 
always been this way, and they might be correct. The shadow realm 
of legends and dreams certainly favors this primal atmosphere. 


Mystic Regions: In certain pockets of the 21*-century world, 
faith holds more sway than science. Within such places, a person 


whose practices match the local beliefs is usually coincidental 
as far as Reality is concerned, whereas anyone whose practices 
clash with - or simply don't feature into - those beliefs is 
considered vulgar. 


Despite common preconceptions, those locations don't 
have to be “in the deepest heart of Africa" or other ethnocentric 
nonsense. Certain segments of small-town Americana, hippie 
communes, counterculture festivals, even high-tech steampunk 
groups or transhumanist enclaves could all be considered mystic 
regions too. It’s mostly a matter of shared culture and belief - a 
belief so strong that it reshapes Reality in its own image even 
without Awakened influence. 


Deep Wilderness: True wilderness is hard to find these 
days, but scraps of it still exist between the cracks of the 21* 
century. And as anyone who’s ever taken a deep-woods hike 
can attest, things just work differently out there. Advanced 
technology tends to fail in deep-wilderness areas, but the 
oldest forms of magick thrive. The further a person gets from 
civilization, the less predictable Reality becomes. Werewolves 
and other monsters favor such remote locations because the 
hand of humanity still holds very little power there. 


Nodes and Wellsprings: Except for Nodes and Wellsprings 
that have been dedicated to science or technology, these raw 
fountains of Quintessential energy favor a primal sort of reality. 
Although Nodes often count as the High Resonance/ Synergy 
Zones described above, the really potent ones - especially 
werewolf caerns, ancient ruins, and unspoiled glades - reject 
technology and acceptonly the Old Ways as coincidental within 
their area. 


The Old Roads: As detailed in Chapters Four and Nine, 
the Paths of the Wyck refuse to accept advanced technology. 
Technomagick simply doesn't work, period. Nothing happens. 
The primal Arts, however, function as well there now as they 


did 5000 years ago. 


The Otherworlds: Aside from a few Realms and regions, the 
Otherworlds render mostforms oftechnomagick vulgar. The Void 
Engineers and Society of Ether have spent centuries crafting their 
exceptional technologies... and even then, the laws of Reality do 
notfavor them. Etherspace - the region between Horizons - seems 
to enjoy a bit of mad science; every form of magick is coincidental 
there, regardless of its form or practice, although acts that violate 
the Earthly Foundations might still become vulgar if the mages 
get too bold. (Space travel? Si! Time travel? No!) 


Shifting the Zone 


As an optional rule, the reality-zone concept can give players 
and characters something to gain by changing the dominant 
paradigm. By working to shiftthe local beliefs - thatis, by getting 
the Sleeping Masses to accept your ideas - you might actually 
be able to change a reality zone. The core reality zone - Earthly 
Foundations - is almost impossible to move with anything short 
of vulgar magick. The other three zones, however, are flexible. 
Significantly dramatic acts within the story can change them. 
This way, a Mage group can join the battle for reality and 
maybe even win. 


Chapter Ten: The Book of Magic 


TN AE 


"rtr. 


| 
l 
AE 


Cinematic. License 


Movies, for many of us, seem real. Sure, they break the laws of reality... and in many cases, we know that they do. Still, 
they seem so real that the 21*-century realm of Mage often accepts cinematic reality as coincidental, even when folks 
know intellectually that things like Terminators or blast pistols can't possibly exist... can they? 


In places where Technocratic Reality determines the boundaries of coincidence, assume that mages can get away with 
small acts of cinematic license that fit the mode of popular action movies. Outrunning explosions, unexpected meetings, 
the disappearing Batman trick, fistfights that would put a dozen normal brawlers in the ICU... a movie-savvy mage can 
pull such stunts and generally expect to get away with them. Even so, technology holds the edge; Sleepers will accept 
Fast & Furious car stunts more easily than they'll accept bullet-time dodges from The Matrix. 


Gritty fantasy films, SF action thrillers, and superhero movies mark the upper limits of cinematic license in the Technocratic 
world. The Masses might accept the realistic tone of Chris Nolan's first two Dark Knightfilms, but Man of Steel isn't gonna 
fly, so to speak. Even the more technophilic action flicks, like Iron Man, are pushing the bounds of credibility. A mage 
could get away with riffing on Casino Royale or The Hunger Games, but she'd best steer clear of Resident Evil stunts. 


Wild action and obvious fantasy films step way outside the bounds of cinematic credibility. No one accepts stuff like Lucy 
or Kung Fu Hustle as coincidental. Although certain localized reality zones might turn a blind eye to Kill Bill-level feats, 


movies like Inception or House of Flying Daggers are spectacularly vulgar, though really entertaining. 


Flipping Zones 

Flipping a zone - that is, making a sudden polar shift from 
Technocratic Reality to Primal Reality - is almost impossible 
for a small group or single individual. The Technocracy and 
Traditions have been trying to accomplish such feats for 
centuries, and neither one has succeeded. Instead, the shifts 
come about by changing Localized Reality, winning hearts and 
minds over to a particular cause. 


Such shifts have massive repercussions. The gradual shift 
from Primal to Technocratic realities has involved a gradual 
process and several catastrophes like the Triangle Trade and 
both World Wars. A polar shift back to Primal Reality would 
be even more catastrophic - it would be the sudden collapse of 
everythingwe hold to be real... in short, an Apocalypse from which 
almost nothing from our world remains. That almost happened 
during the Week of Nightmares, but it has not happened yet. 
And although many mystics speak fondly about such things in 
an abstract sense, no sane person wants them to happen for real. 


(Marauders, of course, are insane by definition... and 
although the Nephandi might possess some awful form of 
sanity, it’s not one most other people share.) 


Localized Shifts 


Localized Reality, on the other hand, can be won by people 
who gain enough influence to shift those local beliefs. In the 
old days, this generally involved conquering people, either 
through military domination or cultural assimilation. These 
days, though, it's easier to win people over by playing to their 
emotions than it is to beat on them until they do things your 
way. (See Iraq, Afghanistan, and the USA.) 


Mages don't really have the option of conquering the 
Masses, although some occasionally still try to do so. Instead, 
Awakened factions influence Sleepers by offering them the 
reality that those people seem to want. As Mage Revised 
points out, Technocracy Reality holds the upper hand... not 
because HIT Marks and Black Suits rule the world, but because 


616 Mage: The Ascension 20" Anniversary Edition 


people would rather have homes and laptops than wizards with 
funny hats. That apparent victory, though, doesn’t look like 
the Technocratic ideal. By the Union’s standards, it’s a mess. 


Why? Because people are complicated, and so is our reality. 


Paradigm Shifts 


Under the Shifting the Zone option, groups of players may 
achieve influence within a Localized Reality zone. Depending 
upon the chronicle, they might even expand that influence 
across several zones, gradually tipping the Technocratic or 
Primal balance in their favor. Doing so, however, should be a 
story-based process, not a dice-rolling contest. After all, if a few 
dozen successes could dominate Reality, then everyone on 
Earth would be some Oracle’s bitch. 


So how can a handful of mages begin to turn Localized 
Reality in their favor? Typically, such paradigm shifts involve 
winning the Masses over to a certain vision through one or 
more of the following tactics: 


* Make life better for the people, and credit those 
improvements to your paradigm. 


* Make life worse for the people, encouraging them to do 
things your way. 


* Blame problems on scapegoats and offer an alternative. 


e Give the people something to fear and hate; profit from 
the results. 


e Undermine everything and take advantage of the chaos. 
e Offer salvation for the Masses’ pain. 


* Create or reveal something so impressive and/ or 
beautiful that the Masses will remember it. 


* Present a pleasing alternative to an unpleasant status 
quo. 


e Circulate a meme so compelling that the Masses will 
embrace it. (See Memes, p. 594.) 


e Present innovations so radical that they accomplish one 
or more of the other feats. (cf. television, the Internet, 
nukes, democracy.) 


All of the previous examples, incidentally, are based on 
things that have brought about real-life, real-world paradigm 


shifts. 


Like personal and cultural paradigms, a reality shift must 
meet the needs of normal people - an elite group of especially 
influential people, perhaps, but still “normal” people who have 
enough cultural clout to tip the balance of belief in their favor. 
Concepts like “trickle-down economics,” for instance, meet the 
needs of a small group of people while going against the needs 
of the Masses, and yet that particular concept maintains a hold 
upon reality because a lot of people believe themselves to be 
members of that elite group even when facts and evidence suggest 
otherwise. As the section about Creating Other Paradigms 
points out (see pp. 571-572), enduring beliefs follow needs, 
withstand challenges, and depend upon evidence. If your mages 
wish to shift the localized reality toward their designs, then they 
must create a reality that serves people other than themselves. 


Ingameterms, checkout The Reality Challengein Chapter 
Nine for suggestions about how player characters might bring 
about a local paradigm shift. Such challenges, after all, are 
decided by changing the local reality in the Masses' favor. 


As a general rule, assume that paradigm shifts come more 
from social influence and technical or artistic innovations than 
through beating someone's ass. The idea that overthrowing 
one reality by force will immediately lead to the reality you 
prefer is nice in theory... but, as history shows, it never really 
works that way. 


Change the Game and 
Change Your World 


The choice between those options belongs to each 
individual group and Storyteller. Mage, however, has always 
been dedicated to the idea of transformation. The very first 
tagline for Mage - one that was never actually published and 
which appeared only on the in-house drafts created by the 
original authors - was “A Storytelling game of changing reality.” 
And although that sentiment lacks the immediacy of Mage’s 
other taglines, the idea that you CAN change the world is an 
essential element of the game. 


As Uncle Al said, do what you Will. 


Chapter Ten: The Book of Magic 6I7 


Se OTT 


cuna ada dia. —— 


Appendix l: 


Allies and 
Antagonists 


Fantasy, abandoned by reason, produces impossible monsters. 


— Francisco de Goya 


Supporting Cast 


In the hectic epic of a willworker’s life, a host of potential 
allies and enemies provides the supporting cast. The following 
templates can fill in Background Traits, inspire characters, 
answer summonses, punish Paradox backlashes, embody 
alternate forms, chase your heroes around town, and otherwise 
keep your Mage adventures hopping. 


Bestiary 


Some mages are urbanites who rarely see anything wilder 
than a house cat or a pigeon. Others prefer to live in remote 
wilderness regions, anda few mages use Life Sphere magick to take 
on the form of animals. Certain Sons of Ether and Progenitors 
also employ a wide range of experimental beasts - enhancing 
their intelligence, placing control circuits into their brains, or 
using drugs and gene therapy to give them new and powerful 
capabilities. And then you've got Familiars(as in the Background 
described in Chapter Six), many of which take the form of 
animals with extraordinary intellect and a few other surprises. 


Normal animals have only Physical and Mental Traits, 
because theirSocial traits are largely irrelevantfor interacting with 
humans. Fewhave Intelligence scores higher than 2 or Perception 
scores lower than 3. Damage inflicted by animals is typically 
lethal, although the Storyteller may decide that small animals 


618 Mage: The Ascension 20" Anniversary Edition 


(housecat or small-dog size) inflict bashing damage instead. 
Medium-size animals (dogs, chimps, wolves, etc.) inflict lethal 
damage with their teeth and bashing damage with their claws. 

For familiars, or manifestations of totem spirits, add one 
to three dots and dice to the Traits below, plus whatever other 
Abilities seem appropriate. (For details about incarnated totem 
demigods, see Totem Spirits, p. 633-636.) 


Alligator 
Attributes: Strength 6, Dexterity 3, Stamina 6, 
Perception 3, Intelligence 2, Wits 3 


Abilities: Alertness 3, Athletics 2, Brawl 3, Stealth 3 
Willpower: 5 

Health Levels: OK, OK, OK, -1, -1, -1, -2, -5, 
Incapacitated 

Armor Rating: | (seven soak dice, total) 

Attack: Bite for seven dice; tail slap for six dice. 


Bird, Small (Finch, Sparrow, Pigeon, etc.) 


Attributes: Strength 1, Dexterity 3, Stamina 2, 
Perception 3, Intelligence 2, Wits 3 


Abilities: Alertness 3, Expression (Mimicry) 2 
Willpower: 1 
Health Levels: OK, -1, -5, Dead 


Armor Rating: O (two soak dice, total) 


Attack: Harassment (-1 die on all target's dice pools 
while being harassed). 


Bird, Substantial (Hawk, Raven, Owl, etc.) 


Attributes: Strength 2, Dexterity 3, Stamina 2, 
Perception 3, Intelligence 2, Wits 3 


Abilities: Alertness 3, Athletics 2, Awareness 1 (3 for 
ravens, crows, and owls), Brawl 2, Intimidation 2 


Willpower: 3 
Health Levels: OK, -1, -1, -2, -5, Incapacitated 
Armor Rating: 0 (two soak dice, total) 


Attack: Claw for two dice (bashing); bite for one die 
(only in desperation). 


Bird, Large (Eagle, Swan, Vulture, etc.) 


Attributes: Strength 4, Dexterity 2, Stamina 3, 
Perception 3, Intelligence 2, Wits 3 


Abilities: Alertness 3, Athletics 2, Brawl 2, Intimidation 2 
Willpower: 3 

Health Levels: OK, OK, -1, -1, -2, -2, -5, Incapacitated 
Armor Rating: 0 (three soak dice, total) 


Attack: Wings for four dice (bashing); claw for four dice 
(bashing); bite for two dice (lethal). 


Cat, Domestic-Size 
Attributes: Strength 1, Dexterity 3, Stamina 3, 
Perception 3, Intelligence 2, Wits 3 


Abilities: Alertness 3, Athletics (Climbing) 4, Awareness 
2, Brawl 2, Empathy 3, Intimidation 1, Stealth 4 


Willpower: 3 
Health Levels: OK, -1, -2, -5, Incapacitated 
Armor Rating: O (three soak dice, total) 


Attack: Bite for one die (bashing); claw for one die 
(lethal); rake for two dice (lethal) when cornered. 


Chimpanzee 
Attributes: Strength 4, Dexterity 4, Stamina 3, 
Perception 3, Intelligence 2, Wits 3 


Abilities: Acrobatics 3, Alertness 3, Athletics (Climbing) 
4, Brawl 2, Empathy 1, Intimidation 2 


Willpower: 3 

Health Levels: OK, -1, -1, -2, -2, -5, Incapacitated 
Armor Rating: O (three soak dice, total) 

Attack: Bite for five dice; claw for four dice. 


Dog, Small (Chihuahua, Pug, etc.) 
Attributes: Strength 1, Dexterity 3, Stamina 2, 
Perception 3, Intelligence 1, Wits 3 


Abilities: Alertness 3, Athletics 3, Empathy 2, Stealth 2 
Willpower: 3 

Health Levels: OK, -1, -5, Incapacitated 

Armor Rating: 0 (two soak dice, total) 

Attack: Bite for two dice (lethal). 


Dog, Medium (Beagle, Border Collie, etc.) 


Dog, Large (German Shepherd, Great Dane, etc.) 


Horse 


Leopard, Jaguar, Panther, or Cougar 


Lynx or Bobcat 


IA A4 


] 


1 


Attributes: Strength 2, Dexterity 3, Stamina 3, 
Perception 3, Intelligence 2, Wits 3 


Abilities: Alertness 3, Athletics 3, Awareness 3, Brawl 2, 
Empathy 2, Stealth 2, Survival (Tracking) 4 


Willpower: 3 
Health Levels: OK, -1, -1, -2, -5, Incapacitated 
Armor Rating: O (three soak dice, total) 


Attack: Bite for three dice (lethal); claw for two dice 
(bashing). 


Attributes: Strength 4, Dexterity 3, Stamina 3, 
Perception 3, Intelligence 2, Wits 3 


Abilities: Alertness 3, Athletics 2, Awareness 3, Brawl 3, 
Empathy 2, Intimidation 2, Stealth 2, Survival (Tracking) 4 


Willpower: 3 
Health Levels: OK, -1, -1, -2, -2, -5, Incapacitated 
Armor Rating: 0 (three soak dice, total) 


Attack: Bite for five dice (lethal); claw for three dice 
(bashing). 


Attributes: Strength: 5, Dexterity 2, Stamina 4, 
Perception 3, Intelligence 2, Wits 2 


Abilities: Alertness 3, Athletics 3, Brawl 1, Empathy 2 
Willpower: 2 

Health Levels: OK, OK, OK, OK, -1, -3, -3, -3, -5, -5, 
Incapacitated 

Armor Rating: 1 (five soak dice, total) 


Attack: Trample or kick for six dice (bashing); bite for 
three (lethal). 


Attributes: Strength 4, Dexterity 3, Stamina 3, 
Perception 3, Intelligence 2, Wits 3 


Abilities: Alertness 3, Athletics 3, Awareness 3, Brawl 3, 
Empathy 2, Intimidation 2, Stealth 4 


Willpower: 4 

Health Levels: OK, -1, -1, -2, -2, -5, Incapacitated 
Armor Rating: 0 (three soak dice, total) 

Attack: Bite for five dice; claw for five dice (all lethal). 


Attributes: Strength 3, Dexterity 3, Stamina 3, 
Perception 3, Intelligence 2, Wits 3 


Abilities: Alertness 3, Athletics (Climbing) 4, Awareness 
2, Brawl 3, Empathy 2, Intimidation 2, Stealth 4 


Willpower: 3 
Health Levels: OK, -1, -1, -2, -5, Incapacitated 
Armor Rating: O (three soak dice, total) 


Attack: Bite for four dice; claw for three dice; rake for 
four dice (all lethal). 


Appendix I: Allies and Antagonists n 


—— 


4 


Tiger or Lion 
Attributes: Strength 5, Dexterity 4, Stamina 4, 
Perception 4, Intelligence 3, Wits 3 
Abilities: Alertness 3, Athletics 3, Awareness 2, Brawl 3, 
Empathy 3, Intimidation 5, Stealth 3 
Willpower: 4 
Health Levels: OK, OK, -1, -1, -2, -2, -5,-5, 
Incapacitated 
Armor Rating: 1 (five soak dice, total) 
Attack: Bite for seven dice; claw for six dice (all lethal). 


Wolf 
Attributes: Strength 3-4, Dexterity 3, Stamina 3-4, 
Perception 3, Intelligence 2, Wits 3 
Abilities: Alertness 2, Athletics 1, Awareness 2, Brawl 3, 
Empathy 2, Intimidation 3, Stealth 2, Survival (Tracking) 4 
Willpower: 3 
Armor Rating: 0 (three to four soak dice, total) 
Health Levels: OK, -1, -1, -2, -5, Incapacitated 


Attack: Bite for four or five dice (lethal); claw for three or 
four dice (bashing). 


Among the Masses 


Even the most reclusive and misanthropic mage occasionally 
deals with Sleepers. Most Awakened folks live amidst the 
Masses... and even those who don’t do so will eventually wind 
up interacting with at least a few Sleepers. That’s especially true 
if you've got the Backgrounds Allies, Backup, Cult, Retainers, 
or Spies (see Chapter Six), which put such characters into your 
mage’s employ. Lab assistants, security guards, toughs, lovers, 
groupies, acolytes, cultists, converts, and so forth... ifand when 
a group of mages finds itself crossing words or swords with such 
people, the following templates will come in handy. 


Typical Citizen 
The average citizen in a non-combat zone has some useful 

abilities butno fightingskills to speak of. Though scrappy individuals 
(bullies, hookers, folks with a few selfdefense classes under their 
belts) might have a dot or two in Brawl - perhaps even Firearms or 
a Martial Art - the typical mortal (as if such a thing exists!) has a 
professional skill or two, a hobby, and the basic skills necessary to 
operate household and professional technologies (cars, cell phones, 
computers, etc.). Ifthatperson'sanathlete, yoga enthusiast, personal 
trainer, or so forth, she might have higher Physical Traits than usual. 
Receptionists, lab assistants, students, informants, reporters, artists, 
and so forth might be very good at their jobs (Mental Attributes 
and a professional skill of 3 or higher), but they still tend to make 
themselves scarce if punches, bullets, or lightning bolts start flying. 
Most Cultists, Retainers, and low-level Backup personnel (as per 
those Background Traits) fall into this category. 

Suggested Attributes: Strength 2, Dexterity 2, Stamina 

2, Charisma 1-3, Manipulation 1-3, Appearance 1-4, 

Perception 1-3, Intelligence 1-4, Wits 2 

Suggested Abilities: Area Knowledge 1-3, Athletics 

0-2, Crafts 0-3, Computer 1-3, Drive 1-2, Firearms 3, 

Technology 1-3 (plus Talents, Skills, or Knowledges 

appropriate to their field or hobby, 1-3) 


620 Mage: The Ascension 20" Anniversary Edition 


Willpower: 3 
Health Levels: OK, -1, -1 -2, - 2, -5, Incapacitated 
Equipment: Wallet, cell phone, typical clothing and 
gear for the appropriate setting. 

Image: This person could be anyone. 


Roleplaying Notes: Depending on your motivations, 
your behavior runs the range of human experience. 


Thug 
Some folks love to fight. Maybe they’re drunken frat guys, 

obnoxious barflies, furious protesters, boys, women, or men who've 
got more issues than sense. It’s pretty easy to end up on the bad 
side of such people, especially in the World of Darkness. Cults with 
particularly shady membership have lots of these sorts of people 
among thecongregation. Although theydon’t putup much resistance 
against a stronger foe, thugs can give a mage or two a decently hard 
time unless that person’s got some mad skills on display. 

Suggested Attributes: Strength 3, Dexterity 2, 

Stamina 2, Charisma 2, Manipulation 2, Appearance 2, 

Perception 2, Intelligence 1, Wits 2 


Suggested Abilities: Alertness 2, Area Knowledge 1, 
Athletics 2, Brawl 2, Crafts 2, Drive 1, Intimidation 1, 
Melee 2, Streetwise 1, Technology 1 

Willpower: 3 

Health Levels: OK, -1, -1 -2, - 2, -5, Incapacitated 
Equipment: Wallet and stuff, improvised weapons (pool 
cues, broken bottles, tire irons, chairs, protest signs, and so 
on). 

Image: A rough and cocky attitude, perhaps accentuated 
by a few scars or old injuries, betrays this person’s willingness 
to fight. 

Roleplaying Notes: Fighting is a rush. You enjoy it, and 
you're pretty decent at it, if you must say so yourself! 


Beat Cop 

In the World of Darkness, most beat cops have seen things 
they don’t understand... but they also know that cops who 
investigate mysterious occurrences too often tend to either 
vanish or else develop an odd aversion to discussing such events. 
Instead, police officers tell stories of the strange things they 
see, then warn each other about the need to report anything 
too strange to the FBI or some similar agency. 


Beat cops react to magick very differently, depending upon 
what they see. Someone who presents the cop with a badge or 
other ID indicating that she’s part of some government or mili- 
tary agency while carrying a device that appears to be a piece of 
impressively advanced or unlikely technology will be treated with 
deference and respect. In contrast, most police treat an oddly 
dressed and obviously eccentric individual who’s waving crystals 
around or gibbering in unknown languages as a threat. Police 
are likely to arrest, beat, or even shoot such a person, depending 
upon how threatened the police officer feels and how menacing 
that individual seems to be. 


In recent years, police forces (especially within the United 
States) have been supplied with military-grade hardware, the 
training to use it, and the ability to do terrible things with it and 
get away with them. Because street-level crime rarely demands 


armored vehicles and combat-ready troops, those police forces 
often escalate even the most routine situations to small-scale 
battle zones. Given the heightened police response to the Occupy 
demonstrations, the Arab Spring demonstrations, and the 
Ferguson protests, it’s not unreasonable to assume that a clash 
with beat cops will turn into a local war within hours... if not 
minutes, especially in the World of Darkness. Mages who want 
to mess with the cops should expect very harsh consequences. 


Suggested Attributes: Strength 3, Dexterity 2, 
Stamina 3, Charisma 2, Manipulation 3, Appearance 2, 
Perception 3, Intelligence 2, Wits 3 


Suggested Abilities: Alertness 2, Area Knowledge 3, 
Athletics 2, Brawl 2, Computer 1, Drive 2, Firearms 3, 
Intimidation 1, Investigation 2, Law 2, Melee 2, Stealth 1, 
Streetwise 2, Technology 2 


Willpower: 5 
Health Levels: OK, -1, -1 -2, - 2, -5, Incapacitated 


Equipment: Badge and ID card, heavy pistol, riot baton, 
pepper spray, Taser, radio, police uniform. Urban police 
officers often wear Kevlar vests when expecting trouble. 
Escalated responses could provide these 
same cops with riot suits and 
shields, shotguns or assault 
rifles, pacification spray, and 
military vehicles. 


Image: Typical beat 

cops wear the local law- 
enforcement uniform, carry 
the essential gear, and share 
the infamous, wary cop 
stare that 
notes small 
details and 
brooks 

no bullshit. 
SWAT 
officers and 
escalated- 
response teams 
wear body armor, 
carry military weapons, 
and employ brutal, 
sometimes lethal, tactics. 


Roleplaying Notes: 
You've seen more awful 
things than you're willing to 
discuss with anyone outside 

the Thin Blue Line. Except 
under the most extreme 
circumstances, you're loyal to 
your fellow cops; you might not 
care for individuals, but only 
other officers can understand 
what you go through. 


Professional Badass 
Organized crime and military 

armed forces are powerful and 

pervasive groups... but they’re 

also mortal subcultures in which 

even the most accomplished members 


can easily become the pawns of mages, vampires, spirits, and other 
supernatural creatures. As a result, many criminals are fairly super- 
stitious (maybe even cowardly!), and all of them know that when 
something looks too weird, it’s time to get the hell outta Dodge. 


Evenso, professional badasses - security specialists, mob enforc- 
ers, SWAT team members, assassins, gangbangers, military personnel, 
martial artists, and so on - regard themselves as very dangerous 
people. And by average-citizen standards, they're right. Such folks 
can't afford to seem cowardly or weak. As a result, you'll often find 
these badasses working for vampires, werecritters, dangerous orga- 
nizations, rival mages, and perhaps even you! (The Allies, Backup, 
and Spies Backgrounds generally employ these types of characters.) 


Suggested Attributes: Strength 4, Dexterity 3, Stamina 
3, Charisma 3, Manipulation 4, Appearance 1-3, 
Perception 2-4, Intelligence 2-4, Wits 3-4 

Suggested Abilities: Alertness 2, Athletics 2-4, Brawl 
3-4, Drive 2, Firearms 3-5, Intimidation 3, Martial Arts 
O-4, Melee 1-3, Stealth 2, Streetwise 3-5, Subterfuge 2, 
Technology 1-3 


Ga 


en 


| Lu 
<r ; 
S 


Appendix I: Allies and Antagonists 62l 


Willpower: ó 
Health Levels: OK, -1, - 1 -2, - 2, -5, Incapacitated 
Equipment: Kevlar vest (perhaps heavy body armor 


in combat situations], knife and/ or club, shotgun or 
submachine gun, car, and various appropriate goodies. 


Image: Regardless of individual appearance or fashion, a 
professional badass has the predatory look of someone who's 
survived many violent encounters and plans to survive many 
more. 


Roleplaying Notes: Violence is your business, and 
business is good. 


Government Agent 

These operatives belong to the FBI, DHS, NSA, CIA, or 
some other alphabetsoup organization and show up when 
serious crimes occur - typically terrorism, kidnapping, serial 
killings, espionage, counterfeiting, drastic hacking, orapparent 
breaches of national security. In the World of Darkness, police 
and other local authorities often call in government agents 
after encountering inexplicable events. Local and national 
governments recognize that the world is not what it seems 
to be, so they send out agents to investigate and neutralize 
such threats. 


Regardless of whether she's been called in to investigate a 
human serial killer or to check out reports about events that 
seem to defy the laws of physics, a government agent knows 
that her job is both importantand dangerous. If she encounters 
someone performing obvious magick or triggering any other 
sort of paranormal event, she'll draw her gun, call for backup, 


622 Mage: The Ascension 20" Anniversary Edition 


and almost certainly start shooting if the supernatural activity 
appears to be in any way threatening. 


Most government agents aren't official members of 
the Technocratic Union and have never heard of it. Many 
inadvertently work for it anyway. They might even have 
encountered ranking Technocratic Operatives and then 
assumed the operatives belonged to another secretive and 
powerful government agency above the agent's security 
clearance. The Union also monitors communications between 
government agents, sorts through reports, and debriefs 
agents who've been on interesting cases. If a government 
agent reports evidence of events that seem supernatural, 
the Technocracy (or perhaps the Nephandi...) might send in 
their own operatives to investigate and deal with apparent 
Reality Deviants. 

Suggested Attributes: Strength 3, Dexterity 2-3, 
Stamina 3-4, Charisma 2-4, Manipulation 3-5, 
Appearance 2, Perception 3-4, Intelligence 3-4, Wits 3-5 
Suggested Abilities: Academics 3, Alertness 3, 
Athletics 2, Awareness 1, Brawl 2-3, Computer 2-3, Drive 
2-3, Enigmas 1-3, Firearms 3-4, Investigation 3-5, Law 4, 
Martial Arts 1-3, Media 1-3, Melee 2-3, Politics 2-4, 
Research 2-4, Stealth 2, Streetwise 3, Technology 2-4 
Willpower: 7 

Health Levels: OK, -1, - 1 -2, - 2, -5, Incapacitated 
Equipment: Badge and ID card, dark-colored suit, 
electronic surveillance devices, heavy pistol, sunglasses, 
plus body armor and heavier weapons in clearly 
dangerous situations. 


Image: Thorough training makes the average government 
field agent confident, well-groomed, capable, and at 
least slightly arrogant. In the field, such people wear clean 
and unusually durable professional clothing, with shoes 
and gear that look fashionable yet remain practical for 
heavy-duty work. 


Roleplaying Notes: You're one of those folks standing 
at the edge of chaos... human or otherwise. Your training 
and experience make you formidable but not invincible, 
and you've probably had enough tough scrapes to 
understand the difference. 


Extraordinary Operatives 
and Technocratic Creations 


The vast majority of people working for the Technocratic 
Union are not Enlightened Operatives or Scientists. Instead, 
extraordinary scientists, technicians, and operatives handle many 
Technocratic chores. Beyond those rank-and-file sympathizers and 
proles, both Iteration X and the Progenitors create intelligent 
constructs that serve as guards, soldiers, spies, and assassins. 


Although the Union would never call any of its members “hedge 
magicians,” there’s a Technocratic equivalent to thatarchaic conceit: 
extraordinary citizens. Extraordinary scientists and field agents do not 
count as Sleeper witnesses, so long as the Effects in question are 
focused through some form of technomagick. Unlike many of their 
co-workers, extraordinary citizens know what the Technocracy is 
and tend to be extremely loyal to it. When a Technocratic operative 
calls for backup (as per the Background of that name) in sensitive 
(that is, paranormal) situations, these are the folks who show up. 


Such personnel can also use certain Technocratic 
Devices, though not Enlightened Procedures. And although 
most of these citizens work in labs, offices, and medical and 
equipment repair facilities, Convention field offices also deploy 
extraordinary field agents as well. Those agents typically carry 
one or two Devices; Iteration X agents often enjoy cybernetic 
implants, and Progenitor field personnel have various biomods 
(both as per the Enhancements Background). Even without 
such gear, extraordinary citizens carry tech that, among the 
Masses, would be considered bleeding-edge mega-cool. 


Extraordinary Scientist 


Staffing the labs that create, refine, and disseminate 
Technocracy hypertech, these visionaries enjoy high pay, 
professional prestige, and the coolest toys on Earth. Naturally, 
they know which side their Technocratic toast is buttered on, 
believe deeply in the Union’s cause, and rarely turn on their 
employers except in the most dire circumstances... and seldom 
escape intact if they do. 


Suggested Attributes: Strength 2, Dexterity 3, 
Stamina 2, Charisma 2, Manipulation 3, Appearance 2, 
Perception 3, Intelligence 4, Wits 3 


Suggested Abilities: Academics 4, Alertness 2, 
Awareness 2, Computer 3, Drive 1, Enigmas 1, Firearms 
1, Hypertech 3, Investigation 2, Leadership 1, Medicine 
2, Occult 1, Science (several suitable specialties) 4, 
Technology 4 


Willpower: 5 


EN 


Health Levels: OK, -1, -1, -2, -2, -5, Incapacitated 
Armor Rating: 0 (two ind dice, total) 

Equipment: Extraordinary scientists can manvfacture, 
modify, repair, and employ Technocratic Devices and so 
tend to have all kinds of neat gear within close reach. 
Image: Smart, cultured, and visionary, these men and 
women work near the tops of their respective fields... and 
they know it, too. 
Roleplaying Notes: 


"the brightest boys/ to play with 
the biggest toys..." 


Extraordinary Field Agent 

The wide range of field agents employs an equally wide 
range ofskills. Dependingon the Convention, Methodology, and 
purpose of the agent in question, such personnel may also have 
thefollowing Abilities, and perhaps others as well: Crafts, Energy 
Weapons, Esoterica, Martial Arts, Law, Politics, Seduction, and 
other Abilities appropriate to the agent in question. 


Suggested Attributes: Strength 3-5, Dexterity 3-4, 
Stamina 3-5, Charisma 2-5, Manipulation 3-5, Appearance 
2-5, Perception 3-4, Intelligence 3-5, Wits 3-4 
Suggested Abilities: Alertness 2, Athletics 2, 
Awareness 2, Brawl 2, Computer 2-4, Drive 1-3, 
Firearms 2-5, Hypertech 2-4, Investigation 3, Leadership 
1, Medicine 1, Occult 2, Science 2-3, Streetwise 2-5, 
Technology 2-5 

Willpower: ó 

Health Levels: OK, -1, -1, -2, -2, -5, Incapacitated 
Armor Rating: O (three to five soak dice, total) 
Equipment: Field ops, like other extraordinary citizens, 
can employ Technocratic Devices. Some have cybernetics 
or biomods that suit their respective duties, though such 
modifications tend to be subtle for all but the most invested 
operatives - see Cybernetics and Biomods and 
Genegineering Modifications in Appendix II, (pp. 
657-661). High-ranking agents also have access to the 
Visual Data & Analysis Spectrum (VDAS) described 
in Appendix II, (pp. 655-656). 

Image: Typical field agents look like whatever their 
particular assignment demands. Regardless of their 
position, though, these folks are not pushovers. To 

reach this level, a person must be, as the title suggests, 
extraordinary. And whatever an operative wears, that 
aura of competence shines through. 

Roleplaying Notes: Yours is a hazardous and 
remarkable honor. Do your best to live up to it. 


Common "Steelskin" Cybor$ 

Among the most effective field operatives in the 
Technocratic Union, the common cyborgs of Iteration X have 
received specialized mechanical and biomodification upgrades: 
increased strength and durability, lifesupport gear, built-in 
tools, sensors, or weapons, and so forth. Originally mundane 
human beings (or sometimes animals), they're now something 
more advanced than they once were. Although they've been 
conditioned to accept their newlives (and thus tend to be 
among the most loyal Technocratic personnel), these exos 
retain a degree of free will, if not much individual identity. 


Appendix I: Allies and Antagonists — 623 


qu 


LU 


Typically known by alphanumerical designations (X-235, 
for example), steelskins often work as manual laborers, security 
personnel, infiltrators, investigators, and hunterkiller operatives. 
Despite their apparent depersonalization, though, they often retain 
distinct motivations and appearance unless they've had to go back for 
frequent Social Conditioning. In that regard, Technocracy cyborgs 
are essentially folks with odd, sometimes drastic, modifications and 
an unusually stubborn sense of duty to the Technocratic Union 
in general and Iteration X in particular. Unlike HIT Marks, these 
agents arenot machines - they're people. Truly dedicated (or severely 
Conditioned) exos lose most of their personality, but many operatives 
retain it unless something awful happens... which, in the World of 
Darkness, it often, eventually, does. 


Suggested Attributes: Strength 3-4, Dexterity 3, 
Stamina 4, Charisma 2, Manipulation 1, Appearance 2, 
Perception 3, Intelligence 2, Wits 3 


Suggested Abilities: Alertness 3, Athletics 2, 
Awareness 2, Brawl 2, Computer 2, Drive 1, Firearms 
2-4, Investigation 2, Medicine 1, Melee 1, Science 2-3, 
Technology 3-5 


Willpower: 5 (3 with regards to Technocratic 
programming) 

Health Levels: OK, OK, -1, -1, -2, -2, -5, Incapacitated 
Armor Rating: 1 (five soak dice, total) 


Attacks / Powers: Variable; all cyborgs possess implanted 
radios with cell phone and wireless Internet capabilities, plus 
USB ports and other data storage and linkage technologies. 
Every cyborg also has several additional implants and Traits, 
depending upon an individual's purpose: 

* Combat agents gain +2 to Strength, Brawl, Firearms, 
and Melee; claws that do Strength *1 lethal damage; and 
*2 armor (bashing & lethal]. 

* Investigation agents add +3 to Computer and 
Investigation; possess IR and UV vision, plus enhanced 
hearing and smell (in game terms, reduce the difficulty of 
hearing and smell rolls -2, to a minimum of 2), and a VDAS 
datacrawl Device. 

* Intrusion agents add +2 to Computer, Stealth, and 
Technology, and contain built-in tools and access jacks that 
reduce the difficulty of Technology and computer-hacking 
rolls by -2 (to a minimum of 2), plus a VDAS datacrawl. 
Image: Despite the name, most steelskins look like fairly 
ordinary people (if somewhat bulkier than usual) with 
rather severe haircuts and mannerisms. Heavily processed 
cyborgs have shaved heads and bodies (regardless of 
gender) and a disconcerting flatness to their voices and 
gaze. Depending on their assignment, they might wear 
uniforms, street clothes, or coveralls that render them more 
or less sexless and monochromatic. 

Roleplaying Notes: The Union is your life and Iteration X 
is your savior. Order is essential, and deviance is a crime. 


Victor 

Homo superior gets grown in a vat, tweaked to perfection, 
and released into the world through the genius of the Progenitor 
Convention. Whether male or female, this person’s designation 
is “Victor” - an apparent jest whose origin remains unclear. Bred 
and conditioned to serve designated purposes, these apparently 
human beings actas clones of special individuals, field-assignment 


Mage: The Ascension 20" Anniversary Edition 


agents, infiltration experts, and public-relations symbols of the 
excellence that is the Technocratic Union. 


Older-generation Victors tended to be rather dull-minded. 
The newer generations are quicker on the uptake, with dazzling 
hand-eye coordination and staggeringly good looks. Like 
their predecessors, new-millennium Victors seem stubbornly 
immune to pain - they recognize damage but don’t appear to feel 
its effects. That said, they're still subject to mental instability (a 
psychological manifestation of Paradox, perhaps?), and - unlike 
cyborgs - remain unable to Awaken to the greater sense of 
things. Although they can use hypertech Devices, they cannot 
employ Enlightened Procedures, and thus remain limited in 
their usefulness to the Technocracy. 


Suggested Attributes: Strength 4, Dexterity 5, 
Stamina 4, Charisma 4, Manipulation 3, Appearance 4, 
Perception 3, Intelligence 2, Wits 3 


Suggested Abilities: Alertness 2, Athletics 4, Brawl 
4, Firearms 4, Melee 4, Technology 3; depending on 
their training, most Victors also have two or three of 
the following Abilities at between one and four dots 
per Ability: Computer, Drive, Etiquette, Intimidation, 
Government, Martial Arts, Politics, Science, Seduction, 
Stealth, Streetwise, Subterfuge. 


Willpower: 4 

Health Levels: OK, OK, OK, -1, -1, -2, -2, -2, -5, 
Terminated 

Armor Rating: O (but see below) 


Attacks / Powers: Beyond their immunity to pain, all 
Victors all have one or two Enhancements (as per the 
Background Trait). For examples, see the Biomods and 
Genegineering Modifications featured in Appendix II. 


Countermagick: 2 dice of innate countermeasures. 


Image: A combination of breathtakingly good looks, 
feline grace, animal charm, and supreme fitness give the 
Victors an air of superiority. Unless one has been modified 
(or specially grown) to replace a particular person, these 
clones share the kind of aesthetic perfection you see on 
magazine covers and fitness advertisements. Victors look 
Photoshopped, but they obviously are not. That said, they 
have a near-universal tendency toward volatile emotions, 
mental illness, and irrational behavior. 

Roleplaying Notes: You don't just look better than 
everybody else — you are better than everybody else! 

The Technocracy may be your god, but you're superior to 
damn near everyone who's not a high-ranking Technocrat. 
Do your job with pride, but never forget that you're the 
next iteration in human development... no matter what 
anyone else might think! 


HIT Marks 


HyperIntelligent Tactical units - formerly Hyper Intelligence 
Technologies, aka HIT Marks - provide the classic shock troops of 
Iteration X... and, more recently, the lastresort terror agents of 
Panopticon and the NWO. Although such extreme operatives 
have gone out of fashion in recent years, the Union still maintains, 
tinkers with, and occasionally upgrades these cybernetic machines. 
Drastic situations call for drastic measures, and in certain crises 
HIT Mark deployment seems... dare we say, traditional. 


All HIT Marks appear to be somewhat bulky humans, so 
long as they remain fully dressed - muscular, but not inhuman. 
Careful observers who know what to look for, however, (Perception 
* Awareness, difficulty 8) might notice an occasional, flickering 
red glow in a HIT Mark's eyes as its targeting systems scan its 
environment. A HIT Mark's programming allows it to mimic 
human social interaction, but such monstrosities are far from good 
at it. Neither human nor machine but an uncanny fusion of both 
that's not even as human as a highly enhanced cyborg, each HIT 
Mark is essentially a skilled weapons system with vague sentience 
and ruthless targeting protocols. 


Previous iterations (so to speak...) of these infamous machines 
featured deadly yet unreliable weapons, bulky design, heavy 
construction, and a fearsome susceptibility to the Paradox Effect. 
Subsequent redesigns (especially during the days of the full-scale RD 
purge of the previous decade) lowered the weight, increased flexibility, 
improved the camouflage systems (read: the ability to mimic human 
beings), and - most importantly - refined the HIT Marks’ Paradox 
Effect profile. One shortlived version even incorporated the 
sentience of mind-wiped rival mages, but that experiment proved 
disastrous for everyone involved. The most current generation, 
however, can pass for human under most conditions, assuming 
that they’re not forced into the sort of awkward social interactions 
that often betray their kind. Meanwhile, the popularity of movies 
featuring killer cyborgs, and the advancements in drone-weapon 
systems, allow the newest forms of HIT Mark 
to remain coincidental within technological 
reality zones. This, of course, makes them 
easier to deploy in urban environments... 
and if the Technocracy’s true leadership 
has noticed this capability (which is 
probably thecase), then there might 
be a growing army of HIT Mark 
Xs prepared for an approaching 
and terrible endgame... 


For details about HIT 
Marks VLIX, see the source- 
book Gods, Monsters, and 
Familiar Strangers. 


[^ 


HIT Mark V - 
"Old Pusty" 
The classic model from the 
1990s is an antique now. Even 
after five new iterations, however, 
the Mark V still brings a shudder 
to Tradition mages everywhere. 
The most infamous model of its 
infamous line, the Mark V was a 
common sight in the old days. 
Despite its shortcomings, it's still 
a nasty piece of work. Several 
dozen units remain in service 
throughout both the Union and 
the ranks of its assorted 
allies. Even the occasional 


vampire or Pentex Industries operative appears with a HIT Mark V 
nearby, its power undimmed by its supposed obsolescence. How do 
Reality Deviants obtain such things? That's one of many skeletons 
hiding in the Union's collective closet... 


Attributes: Strength 5, Dexterity 2, Stamina 5, Charisma 
1, Manipulation 1, Appearance 4, Perception 3, 
Intelligence 2, Wits 2 


Abilities: Alertness 3, Brawl 3, all Skills and Knowledges 
3 (excepting Cosmology, Esoterica, Meditation, Occult, 
and Stealth, all of which are O) 

Willpower: 5 


Health Levels: OK, OK, OK, OK, OK, -1, -5, 
Terminated 


Armor Rating: 4 (nine soak dice, total) 


Attacks/ Powers: Chain gun (200 rounds; difficulty 7, 
damage 8, range 150, rate 3); claws (Strength + 3; eight 
dice total); infrared and ultraviolet vision. Many models 
also carry additional human-style weapons - typically 
firearms of various calibers, rocket launchers, grenades, 
shotguns, swords, knives, and chainsaws. All HIT Marks 
have been programmed to be able to use anything as a 
weapon, and they can employ Technocracy hypertech 
like an Awakened operative. 

Countermagick: Five dice worth of Primium 
countermeasures; older models had only two, but those 
models have since been destroyed. 


Appendix l land Antagonists 625 


— 


—M 


Hacking a HIT Mark 


Earlier versions of the HIT Mark design — versions | through IV — were susceptible to “reprogramming” by computer- 
hacking Virtual Adepts. By the Mark V model, however, those bugs had largely been eliminated (*4 difficulty to all 
hacking attempts) by a combination of biological tissue, improved programming, and Primium countermeasures. By the 
Mark VII model, hacking had been rendered more or less impossible, thanks to the fusion of computer technology and 
biological brain matter. By the Mark X model, the computer-hacking glitch has been completely eliminated... one of 
several problems solved by the transition from thinking machine to biomechanical organism. 


As self-governed machines, the HIT Marks cannot be cracked via remote access. A Reality Deviant needs to get his 
hands on each individual HIT Mark... a task, that, for obvious reasons, is not as easy as it sounds! Characters who want 
to hack an early-model HIT Mark need to spend at least 10 minutes with that task, making one Intelligence + Hypertech 
roll (difficulty equal to the HIT Mark's model name - i.e. 5 for a Mark V) for each iteration of the model (again, five 
rolls for a Mark V). 


A HIT Mark X can be reprogrammed only with a combination of Matter 3/ Mind. 3/ Forces 2, plus the hacking rolls 
as above. The protocols necessary to program a HIT Mark X remain closely guarded secrets within Iteration X and the 
NWO. Even members of those Conventions rarely have access to such information if they're below the Manager grade. 


Image: A bulky badass, the typical Mark V is male, 
laconic, and dressed in heavy clothing to conceal various 
weapons and subtle, inhuman fics. 


Roleplaying Notes: Circulate, locate, exterminate. 


HIT Mark X - "The Invisible Soldier" 

"Today's standard HIT Mark model, the Mark X looks like an 
ordinary human who's strong, fast, and extremely deadly, with a 
limited faceshifting ability that allows it to make cosmetic changes 
to its features, gender, and skin tone. Without internal examination 
or magick, a Mark X remains indistinguishable from a muscular, if 
somewhat taciturn, human being. Such machines are no better at 
social banter than any previous HIT Mark model, but they're smart 
enough to know how to conceal this weakness; given the decline of 
social graces in recent years, such concealment isn't difficult. 


Like its previous iteration, the HIT Mark IX, the newer 
model X employs a complex integration of nanotech and 
lab-grown organic tissue which creates a literally flexible bio- 
machine. To counteract the Paradox issues of earlier iterations, 
the newest HIT Marks are more like super-oldiers than death- 
dealing war machines. Even so, they're exceedingly effective 
and can take a lot of punishment. 


Suggested Attributes: Strength 6, Dexterity 4, 
Stamina 6, Charisma 1, Manipulation 2, Appearance 3, 
Perception 5, Intelligence 2, Wits 4 


Suggested Abilities: Alertness 4, Brawl 4, Firearms 
4, Melee 4, all other Skills & Knowledges 3, with the 
exceptions above. 

Willpower: 6 

Health Levels: OK, OK, OK, OK, OK, OK, OK, OK, 
-5, Terminated 

Armor Rating: 6 (12 dice soak, total) 


Attacks / Powers: A Mark X unit lacks the internal 
firepower of previous models, but it can use human-sized 
gear and hypertech. A smaller claw array (damage: 8/L) 
gives this model an innate hand-to-hand component that 
— thanks to movies and comic books — remains essentially 
coincidental in technological reality zones. Beyond the 
usual sensory array of previous models, the Mark X has 


626 Mage: The Ascension 20" Anniversary Edition 


wireless Internet access and internal cell phone capability, 
plus five concealed USB ports, two high-capacity internal 
flash drives, and a VDAS datacrawl. 

A Mark X that loses its last health level automatically self- 
destructs. Technocratic technicians can also set one to 
self-destruct if it’s captured or incapacitated. Normally, this self- 
destruct function just fuses and melts all internal components 
into biomechanical slag. A skilled technician, however, can 
also cause the Mark X to explode, inflicting 8 dice of lethal 
damage upon everyone within four yards of the Mark X. 


Countermagick: Four dice of Primium countermeasures. 
Image: Though bulky and muscular, the Mark X looks 


unsettlingly human — a bit thick, perhaps, but not nearly as 
obvious as previous iterations had been. 


Roleplaying Notes: Like a professional solider, you've 
been trained and conditioned to do whatever must be 
done. That said, you've got something approximating free 
will... not much of it, but enough to blur the line between 
human and machine to a degree that your creators would 
find truly unsettling. 


Our Awakened Brethren 


Every mage knows at least a few others of her kind. Among 
the many friends, rivals, and enemies along a mage’s Path, the 
following Awakened folks might wind up playing a role in your 
chronicle or inspiring other mages along the way. 


Orban Shamanic Musician 

For some folks, the Path of the spirits requires potent 
hallucinogens, fasting, painful ordeals, complex meditative sigils, 
or hours of dancing and chanting. Other people find a swift 
and beautiful path to the world of the spirits using the creative 
power of music. Many folks think of shamans as residents of the 
Siberian wilderness, remote corners of the Amazon jungle, or 
other isolated and indigenous locales. Certain seekers, however, 
call upon the spirits of streetlights, pigeons, and skyscrapers 
rather than the spirits of rivers, wolves, or forests. 

Jamming in bars and coffeehouses, asking advice from 


urban spirits, an urban shaman seeks to bring balance and 
harmony to humanity’s ever-growing cities. In doing so, 


she must fight the efforts of corrupt Technocrats, vampires, 
and other urban monsters, as well as the far more common 
problems like despair, apathy, greed, and the shitty income of 
a working musician. 


Suggested Attributes: Strength 2, Dexterity 3, 
Stamina 3, Charisma 4, Manipulation 2, Appearance 3, 
Perception 4, Intelligence 3, Wits 3 

Suggested Abilities: Academics 1, Alertness 2, Art 
(several musical instruments) 4, Athletics 1, Awareness 

3, Brawl 1, Computer 1, Cosmology 3, Drive 1, Enigmas 
2, Esoterica (various disciplines] 4, Firearms 1, Occult 2, 
Stealth 2, Streetwise 3, Subterfuge 1, Technology 1 
Suggested Arete: 3 or 4 

Suggested Spheres: Forces 2, Prime 1, Spirit 3, Time 2 
Willpower: ó 

Health Levels: OK, -1, -1 -2, - 2, -5, Incapacitated 
Armor Rating: 1 (leather jacket and pants; four soak 
dice, total) 

Equipment: Aging subcompact car, guitar, knife, light 
revolver, motorcycle leathers. 

Image: Decked out in urban-tribal fashion, our shaman 
could be distinctly ethnic, culturally ambiguous, or an 
apparently standard-issue, white-bread suburbanite 
whose Path has led her away from mainstream Americana 
and into a more bohemian life. 

Roleplaying Notes: The world is alive, and it speaks 
to you in a million voices — some harsh, some ugly, and 
others gorgeous beyond measure. Help give the best of 
them a voice in a world that has lost the gift of hearing 
them, and step carefully around the malignant ones so as 
not to fall into their traps. 

Focus: Guided by a paradigm like Creation's Divine and 
Alive or It's All Good — Have Faith, the urban shaman 
specializes in practices drawn from witchcraft, medicine 
work, gutter magick and/ or Voudoun in addition to her 
obvious shamanism, channeled through music and other 
related (and probably disreputable) instruments. 


Awakened Hacktivist 


Some information doesn’twant to be free, and many powerful 
people certainly want to keep it concealed. Even so, politically 
savvy computer-mages - many, but notall, of them Virtual Adepts 
- understand that releasing the right information in the proper 
places can spark social change and bring down governments. 
From Tahrir Square to Wall Street, these hacktivists work to 
uncover and publicize secrets that ignite popular reactions... 
and then spur those reactions toward bigger shifts of paradigm. 


Using Trinary smart phones and recording devices, 
Awakened idealists hack systems, record damning materials, 
and then disseminate them through the channels that get 
the most attention in the shortest periods of time. Called 
“terrorists” by officials in a multitude of governments, and 
considered “Reality Deviants” by much of the Technocracy, 
these individuals are among the most daring and adventurous 
members of their respective groups. 


Suggested Attributes: Strength 2, Dexterity 3, 
Stamina 3, Charisma 3, Manipulation 3, Appearance 2, 
Perception 3, Intelligence 4, Wits 4 


Suggested Abilities: Academics 3, Alertness 2, 
Athletics 2, Awareness 2, Brawl 2, Computer 5, Drive 

2, Enigmas 2, Firearms 1, Investigation 4, Media 3, 
Politics 4, Occult 1, Research 3, Science 2, Streetwise 2, 
Subterfuge 4, Stealth 2, Technology 4 

Suggested Arete: 3 or 4 

Suggested Spheres: Correspondence/ Data 3, Forces 
2, Mind 2, Time or Entropy 2 

Willpower: 7 

Health Levels: OK, -1, -1 -2, - 2, -5, Incapacitated 
Armor Rating: 2 (armored T-shirt; five soak dice, total) 
Equipment: Enhanced Trinary smart phone or tablet, 
light pistol, fake press passes, data-storage devices, 
motorcycle or subcompact car. 

Image: Smart and furious, modern hacktivists either favor 
stylish and provocative clothing and haircuts, or else blend in 
with the scenery by dressing and acting as inconspicuously 
as possible. Both approaches have their merits, although 
dressing respectably tends to open more doors and win more 
sympathy from the Masses. Radical fashions can be fun but 
alienating, and most hacktivists have learned that mainstream 
outrage is the true tool of revolution. 

Roleplaying Notes: Delay, compromise, and silence 
are no longer possible... if indeed they ever were. The 
system is rigged and the bastards are everywhere. Kick in 
their doors and blow down their walls. Change demands 
action, and the time for both is now! 

Focus: Everything is Data, might also be Chaos, and is 
certainly on a One-Way Trip to Oblivion unless someone 
changes the signal. Thankfully, Tech Holds All Answers, so 
these technomancers employ reality hacking, cybernetics, 
hypertech, and perhaps other practices (chaos magick, 
hypereconomics, dominion, maybe even martial arts) to get 
the point across and change the world before it’s too late. 


Black Suit 

Except for gender and skin color, these mysterious beings 
all look more or less the same: a well-dressed person in a dark 
suit and sunglasses, usually carrying a briefcase and always 
driving an expensive car. Most, though not all, are bald and 
virtually hairless. Descendants of old-school black knights and 
the dark-clad investigators of Victoria’s elite detective corps, 
these are the front-line agents of the New World Order. 


Composed largely of clones created for such duty, the Black 
Suits begin as field agents with a chance at upward mobility. 
Cloned agents (derived from a handful of distinguished retir- 
ees of several different ethnicities) initially share a hive mind, 
whereas the NWO recruits other agents from the outside world 
and then Socially Conditions them to an appropriate degree of 
loyalty and competence. Agents who display potential are soon 
groomed for better things; some Awaken and get promoted, 
and the remainders function as rank-and-file field Operatives. 
The best of the best graduate to become Gray Suits, Intelligence 
Analysts, and perhaps even White Suited Gatekeepers. Although 
the Black Suits embody an obvious and unnerving authority, 
such Gatekeepers work in the shadows of that authority... and 
with far more competence than their obvious peers. 


Regardless of their degree of Enlightenment, all Black Suits 
appear soulless to anyone who examines them with Spirit magick; 


Appendix I: Allies and Antagonists 627 


Iw 


In 


i 


h 


Y 


Tw 71 


their thoughts and memories remain hidden to all but the most 
skillful Masters of the Mind Sphere. Whether or not a particular 
Black Suit can, in game terms, use Technocratic magick, each one 
of them can employ Technocratic Devices and a Mind Sphere Effect 
that intimidates everyone nearby. (See below for details.) Black 
Suits typically travel in groups of between three and six agents, each 
member's specializations complementing the others’. These agents 
seem to be immune - or at least resistant - to Paradox, but that 
might be because they rarely use vulgar Effects. Instead, they prefer 
subtle yet pervasive psychology, martial arts, and advanced weaponry. 


Black Suits appear taciturn, matter-of-fact, and intensely 
focused on their current mission. Very few of them display 
any sense of humor beyond a dry and understated sarcasm. 
When killed, Black Suits of all types rapidly dissolve into a 
pool of liquid that evaporates within seconds, leaving behind 
no evidence of their existence. 


Suggested Attributes: Strength 3, Dexterity 3, 
Stamina 3, Charisma 2, Manipulation 4, Appearance 2, 
Perception 5, Intelligence 4, Wits 3 


Suggested Abilities: Alertness 5, Athletics 2, 
Awareness 3, Brawl 2, Computer 3, Drive 2, Energy 
Weapons 3-5, Enigmas 1, Firearms 3, Hypertech 

3, Intimidation 4, Investigation 3, Martial Arts 3-4, 
Meditation 2, Melee 3, Science (typically Psychology) 4, 
Streetwise 2, Subterfuge 3, Stealth 5, Technology 3 


Suggested Arete: 3-5 (Enlightened Operatives only) 


Suggested Spheres: All Enlightened Black Suits have at 
least Mind 2, plus two to four other Spheres between Ranks 
2 and 4. Typically, these Spheres are Forces, Prime, Time, 
or Entropy, occasionally Lite or Correspondence/ Data. 


Willpower: 8 
Health Levels: OK, OK, OK, -1, -2, -2, -5, Vaporized 
Armor: 4 (in their ever-present suits; seven soak dice, total) 


Attacks/ Powers: In addition to guns and hypertech 
weapons, Black Suit teams generate a constant aura of 
fear around themselves. To overcome that aura, an enemy 
must make a Willpower roll against difficulty 5 +1 for 
every Black Suit present (maximum of 10). Even those 
characters who resist the full effects feel disconcerted in the 
presence of so much as a single Man in Black. Intimidation 
is an essential weapon in the Black Suit arsenal. 
Equipment: Hypertech smart phone, high-density 
mesh-weave suit (the armor mentioned above), armored 
briefcase, badge & ID card, heavy pistol, large black car, 
various Technocratic Devices, and a VDAS datacrawl. 


Image: See above; most Black Suits are Caucasian or 
Asian, though a select and growing number seem to be of 
African, Indian, or Latino origin. All Black Suits appear fit, 
imposing, and grim, composed and dignified under even 
the most difficult circumstances. 


Roleplaying Notes: Other agents might wield more brute 
power or technological weaponry, but you and your comrades 
are the finest and most essential agents in your Order's employ. 
Remain proud and strong even in the face of fierce adversity. 


Focus: In A World of Gods and Monsters, Might is 

Right, and Tech Holds All Answers. Through a skillful 
combination of dominion, reality hacking and martial arts, 
a Black Suit employs all manner of technologies, from 
weaponry to meditation to force of social domination. 


Mage: The Ascension 20" Anniversary Edition 


Awakened Enemies 


Some of these dangerous, and often insane, individuals 
hide within the Traditions or the Union. Others blend in among 
the Masses. All of them can be deadly threats, especially when 
you don’t realize that you’ve met one until it’s far too late... 


Marauders 

Awful examples of Dynamism gone too far, each Marauder 
is an individual living out reality as he, she, it, or they sees 
it. Their apparent immunity to Paradox, combined with the 
disrupting effects they tend to have upon their surroundings, 
places them among the most fearsome threats a mage can 
face. Although certain Marauders share delusions common 
enough to allow them to work together, most of these Mad 
Ones operate in personal realities too arcane for any other 
mage to fathom. The lore surrounding these entities is mostly 
conjecture. Non-Marauder mages who try to understand them 
wind up confused at best, among them at worst. 


Because of their reality-warping powers, Marauders are 
typically run best as walking plot-devices who can - within 
reason - do whatever the plot requires. For more details, see 
the Chapter Five section about The Mad. 


Pillory (Nightmarish Marauder) 

Pillory began, so the story goes, as a girl with Asperger’s 
Syndrome and a taste for pain. It was the pain, she’d say, that 
brought her out of herself. As she grew, she allowed herself 
to fall into relationships so abusive and injurious that her 
Avatar’s shriek could be heard reverberating through the 
Otherworlds. Finally, one climactic burst of agony broke 
through her Sleep. Pillory Awakened... but that Awakening 
trapped her in a permanent nightmare that she now shares 
with everyone nearby. 


Essentially a solo Marauder, Pillory has crafted four arms for 
herself out of Life Magick. One holds a bell, which she constantly 
rings; one remains empty-handed; the third has forged itself into 
a razorbarred cage full of butterflies whose colors perpetually 
shift and change; and the fourth has become a whip with dozens 
of thick, spiked thongs. She has neither eyes nor a nose, nor 
ears - onlya mouth gaping in an eternally silent scream. Spiders 
crawl in and out of that mouth, which opens not from her jaw, 
but from her forehead. A swirl of tangled hair hovers around 
Pillory's head - a crackling, sick halo of coruscating blue. Her 
long dress shines in a deep, wet crimson shade. 


For the most part, Pillory remains in the Otherworlds, 
tormenting the spirits and tormented by them in return. From 
time to time, however, she seeps through into material reality, 
bringing with her a dark red mist that spreads out from her 
body like thick oily smoke. That smoke smells ripe and meaty, 
like air from a slaughterhouse. Each time she casts a spell, 
the bars on her butterfly cage open up; a flock of butterflies 
escapes, morphing into the effects of the spell itself. Those 
butterfly spells appear as smears of bright colors in the air. All 
the while, Pillory remains silent. Even ambient sounds fade to 
nothing when she comes near. 


Classified asan Extreme Marauder Complex Manifestation, 
Pillory has been known to take playmates - she's especially fond 
of Nephandi and Ecstatics of the more sinister persuasion. That 
said, she neither speaks nor seems to hear anyone else speak. 
Wrapped inan extreme version of her original isolation, this Mad 
One floats about, snapping her whip, releasing her butterflies, 
and ringing a bell that makes no noise. In her presence, reality 
vibrates as if shaken by potent sound waves that no one can hear. 


Attributes: Strength 3, Dexterity 4, Stamina 5, Charisma 
1, Manipulation 1, Appearance O, Perception 1, 
Intelligence 2, Wits 5 

Abilities: Alertness 4, Awareness 1, Brawl 3, Computer 
3, Cosmology 4, Intimidation 6, Melee 4, Stealth 3 
Willpower: 8 

Health Levels: OK, OK, OK, OK, OK, -1, -5, 
Incapacitated 

Armor Rating: 0 (five soak dice, total) 

Arete: 6 

Spheres: Correspondence 4, Entropy 3, Forces 2, Mind 
4, Prime 2, Spirit 4 

Equipment: Whip-fingers (damage 5/L; can grab and 
entangle targets], silent bell, butterfly cage-hand (all of 
which provide focus for her Arts). 

Image: See above. 

Roleplaying Notes: Though blind and deaf, you 
perceive your surroundings through Correspondence and 
Mind magicks. To you, nothing is real except pain, and 
that reality is your god. Share that Paingod with as many 
entities as possible. It enlightened you, after all, and it can 
do the same for every other being too. 


Focus: Ecstatic pain in an existence beyond sanity. 


Hive (Innocuous Marauder) 

Sometimes the deepest madness lives right next to us, 
moving through our world without a whisper until some 
unexpected disaster forces us to realize what was already there. 
In the case of Hive, that madness has many faces too - all of 
them working toward some unfathomable end. 


Hive isn't a single Marauder... or rather, Hive is a single 
Marauder permanently codocated in several locations atonce, with 
all of those selves linked through a hive-mind spell. Thankfully, 
Hive remains unaware of this fact. As far as Hive is concerned, 
Hive is an office drudge working at a dead-end job... at several 
places simultaneously. Each self has a different name, a different 
face, and a different identity. Essentially, Hive is a living Multiple 
Personality Disorderwho's consciouslyunaware ofthe tremendous 
power Hive commands. If Hive became aware of that power, life 
could get extremely difficult for a whole lot of people. 


The few people who know of Hive theorize that Hive was 
once a powerful wild talent, an even more powerful Virtual 
Adept, ora Technocratic employee who quietly snapped. Instead 
of exploding into the typical pyrotechnics, Hive manifested its 
low self-esteem as an embodied "human resource" rather than 
the powerful mage Hive could be otherwise. 


How, then, do people know Hive exists? Because Hive 
plays pranks on, and occasionally sabotages, Hive's employers. 


"Hive" is a name attached to various exposé emails, blog 
posts, and leaked documents. Folks who've met Hive in the 
Digital Web recall a collection of fractal images that shift 
constantly - not an especially strange thing in Netspace, but 
memorable nonetheless. In material reality, Hive is a collection 
of nondescript office drones. If you met any of them, you'd never 
know that the particular drone is anyone of note. Especially 
observant characters (Perception + Awareness, difficulty 9) 
might pick up a tremble in Hive’s aura and hear a variety of 
voices buzzing in the vicinity of an otherwise unremarkable 
person. Beyond that, Hive answers only to the name of each 
individual person Hive embodies. Ona conscious level (and to 
a surface Mind Sphere scan), those various minds seem dull, 
insecure, and utterly unremarkable. Only on a subconscious 
level does Hive realize what Hive truly is. 


Several of Hive’s manifestations work for Technocratic 
offices - not as extraordinary or Enlightened personnel but 
as mundane drudges. As a result, Hive leaks occasional Union 
secrets without even consciously realizing that the individual 
manifestations have even heard of a Technocracy to begin with. 
Ifand when Hive trips over some ofthe nastier skeletons in the 
Technocratic fruit basket, things could really get ugly... especially 
if, in the process, all of Hive’s selves wake up simultaneously... 


Suggested Attributes (per manifestation): Strength 
2, Dexterity 2, Stamina 2, Charisma 1, Manipulation 1, 
Appearance 2, Perception 2, Intelligence 5, Wits 5 


Suggested Abilities (likewise): Academics 3, Alertness 
5, Awareness 5, Computer 4, Cosmology 2, Drive 1, 
Enigmas 2, Hypertech 3, Stealth 2, Sciences 3, Subterfuge 
5, Technology 3, plus various individual skills appropriate 
to the various identities (treat as the Background Dream 5). 


Willpower: 8 (apparently 2) 

Health Levels (each manifestation): OK, -1, -1, -2, 
-2, -5, Incapacitated 

Armor Rating: 0 (two soak dice, total) 

Arete: 7 


Spheres: Correspondence 5, Entropy 2, Forces 2, Life 5, 
Mind 5, Prime 2, Spirit 2, Time 3 

Equipment: Smart phone, laptop, pens, flash drives, and 
other tools of the modern office worker's trade. 

Image: As mentioned above, Hive manifests as a number 
of low-tier office workers who — aside from their uncanny 
intellect and grasp of various skills - seem remarkable only 
by their complete ordinariness. These selves comprise several 
different sexes and ethnicities, each with complex backstories 
about their individual home lives. Some of these Hive entities 
even work in the same offices, apparently unaware that 
they're all the same entity. 


Roleplaying Notes: life's so boring. If only something 
exciting would happen... 


Focus: Like many Mad Ones, Hive operates in a plane 
beyond conscious focus — unaware, in this particular 
case, that Hive's even doing magick at all. 


Appendix I: Allies and Antagonists — 620 


4 


[c 


eee SZ 4 


: 


Ji 


B 
- 


H- 


ak* 


tis 


ee 


Nephandi 


As mentioned in Chapter Five, the Fallen are rarely 
obvious. Under most circumstances, Nephandi appear to be 
someone or something else entirely unless they occupy the very 
lowest (and most expendable) ranks of their society. 


Widderslainte Cultist 


A small number of the Awakened are doomed and damned 
from the moment of their birth. Although most Nephandi are 
Awakened mages who go through the Cauls of their own volition, 
some Fallen are simply born that way, inheriting a twisted Avatar 
that had belonged to another Nephandus ina previous incarnation. 


Even before the Awakening, a widderslainte’s mind is 
tainted. Some of these deviants are cunning (and often violent) 
sociopaths who con and bully their way to power. The most 
dangerous ones, however, are quiet women and men who lose 
themselves in dark reveries, living unassuming lives until they 
start to realize their full, horrific potential. 


Once a Nephandic soul Awakens, a widderslainte mage 
soon makes contact with the inhuman entities he might 
have dreamed about since his strange and nasty childhood. 
Some natural-born Fallen find others of their kind, but 
many of them encounter foolishly hopeful mages who seek 
to redeem them. Attempts to “Save the Fallen One” almost 
always fail... and, in the process, take other mages down to 
death, despair, or the Cauls. 


630 Mage: The Ascension 20" Anniversary Edition 


Suggested Attributes: Strength 2, Dexterity 2, 
Stamina 3, Charisma 4, Manipulation 3, Appearance 3, 
Perception 4, Intelligence 3, Wits 2 


Suggested Abilities: Academics 2, Alertness 2, Art 2, 
Awareness 3, Brawl 2, Computer 2, Cosmology 2, Drive 
1, Enigmas 3, Esoterica 2, Firearms 2, Melee 2, Occult 2, 
Stealth 2, Streetwise 1, Subterfuge 3, Technology 2 


Willpower: 5 

Health Levels: OK, - 1, - 1, -2, -2, -5, Incapacitated 
Suggested Arete: 3 

Suggested Spheres: Entropy 2, Life 2, Spirit 2 


Equipment: Black clothes, knife, small pistol, diary filled 
with corrupt stories and foul poems. 


Image: Our young Nephandus could be the archetypal 
misfit kid — male or female — whose interest in heavy metal 
and other outlaw music genres outweighs everything except a 
keen interest in the bizarre. Already somewhat of a bully, this 
demonic teen might be a school shooting waiting to happen. 
Worse still, she could be an apparently normal kid whose 
good grades and clean personality mask a cruel intellect and 
a sociopathic heart... in short, then, a budding politician or 
executive who aims devilish accusations at the innocent misfit 
kid who just wants to listen to Cradle of Filth in peace. 


Roleplaying Notes: There’s a black space in your heart 
that’s been in place since your birth. Although outsiders 
might blame your cruel and amoral behavior on bad 
parenting or warped circumstances, you know that you are, 
as they say, bad to the bone. Always have been, always 
will be, so you might as well enjoy it while you can. 


Focus: Everything is Chaos, and this person is happy 

to give it a little shove... or, perhaps, a really big one. 
Maleficia is this mage's obvious practice, but it might 

be wrapped around something else — witchcraft, 
dominion, reality hacking, the Art of Desire, or some other 
appropriate discipline. 


NWO Infiltrator 


Although some Nephandi are born Fallen, most choose to 
enter the Cauls willingly. Their reasons can include numbing 
despair, implacable fury, a passion so intense thata person would 
literally sell her soul to get the object of her obsession, or simply 
the desire to be on whatshe believes to be the winning side. These 
last two motivations are especially common among members of 
the Technocratic Union who join the Nephandic ranks. When 
you're already a fanatic, after all, going over the edge of decency 
is just a short step away from where you already stand. 


Fallen NWO operatives become some of the most 
dangerous Nephandi in the Union. As the Technocracy's police 
force, these operatives have an easy time reshaping the Union 
to their darker purposes. They're also among the infiltrators 
who are hardest to detect; their mastery of Mind Procedures 
allows them to conceal their thoughts and erase doubt and 
suspicion from the minds of their fellows and underlings. Like 
normal members of this Convention, NWO Nephandi excel 
at long-term planning. Many of their seemingly innocuous 
actions are parts of an extended plan to bring both the Masses 
and the Union under their complete control... and from there, 
to ultimate extinction. 


Suggested Attributes: Strength 3, Dexterity 4, 
Stamina 3, Charisma 3, Manipulation 4, Appearance 3, 
Perception 3, Intelligence 4, Wits 5 


Suggested Abilities: Academics 3, Alertness 4, 
Awareness 3, Brawl 3, Computer 3, Cosmology/ 
Subdimensions 2, Drive 2, Enigmas 2, Firearms 3, 
Hypertech 3, Intimidation 4, Martial Arts 3, Melee 2, 
Stealth 3, Sciences 3, Subterfuge 5, Technology 4 


Willpower: 8 
Health Levels: OK, -1, -1, -2, -2, -5, Incapacitated 


Armor Rating: 4 (from high-density mesh-weave suit; 
seven soak dice, total) 


Suggested Arete: 6 


Suggested Spheres: Correspondence/ Data 4, Entropy 
3, Forces 3, Mind 4, Prime 3, Dimensional Science 3 


Equipment: High-density mesh-weave suit, armored 
sedan, Technocratic smart phone, heavy pistol, VDAS 
gear, and hidden surprises of various nasty kinds that 
range from Technocratic goodies to Nephandic Talismans 
and tactics. 


Image: He looks like a Man in Gray - cheerless, 
accomplished, and formidably capable. He's got the same 
sort of blurred thoughts as any Black Suit, and for good 
reason: in reality, he's playing the most dangerous game 
imaginable, among playmates whose primary vocation 
involves turning ha inside out. As a survivor - even a 
master — of that game, he's unspeakably good at what 

he does. No lesser mage could match his achievements, 
and the fact that he has succeeded thus far testifies to his 
supreme competence. 


Roleplaying Notes: In a world of double-blinds and 
perilous truths, you exist along the razor's edge between 
superiors who know what you are and peers who'd kill 

you horribly if they recognized your true allegiance. The 
Nephandi might run the Union kon the inside out, but at 
your level, and in your Convention, this is still a dangerous 
proposition. Subvert your supposed allies, terrorize your 
known enemies, spread the agenda of your hidden masters, 
and recognize that you'll all be screaming in the end. 


Focus: On a One-Way Trip to Oblivion, he's the 
conductor of the secret train to hell. On the surface, 

he employs the tools and practices of a typical NWO 
operative; below his subversions, however, it's maleficia 
all the way down. 


Spirits 

Outside the material world looms the greater reality of the 
spirit realm. Its Umbrood denizens remain largely on the far 
sideofour Gauntlet. From time to time, however, they manifest 
on the Earthly side of that barrier... or wind up meeting mages 
on the spirits home turf when those willworkers pass over 
into the spirit lands. And though Dreamspeakers and other 
shamans are the mages most likely to meet such entities, any 
mage - even a Technocrat - can encounter them under the 
right (or wrong...) circumstances. 


Allspirits have the Airt Sense Charm. For the rules dealing 
with spirit entities and their various abilities, see Chapter 
Nine, (pp. 488-495). 


Naturae 


Embodiments of natural forces and principles, Naturae 
resist the foolish trivia of Umbrood politics. Instead, these 
entities dwell in the Penumbra and Middle-Umbral Realms, 
reflecting the spiritual elements of our Earth. 


Ancient Forest-Heart (Grand Natura) 

Embodied in both the mortal realm and the Penumbra 
as a titanic tree at least 150 feet tall and 20 feet across at the 
base, a forest-heart entity personifies the spirit of old-growth 
wilderness. Every primal forest has at least one such spirit, 
and vast woodlands have several of them. Depending on the 
region, a forest-heart spirit could manifest as an ancient pine, 
sequoia, birch, willow, oak, or other form of tree indigenous to 
that area. If such a tree burns in its Earthly aspect, its ashes and 
remains disperse to form new trees that can hold its spirit. If 
that tree gets cut down in the mortal world, however, its spirit 
is destroyed - trapped, some folks say, in the bits of tree that get 
cut up, shipped far away, and transformed into furniture, ships, 
houses, and other wood-based constructions. And if that should 
happen, the forest literally loses its soul... at least for a time. 


Though essentially anchored to its tree, a forest-heart spirit 
sees and hears everything that happens within its woods. The 
whorls and contours of its bark and inner rings preserve its 
memories. Using animals and other spirits as its eyes, ears, and 
hands, this entity recalls, guides, and, to a degree, defends its 
territory. Although its senses and priorities are not those of a 


Appendix I: Allies and Antagonists 63l 


TN e 


: 


Ji 


| Hd 


lesser-lived entity (like a human mage), a forest-heart can provide 
information and advice to a mortal who knows how to ask 
correctly. If nothing else, the forest-heart shapes the spirit of 
those woods: a friendly spirit presides over a calming, settled, 
relatively peaceful forest, whereas a hostile one manifests a 
tangled, dark, and hazardous domain. It's worth noting that 
a forest-heart tends to reflect the spirit of intruders back upon 
themselves. Visitors who treat the woods disrespectfully often 
anger a forest-heart, who'll take its deep-seated rage out upon 
every mortal who dares to enter that forest afterward. The 
wilderness, it's been said, holds a grudge for a very long time... 


Forest-heart spirits take the long view of things; with few 
exceptions, mortal matters do notconcern them. Things are born, 
things die - such is the way of the world. Only when a mortal 
(or a group of mortals) either delights or threatens the domain 
does a forest-heart care about brief human lives. A respectful 
traveler might earn the forest-heart’s goodwill, whereas a logging 
crew incites its anger. Until recently, the fury of a forest-heart 
was enough to discourage human intrusions; woodlands were 
vast, implacable mysteries to be avoided whenever possible and 
traversed along paths that tended to run far away from the 
forest’s heart. Within the last three centuries, that has changed 
drastically. Forest-heart spirits, however, are slow on the uptake - 
and because cold winds, falling trees, ferocious wolves, and walls 
of thorns are more likely to harm a hiker than a logging crew, 
those old tactics no longer protect a forest the way they once did. 


Even now, though, a mortal who respects the forest and under- 
stands its language can communewitha forest-heartspirit, assuming 
she knows the way to do so. Trees speak without words, and so that 
mortal needs to understand the subtle language of nature - not 
the hasty words of humanity - if she wants to speak with such a 
being. A forest-heart speaks though sensory impressions, and so a 
conversation with one involves sights, sounds, tactile sensations, 
and so forth, rather than words. Especially considering that those 
impressions often come from animals, birds, insects, and plants, 
not from human beings, a conversation with the forest-heart can 
be puzzling, frustrating, and apparently one-sided unless the mortal 
knows how to listen properly to what's being said. 


Although a forest-heart spirit appreciates mortals who 
revere the ways of nature, it’ll probably want some tangible 
payment in exchange for anything beyond safe passage or a nice 
place to sleep for a night or two. Typical bargains with such 
entities include protection from loggers and other intruders, 
restoration of a damaged area, retribution for some injury 
against the woods, mortal stewardship, the purging of some 
great threat, or other, similar requests. Because mages tend to 
be more suited to such services than ordinary mortals are - 
and often know how to listen better than the average modern 
human being - Awakened mystics tend to recognize this spirit 
for what it is. Even so, certain unAwakened human beings can 
commune with a forest-spirit too... just ask Julia Butterfly Hill. 
Forest-hearts tend to rise from the center of an Umbral glen 
- usually with a potent Node marking the spot. Werewolves 
frequently build their caerns near such places (or even in them), 
so the mortal who wants to commune with a forest-heart spirit 
might find that conversation rather... challenging... to arrange! 


Ma$e: The Ascension 20^ Anniversary Edition 


Willpower 8, Rage 4, Gnosis 7, Essence 200 
Charms: Appear, Armor, Cleanse the Blight, Create 
Wind, Disorient, Forest Sense, Lightning Bolt, Mind Speech, 
Mist, Summon Wildlife (brings fierce animals to the spirit's 
defense; 1 Essence per animal), Tracking, Umbraquake 


Animal Spirits (Gafflings and Jagglings) 
Asanimists have always known, animals have spirits too - not 
“souls” as people define that term (although they just might have 
souls too...), but spiritual personifications of the essence of each 
species. Beyond the obvious totem spirits, these animal spirits 
appear, in human terms, as Gaffling and Jaggling spirits that 
resemble the beast in question but possess mystic powers too. A 
mage, then, might encounter a crow spirit, serpent spirit, horse 
spirit, and so on - all with powers that suit their particular beast. 


In general, animal spirits look like normal animals (see the 
Bestiary), with the gifts of mental or physical speech; sapient 
personalities; and afew appropriate mythic powers like great speed, 
a paralyzing stare, and so forth. Given the vast array of potential 
animal spirits - which extends even to extinct beasts like titanic 
insects, dinosaurs, and other such creatures - we encourage the 
Storyteller to treat such powers as low-level rotes (Ranks 14, 
with an Arete between 2 and 6) or story elements based on the 
legendary talents of the associated animal. All animal spirits have 
the following Charms in addition to all others: Airt Sense, Appear, 
and Reform. Jagglings can Materialize (as per the animal type, 
with greater intellect), and have other Charms and powers as well. 


In Background Trait terms, such entities may become Allies 
or Familiars, too. A handful of examples includes: 


Crow 
Willpower 6, Rage 5, Gnosis 8, Essence 25 
(Gaffling) to 50 (Jaggling) 
Charms: Influence, Materialize; some crow spirits also 
have Possession and Spirit Away. 


Powers: Foresight and prophecy (like a Time 3 Effect). 
Crow Jagglings can rouse spirits (Spirit 2); step sideways 
and lead ghosts to the Afterworlds (Spirit 3); or even open 
gates in the Gauntlet (Spirit 4). 


Serpent 
Willpower 5, Rage 6, Gnosis 8, Essence 20 
(Gaffling) to 30 (Jaggling) 
Charms: Blighted Touch, Cleanse the Blight, Influence; 
some serpent spirits also have Materialize, Possession, 


and Shapeshift. 


Powers: Regeneration, Healing, and Injury (Life 2 and 
3). Serpent Jagglings can send and enter dreams (Mind 3 
and 4], locate and tap Quintessence (Prime 3), or control 
fate and fortune (Entropy 2). 


Horse 
Willpower 9, Rage 7, Gnosis 7, Essence 25 (Gaffling) 
to 50 (Jaggling) 
Charms: Armor, Materialize. Some horse spirits can also 


Create Wind, call Lightning Bolts, Spirit Away, and stomp 
up an Umbraquake. 


Powers: Incredible speed (increased movement) and the 
ability to cross vast distances (Correspondence 3). Horse 
Jagglings can also co-locate (Correspondence 4], fly 
(Forces 3), or summon storms (Forces 4/ Prime 2). 


Owl 
Willpower 7, Rage 4, Gnosis 6, Essence 20 
(Gaffling) to 40 (Jaggling) 
Charms: Influence, Materialize, Tracking. Certain owl 
spirits can also Create Wind, Cleanse the Blight, and 
employ Corruption. 
Powers: Foresight (Time 3). Owl Jagglings may 
manipulate fate and fortune, command decay (Entropy 2 


or Entropy 4], or possess people and walk among their 
dreams (Mind 4). 


Monkey 
Willpower 7, Rage 9, Gnosis 7, Essence 25 
(Gafflings) to 50 (Jagglings) 
Charms: Influence, Materialize, Shapeshift. Some 
monkey spirits can also Armor up, Spirit Away, and evoke 
an Umbraquake. 
Powers: The ability to craft or destroy solid elements 
(Matter 3). Monkey Jagglings may also sidestep distances 
(Correspondence 3], “monkey” with probability (Entropy 2), 
or heal or inflict massive injuries (Life 3). 


Totem Spirits 

For shamans both urban and otherwise, the totem spirits 
present an array of allies that few other people - even Awakened 
ones - understand. Ecstatics, Dreamspeakers, and other spirit- 
workers contact these entities, sometimes adopting them 
(and being adopted by them) as mystic kin - see the Totem 
Background Trait for details. Any mage with Spirit Sphere 
magick can deal with totem entities, though few mages bond 
with them the way that shamans do. 


Classified as Incarna Umbrood by Hermetictype mages, 
totem spirits are essentially gods. Though they tend to manifest 
totem avatars — lesser entities that represent a sample of that 
spirit’s essence - such beings are immortal, boundless, and 
beyond the definitions of simple game stats. (For some sample 
totem avatars, see the animal spirits above.) On most levels, 
totems are far older than humanity, even when they take 
identities from human myths. Many represent animals, plants, 
orother natural forces, although some totems personify mythic 
beings and others represent ideas. A few technological totems 
seem drawn from the concepts and powers of the modern age, 
and though they lack the timeless majesty of their primal kin, 
they can be quite powerful in the industrialized world. 


The following entities reflect a tiny portion of the world's 
potential totems. Although they're among the totems a North 
American mage is most likely to meet, these spirits transcend 
geography, and have different identities and conceptions 
in other human cultures. Coyote, for example, is uniquely 
American, but Spider, and Crow have many faces, names, and 
personalities across the world. 


Human mages and shamanic werewolves interact very 
differently with totem spirits. Even so, the Werewolf: The 
Apocalypse line features a wide array of potential totems. 
That said, mage characters do not buy totems the way that 
werewolves do. A mage's Totem Background reflects the level 
of contact he has with a given spirit; the spirit itself decides 
how intimate a bond the totem shares with its adopted human, 
and that bond can change over time. Again, see the Totem 
Background entry in Chapter Six for details. 


A handful of North American totem spirits includes... 


Raven & Crow 


The supreme Trickster, Raven is said to have either made or 
saved the world on numerous occasions. His little cousin Crow 


IA AA ; 


7 


EN 


Ji 


= 


Totem Trails 


Each totem-spirit entry has the following features: 


Manifestations: When a totem sends an aspect of itself in physical form, that totem avatar usually manifests as an 
animal or human-like figure. Generally, the manifestation has the game Traits of a related animal or character, although 
it can — at the Storyteller's discretion — be as powerful as the spirit (and the Storyteller) wants it to be. 


Associations: As embodiments of animals, forces, and ideas, totem spirits have personalities and attitudes when they 
deal with humankind. Shamans and other human allies take on these associations when they deal with totem spirits, 
and might attract the attention of a totem by living out its associations before the two of them even meet each other. 


Brood: Mosttotems, especially animal spirit totems, have a brood: lesser spirit Gafflings in its family. Such spirits reflect 
the totem's Associations and identity: Raven sends spirit crows, crow girls, and raven men, but Glitch spits out electrical 
spirits and data-eater viruses. Unlike the totem itself, these spirits can be caught, fought, or contained... although a 
mage who does such a thing had better watch out for the associated totem afterward unless that totem has sent its 
broodling to aid its human ally. 


Abilities: If a totem adopts a human ally, that ally gets a bonus to an Ability associated with that spirit. Most totems have 
several related Abilities, although a totem-bound shaman receives a bonus to only one of them. This bonus isn't an official 
Trait that gets added on to the character's Abilities — it's a few additional bonus dice that get added to the character's 
existing dice pool. If, say, Spider Chase gets adopted by the Spider totem (in game terms, getting the Totem Background), 
she'd receive a few dice added to her normal Crafts Trait, although the Trait itself would not go up. 


Bans: Totem allies have certain things they should or should not do. Also called taboos, these bans reflect the deal a 
shaman strikes with the totem spirit in exchange for its favor. If that person breaks the ban, the totem might withdraw 
its favor... and, in game terms, the Background Trait. If that person wants to keep the spirit happy, he ought to make 
some sort of apology and atonement to the spirit. Until he does, that character loses dots in the Totem Background, 


and might even lose it for good if the ban was broken badly enough. 


is slightly more humble but no less clever. Smart, pragmatic, 
and unsettlingly knowledgeable, Raven and Crow have sinister 
connotations to some people and cultures for their habit of 
snacking on the dead. As a result, Raven and Croware considered 
bsychopomps, ferrying the spirits of the dead on to their rightful 
resting places... and occasionally bringing them back for revenge. 


Manifestations: Flocks of crows or ravens, exceptionally 
large and/ or vocal individual crows or ravens. 


Associations: Intellect, knowledge, death, prophecy and 
foresight, mortality, tricks. 


Brood: Corvid spirits, white ravens, mysterious people 
with long black hair, mischievous and often ominous folks 
in black — often with a snide or eerie sense of humor. 
Abilities: Enigmas, Medicine, Subterfuge. 

Bans: Raven-people aren't expected to place much stock 


in earthly goods, properties, or concerns. Wealth is to be 
avoided unless it involves knowledge, secrets, or shiny things. 


Coyote 

Lusty Coyote is a carnal trickster, less intellectual than 
Raven but cunning as hell. Perched somewhere between Wile 
E. Coyote and the darker figure of traditional lore, Coyote 
(also Coyote-Sister) is a shape-changing survivor who never 
lets apparent disadvantages slow him down. Real-life coyotes 
thrive in bad circumstances, and so do Coyote’s chosen folk. 
Raggedly seductive, Coyote often sees his plans backfire in his 
face, yet he never stops looking for the next successful scheme. 

Manifestations: Singular coyotes, bodiless barks and 


cries in the night, disheveled yet attractive people with 
instinctive wit and feral behavior. 


634 Mage: The Ascension 20" Anniversary Edition 


Associations: Cunning, lust, tricks, shape-changing, 
cowardice, determination. 

Brood: Coyote spirits, magpies, vagabonds, and nomads. 
Abilities: Stealth, Subterfuge, Survival. 


Bans: Aside from forbidding the harm or killing of 
coyotes, Coyote puts no limitations on his chosen kin. 


Spider 

Crafty and delicate, Spider represents another ambivalent 
totem. On one hand, she’s the industrious creator of intricate 
masterworks... and yet she’s the treacherous bringer of poison and 
pain. Regarded sometimes as Grandmother Spider, Arachne, or the 
Widow, Spider holds an alien patience. Even folks who fear her (and 
most people do) recognize her beauty. Whether or not they want to 
get close enough to learn her many lessons is a personal decision. 
Spider herself rarely cares what lesser creatures want. To impress her, 
a human being must be as patient and dedicated as Spider herself. 


Manifestations: Huge spiders, arachnid swarms, 
Pattern Spider spirits, people with unsettlingly spider- 
like characteristics, large webs, and other eerie (often 
nightmarish) apparitions. 

Associations: Poison, cleverness, craftsmanship, 
stability, patience, fear. 

Brood: Pattern Spiders, spider-kin, certain manifestations 
of the Fates. 

Abilities: Craftsmanship, Esoterica, Intimidation. 
Bans: Spider's chosen are not sloppy, hasty, or easily 
frightened. She understands the killing of her children 


(after all, they eat one another too!), but cannot abide a 
clumsy, trembling human bug. 


Glitch 


An Incarna of the computer age, Glitch embodies the many 
frustrations and strokes of misfortune that shouldn't happen and 
yet happen all the time. Glitch fouls communication, mangles 
data, crashes systems, and otherwise renders mechanical and 
electrical goods into infuriating blocks of pure malfunction. 
Often appearing as a coruscating blot of electrical malice, 
Glitch seems to enjoy showing off the limits of human vanity. 
Technoshamans both revere and dread this totem. Although 
they can direct Glitch’s attention into enemy gear, its capricious 
favors have a nasty habit of taking out technology of all kinds... 
particularly when you least expect it. 


Manifestations: Electrical surges, crackling balls of 
energy, error messages (often displaying a snide sense of 
humor), the dreaded Blue Screen of Death. 


Associations: Malfunction, humbleness, ruin, chaos 
amidst order, the error of relying too heavily on mortal 
technology. 

Brood: Computer spirits of all kinds, viruses, gremlin- 
imps, Pattern Spiders with crackling auras and eerie 
deformities in their usually sleek forms. 

Abilities: Computer, Hypertech, Technology. 


Bans: Don't get too proud - Glitch fucking hates that shit. 


City-Heart 

Typically known by the name of the city it embodies, 
City-Heart personifies the essence of the city itself. Urban 
shamans can petition such entities for protection, knowledge, 
and connection to the city’s unknown places. In return, these 
shamans devote themselves to the city’s welfare, either through 
political methods (working to improve the city and preserve 
its landmarks and character), humanitarianism (typically 
helping the city’s poor and dispossessed residents), vigilantism 
(protecting the city’s people), shadow work (assisting the city’s 
underground, often in ways that most citizens would consider 
criminal), or maintaining the city’s supernatural community 
(weeding out intruders and striking as much of a balance as 
possible among the various vampires, werecreatures, mages, 
and other Night-Folk throughout the city). 


Manifestations: Whispers, human figures who seem 

to epitomize the city’s personality, weather fluctuations, 
odd shadows, rustling newspapers, eerie vigilantes or 
criminals, and urban omens like messages spelled out on 
neon signs, graffiti, or randomly arranged trash. 


Associations: Whatever characteristics seem most 
appropriate to the city in question. 


Brood: Urban wildlife spirits (rats, roaches, alley cats, 
pigeons, raccoons, seagulls, etc.) and city people 
who embody the best and worst elements of the city in 
question. 


Abilities: Area Knowledge, Etiquette, Streetwise. 


Bans: A person devoted to a city should not leave that 
city if she can possibly help it. City-bound shamans tend 
to make offerings of material goods, money, service, or 
some combination of the three, all intended to make the 
city a better place to live. Truly wealthy city-shamans erect 
monuments, parks, urban projects, sports complexes, 

or other noteworthy buildings, whereas other shamans 


lobby fellow citizens to construct or restore landmarks that 
distinguish the place. 


The Man 


The embodiment of Authority with a capital “A,” The Man 
maintains a rigid and often oppressive sense of order. His suit 
is always pressed, dark, and clean. Though his guise shifts from 
culture to culture, the most common manifestation of The Man 
these days is a tall, looming man with short hair, dark glasses, 
and an implacable expression. In his best aspects, The Man wards 
off disorder, stabilizes his community, and safeguards people 
who follow The Rules. All too often, though, The Man and his 
devotees hound and destroy people and spirits who apparently 
threaten the localized sense of order. As international forces 
expand and deepen their reach, The Man can be found almost 
anywhere, the Big Brother of which we're so often warned. 


Although Technocrats don't make shamanic bargains with 
The Man, they might find themselves under his protection and 
benevolent guidance. Along with The Machine, this is one of the 
two exceptions to the rule forbidding Technocrats to purchase 
the Totem Background, and those characters certainly don't see 
themselves as shamans dealing with spirits. Such nonsense is 
clearly Deviant and should be purged at the first opportunity. 


Manifestations: Scary spirit men, often appearing as 
cops, executives, Men in Black, stern priests, and other 
dominant father figures. The Paradox Spirit known as 
Judgment might be a manifestation of The Man. 
Associations: Order, authority, oppression, protection, 
strictness, supervision, preservation of the status quo. 
Brood: The Man favors Black Suits, for very obvious 
reasons. 

Abilities: Intimidation, Leadership, Melee. 


Bans: The Man cannot countenance disorder, disrespect, 
chaos, cowardice, or other deviant behavior. 


Mary Jane 


At the opposite end of the spectrum, Mary Jane offers 
relaxation, fun, playfulness, and a sense that things can be put 
off till later or enjoyed more fully than they usually are. Often 
appearing as a cute hippie girl in '6Os-style attire, Mary Jane 
watches over people who hurt (often soothing their pain), folks 
who like to bend the edges of a stressful day or otherwise break 
through mental barriers that impede a joyful approach to life. 
Despite her frivolous appearance, however, Mary Jane’sa healer 
with potent medicinal lore. Her connection to healing is quite 
ancient, really. Beyond her obvious ties to stoner culture, Mary 
Jane has been associated with peace, the easing of pain and 
constraints, and the softening of inner blockades. Arbitrating 
conflicts of body, mind, and soul, she helps her chosen people 
slow down and enjoy the world... although sometimes they 
enjoy it a bit too much for their own good. 


Manifestations: Clouds of pot-scented smoke, the 
hippie girl, and other incarnations of cannabis-associated 
archetypes (a Beat-style bohemian, laid back jazzman, 
stoner dude, and so forth) under a variety of names. 


Associations: Release, bliss, healing, insight, laziness, 
distraction. 


Appendix I: Allies and Antagonists 635 


H 


A 


ee A 4 


Peet we 


d 
9 


"na 


3 


i 


255 


A 7 


Brood: White birds, smoke spirits, fireflies, and people 
who seek comfort. 

Abilities: Esoterica, Etiquette, Medicine. 

Bans: Mary Jane abhors violence and will not ally 
herself with people who take pleasure in harming other 
living beings. She also isn't fond of authority figures, and 
although she might tend to peace accords, she won't aid 
people who feel rigid unless they want to loosen up. 


The Machine 


It’s everywhere these days, this manifestation of our 
industrialized world. Oncea clunky, steaming block of automated 
might, The Machine now takes the form of sleek technology, 
glowing computers, miniaturized gadgets, living cars, and other 
toys of the modern age. It’s been said that technology has no 
soul... but that’s not true. Anyone who’s ever dealt with a quirky 
computer or a particularly smooth machine, everyone who’s 
ever cursed her car or shouted at his TV, each mechanic and 
technician and end-user and inventor, has conferred a little bit 
of Essence into the totem-soul of machinery. 


For folks who revere technology - especially imaginative 
Etherite gadgeteers and the devotees of Iteration X - The 
Machine is an animate ideal... not a god, exactly, but the 
conscious and immortal distillation of mechanized perfection. 
Some theorists speculate that the extradimensional Realm called 
Autocthonia could be the heaven where such an entity resides. 
That’s nonsense, of course... Machines aren’t deities. Still, all 
the energy of focused human devotion has to go somewhere... 
and just as Plato speculated about a realm of idealized forms, 
it stands to reason that the omnipresence of technology has a 
place somewhere out there in the reaches of possibility... and 
it’s very much alive. 


Manifestations: Sparks, clouds of smoke, mechanical 
devices of all kinds that seem... and sometimes act... alive. 
Associations: Technology, perfection, industriousness, 
stability, functionality, luxury, oppression, soullessness. 
Brood: Pattern Spiders, mechanical people, animated 
vehicles, and other machines. 

Abilities: Crafts, Hypertech, Technology. 

Bans: The Machine requires service, inventiveness, 


precision, a commitment to technological innovation and 
repair, and a relentless pursuit of self-perfection. 


Elementals 

Manifestations of elemental forces, these entities range 
from near-mindless Gafflings to Elemental Lords and Ladies - 
essentially Incarna oftheir respective principles, with Realms that 
favor their chosen element. Hermetic wizards and other classical 
high-ritual types have worked with such entities for millennia; 
more recently, mad scientists learned to employ elemental spirits 
for certain errands... discovering, in the process, that modern 
innovations like metal, glass, and electrical power have inspired 
their own elemental spirits... or were, perhaps, inspired by them... 


Such entities often create Environmental Hazards, as 
detailed in Chapter Nine under the section of that name. In 
addition to the Charms listed below, every elemental spirit 


Mage: The Ascension 20" Anniversary Edition 


also has Element Sense and a Meld Charm that allows these 
entities to shift into or out of their native element; this costs two 
Essence points, and works only within that spirit’s appropriate 
element. In the wake of an elemental’s passage, the element 
might be disturbed for a turn or so... possibly, as with earth and 
metal elementals, until something else reshapes that material. 


Air Elemental 

Manifesting as an ephemeral girl, breezes, ora column of wind, 
anairelemental remains immaterial - visible, perhaps, butultimately 
untouchable. If she chooses to speak, such a spirit whispers in a 
voice that only mages and other spirit-attuned creatures can hear. 


Willpower 3, Rage 8, Gnosis 7, Essence 40 


Charms: Appear, Cleanse the Blight, Create Wind, 
Reform, Updraft 


Earth Elemental 

Composed of lumpy dirt and stone, this vaguely masculine 
elemental speaks in a grating voice and refuses to hurry along. 
Like the earth itself, he does what he does in his own sweet time. 


Willpower 10, Rage 8, Gnosis 5, Essence 40 


Charms: Armor, Materialize, Stone Fists (as Blast, but 
hurls stone instead), Shapeshift, Umbraquake 


Fire Elemental 

Hungry and crackling, the genderless fire spirit consumes 
everything that will burn. If happy, this entity remains a small 
glowing ember speaking in puffs of smoke; outraged, it explodes 
into a howling conflagration, igniting everything in its path. 


Willpower 5, Rage 10, Gnosis 5, Essence 30 
Charms: Blast, Create Fire, Materialize 


Water Elemental 

Often, but not always, embodied as a seductive young 
woman, the water elemental's smooth voice and sinuous form 
recall the mermaids and sirens inspired by the sea. Her forms 
echo the nature of the water from which she comes: a swamp 
hag, spring child, river nymph, or oozing sludge girl. 


Willpower 6, Rage 4, Gnosis 8, Essence 30 


Charms: Blast, Cleanse the Blight, Flood, Healing, 
Materialize 


Electricity Elemental 

Impersonal and fearsome, this bright snapping figure 
flashes like oddly human lightning, arcing between conductive 
materials and sizzling everything that can burn. If such an 
elemental speaks, its words buzz like furious metal bees. 


Willpower 6, Rage 7, Gnosis 5, Essence 40 


Charms: Control Electrical Systems, Lightning Bolts, Short 
Out 


Glass Elemental 

Glittering with jagged edges or gleaming with unbroken 
liquid grace, a glass elemental can shatter itself and fling its 
bits across open space, then pull itself back together with the 


slick fluidity of gleaming CGI. Such beings speak with sibilant 
cadence and seem, by human standards, to be quite vain. 


Willpower 4, Rage 7, Gnosis 7, Essence 45 
Charms: Blast, Materialize, Shatter Glass 


Ice Elemental 

Temperatures plunge if this elemental appears. Most 
often embodied by a frozen man, a glittering ice queen, or a 
shrieking blizzard cloud, the ice elemental hisses like falling 
snow or cracks out its words like breaking ice. In its wake, 
frost patterns etch themselves across nearby surfaces, and ice 
leaches the warmth and traction from everything within the 
elemental’s cold reach. 


Willpower 6, Rage 5, Gnosis 8, Essence 25 


Charms: Blast, Create Wind, Freeze, Frozen Breath, Ice 
Prison (as Calcify, except manifested as ice), Slip 


Metal Elemental 
Shaped from specific metal types (steel, iron, bronze, cop- 

per, etc.), these dense entities range from 

smooth-skinned humanoids to 

lumpy blocks of ore. In 

all forms, metal 

spirits are 


M 


A 


incredibly heavy, remarkably flexible, and damn near impos- 
sible to hurt. When they speak, such elemental voices echo 
as if across some great distance. Their words sound sharp and 
stilted, and their movements ring like clashing metal plates. 
Willpower 8, Rage 4, Gnosis ó, Essence 30 
Charms: Armor, Materialize, Shapeshift, Soul Reading 


Storm Spirit 

Swirling up in thick crackling clouds, embodiments of 
tempest combine several different elements in one. Water, air, 
and electricity spin through a storm spirit's form, lashing out 
with wind, rain, lightning, and angry thundered words. Such 
entities grow far larger than other elementals, too - from the 
size of a "personal raincloud" to the span of a football field 
(in which case, the Essence Trait is two or three times the 
usual amount). 


Willpower 8, Rage 8, Gnosis 4, Essence 50 


Charms: Appear, Cleanse the Blight, Create Wind, 
Lightning Bolts, Umbraquake 


Wood Elemental 
Shaped like a skeletal (though perhaps 
quite lovely) woman, the wood spirit 
evokes the fabled dryad no matter 
where she happens to be 
from. Certain wood 
spirits resemble 
horned men, 


= Pes 


=> Allies and Antagonists P€ 637 z 4 


too: naked, rustic figures with ruddy skins and often leafy faces, 
darting between trees. Such entities almost never speak; if they 
do, their words whisper like the breeze between branches or 
clack with hollow resonance. 


Willpower 4, Rage 4, Gnosis 5, Essence 25 


Charms: Cleanse the Blight, Element Sense (within 
wood), Materialize, Shapeshift, Soul Reading 


Minions 

Servitors of greater powers or principles, Minions display 
an intellect of sorts. Some of them follow an instinctive purpose 
with only the faintest glimmer of sentience. Others can be as 
cunning and perceptive as any mortal human, though perhaps 
not cosmically aware like the greater spirit entities. 


Memophores (Digital Web Entities) 

Entities composed of living information, memophores (also 
known as daemons, zerks, data beasts, info elementals, and other 
humanocentric names) display self-willed intellect. Originally, 
it’s been said, these Digital Web inhabitants begin as human- 
crafted computer programs. In time, however, they gain 
sentience through enigmatic combinations of Quintessence, 
information, and the invested attention and belief of the Masses. 
Such origins certainly spawned the early generations of data 
beasts. Newer ones, however, appear to generate spontaneously 
from the essence of the Digital Web itself - embodying popular 
concepts, perhaps, but never programmed in the human sense 
of that word. 


Not long ago, netizens considered such entities virtual 
animals or, in more flattering terms, Internet angels embodying 
the Divine Will of the Web. Memophores have their own ideas 
about their origins, ranging from bland acceptance to existential 
contemplation or religious fervor. Simple entities follow the 
basic dictates of game-system characters or data-courier programs 
given hints of personality. Their advanced counterparts, on 
the other hand, seem as real as any human netizen, with all 
the emotional complexities that such reality entails. 


The spontaneous existence and deepening sophistication 
of the various memophores (a name, incidentally, that many 
such beings reject) reveals the continued evolution of the 
Web as a cosmos in its own right. Where once it was viewed 
as the creation of Virtual Adepts (a perspective many Adepts 
still share), the Digital Web appears to be a self-generating, 
self-regulating reality... one that’s tied, without a doubt, to 
human technology but no longer dependent upon it... if, 
indeed, it ever was dependent upon it in the first place. That 
revelation, in turn, has thoughtful mages pondering the 
origins of humanity... and considering the origins of the first 
memophores, the potential answers aren’t always flattering. 


Twenty-first century memophores range from simplistic 
clouds of information or digitized reflections of CGI to 
full-bodied, eloquent beings with impressive powers and 
capabilities. Game-wise, these characters possess five Attribute 
Traits - Strength, Dexterity, Stamina, Intelligence, and Wits - 
plus a range of Abilities that suit an individual memophore's 


638 Mage: The Ascension 20" Anniversary Edition 


nature and personality. The overall appearance and agendas 
of such characters depend upon their origins: office programs 
inspire dry, simple memophores with industrious personalities 
and rigid temperaments; hacking programs have evolved into 
rebellious anarchistic memophores, whereas advertising spawns 
loud, garish, and frequently annoying entities. 


Originally divided up into power levels (see Digital Web 
2.0), today's memophores often get referred to by category 
ratings... in much the same way that meteorologists refer to 
storms by category ratings. This in itself says a lot about the 
way that human netizens view their data-elemental peers who 
keep evolving in the unpredictable cosmos of the Digital Web. 


Category 1:Traits of 1, three dots of Abilities, three health levels 
Category 2: Traits of 2, six dots of Abilities, four health levels 
Category 3: Traits of 3, 10 dots of Abilities, six health levels 
Category 4: Traits of 4, 15 dots of Abilities, eight health levels 
Category 5: Traits of 5, 20 dots of Abilities, 10 health levels 
Category 6: Traits of 6, 25 dots of Abilities, 15 health levels 


A few sample memophores include: 


* LOLCat: Cuteness elemental, often manifesting as 
an adorable (often young) animal in an endearing 
situation. Tends to speak in abbreviated childish banter 
(“I can haz...?"). Apparently immortal, this shapeshifting 
entity seems to be totally impervious to harm, avoiding 
conflicts through the sheer intensity of its charm. Has an 
uncanny talent for making people smile. Traits: Category 
1; Expression 3 


* Screamer: Ranting dude or lady with a monumental 
(sometimes literal) chip on their shoulder about some 
cause or aggravation. OFTEN SPEAKING IN ALL CAPS, 
Screamer tends to be extremely annoying... and, these 
days, he seems to be everywhere. Traits: Category 2; Brawl 
2, Expression 3, Research 1 


* Link: Eager information courier, often embodied as a 
flash of light illuminating potential areas of interest and 
connection. Speaks either in the warm voice of a young 
woman or the confident tones ofa mature man. Apparently 
devoted to creating greater connections between people and 
information, possibly as an act of religious fervor. Traits: 
Category 3; Etiquette 4, Research 5 


e Nerdrage: Seething cloud of aggressive and often 
incoherent insults, sometimes manifesting as a white 
human male of unflattering appearance and demeanor. 
Tends to be grotesquely sexist, racist, homophobic, and 
obsessed with bodily functions and related insecurities. 
Fanatically fixated upon pop-culture trivia and/ or 
paranoid political theories; often has impressive resources 
to draw upon. Can occasionally be talked into something 
resembling pleasant conversation by an apparently 
sympathetic peer. Traits: Category 4; Computer 3, Esoterica 
(geek culture) 4, Expression 3, Research 3, Technology 2 


e TheLeak: Coruscating dark swirl of information, seeping 
through shadows and cracks, sometimes taking on vaguely 
human shapes. Rarely speaks, and whispers when it 
does so, in a sibilant voice with no discernable gender 
or culture. Occasionally, that voice sounds like a crowd 
of people speaking urgently in hushed tones. Dedicated 
to exposing secrets from any source, the Leak possesses a 
knack for slipping through computer security systems, and 
occasionally allies itself with mortal hackers who promise 


to put that information to good use. Traits: Category 5; 
Computer 5, Research 5, Stealth 3, Subterfuge 2 


* Non: Masked and black-robed person of undetectable 
gender. Speaks in accented English, though that accent 
ranges from uppercrust English to Latin-American 
Spanish, Academy-formal French, and a vaguely Nordic 
tone not tied to any specific nationality. Non honors no 
country nor ideology beyond selfgovernmentand the will 
of the People. That said, Non despises secrecy, especially 
among powerful and abusive institutions like banks and 
governments. Occasionally manifests sharp blades and 
speaks with great eloquence. Allied with the Leak, Non 
despises the Technocracy and has been included on 
several internal killlists... none of which acknowledge 
that Non exists only as self-willed information. Traits: 
Category 6; Academics (political philosophy) 3, Athletics 
2, Expression 3, Melee 3, Research 3, Stealth 5 


Pattern Spider (Technology Minions) 

Spirits of order and static reality, Pattern Spiders embody 
the forces of technology in the spirit world. The least-powerful 
of them appear as steel-and-crystal spiders an inch or two across; 
the largest approach, or even surpass, the size and mass of a 
small car. Most Pattern Spiders tend to incorporate pieces of 
various technological devices in their bodies and limbs: steam 
vents, vacuum tubes, pneumatic cylinders, integrated circuits, 
and so on. Most of these beings dwell in the Penumbra, always 
close to centers of advanced technology, indoctrination, and 
other centers of material and spiritual stasis. 


Although they reflect the growing influence of technology 
in the material world, these cybernetic spiders cannot materialize 
in the mortal realm. Instead, they work to make certain that 
reality remains as static as possible in the regions where the 
spiders are most common. Media centers, classrooms, factories, 
construction sites, military installations, and Technocracy 
Constructs host hundreds, often thousands, of these entities 
per site. Yet despite their apparently symbiotic relationship, 
very few Technocrats realize that these things even exist... 
much less regard them as allies. To the handful of Technocrats 
who've seen Pattern Spiders first-hand, the spiders look like 
one more weird-ass alien life-form to be attacked and purged 
whenever possible. 


As for the spiders themselves, they seem oblivious to the 
concept of individuality or independent thought. When they 
bother to communicate at all, these near-mindless beings refer 
to “us,” not “I,” address humans in collective terms, and regard 


their own existence as a simple task, not a complicated journey. 
The idea that one might exist apart from the whole, much less 
pursue an individual existence, remains beyond their grasp. 


Even so, certain mages have managed to strike deals with 
Pattern Spiders - usually by giving them a project, leading 
them to an Umbral location in need of repair, or otherwise 
giving these industrious spirits something to do. Virtual 
Adepts sometimes bond with the data creepers that swarm 
around their workstations, and Etherite Scientists study the 
fascinating manifestations of insectoid energy-pattern loci in 
the counterdimensional pockets within their labs. Shamans 
who deal with werewolves refer to these creatures as “servants 
of the Weaver,” regarding them as symptoms of a stagnant 
world. Yet for those mages who understand the greater benefits 
of technology, Pattern Spiders can be potent allies. 


Weaving webs of solidified reality, Pattern Spiders spin 
pattern webs around flaws, ruins, or disruptive parties who 
threaten the integrity of localized reality. In game terms, they use 
the CalcifyCharm to capture intruders, and the Solidify Reality 
Charm to stabilize the surroundings on a metaphysical level. 
Certain Pattern Spiders have other Charms as well, reflecting 
acontrol over electrical, mechanical, and data-storage systems. 
In story terms, these beings spin their webs with tireless preci- 
sion, tiny data creepers ferrying information through electric 
networks or weaving it into knots of stored data. Although they 
don’t appear in material reality, their work reinforces things 
like the Gauntlet or the feel and stability of a given place. A 
handful of the older entities can vibrate their webs in such a 
way as to cause pain to folks in materialized reality... an effect 
that goes a long way toward explaining the headaches and 
bodily discomfort people get when they spend too much time 
around certain types of technology... 

Willpower 6, Rage 4-7, Gnosis 6, Essence 25-50 


Charms: Calcify, Solidify Reality. Some large spiders also 
have Control Electrical Systems, Short Out, Lightning Bolt. 


Paradox Manifestations 

All mages fear these entities, which show up only in 
response to Paradox backlashes. Some mages refer to them 
as “reality’s immune system” or “Technocratic shock troops,” 
but in truth, these beings operate by their own rules and serve 
no obvious masters beyond the incontrovertible principles of 
cosmic reality itself. Most of these entities seem aligned with 
a particular Sphere; if so, that Sphere has been listed next to 
the Paradox Spirit’s name. 


Judgment 
(Destructive Vulgar Magick of Any Sphere) 
When careless mages endanger the Masses with obviously 
vulgar magick, Judgment might appear. Inspired by the 
collective faith and fear that Sleepers attribute to their laws, 
this spirit manifests as a high-ranking member of the local law 
enforcement, like a police detective, SWAT team member, or 
Military Police officer. In especially lawless areas - like war 
zones, urban wastelands, criminal subcultures, or night-culture 
undergrounds - Judgment shows up like some paranormal 


Appendix I: Allies and Antagonists 639 


Dii ha ramis 


Ne No 7^: 


sai 


ga Pal 


YA 


“el | 


vigilante, straight out of an action flick or comic-book movie... with 
all the violence that implies. 


In whichever form he wears, Judgment first tries to arrest the 
offending mage, barkinga terse warning along the lines of " Dead or alive, 
you're coming with me." Ifthe mage surrenders, Judgmentsnaps handcuffs 
on the mage and hustles her off to a waiting car (also a manifestation of 
this spirit). If she resists - which she probably will - Judgment proceeds 
to clean her clock and then haul her into the waiting car. 


That nearby car resembles an ominous vehicle of punishment: a 
cop car, paddy wagon, black limousine, superhero transport, armored 
military vehicle, horse-drawn hearse, or whatever else seems appropriate. 
A few seconds after the mage enters Judgment’s vehicle, Judgment and 
the offender appear in the spirit’s Paradox Realm. To anyone else who 
observes these proceedings, the vehicle starts to drive off... and then 
vanishes in a cloud of mist or drives off into the enveloping darkness 
of night. Examining the location where the vehicle vanished, a mage 
with at least three dots in Spirit can both determine where the vehicle 
has gone and possibly (with Spirit 4) travel to that Realm... if he dares. 


Once the mage reaches Judgment’s Realm, the spirit places her 
in a jail cell within an otherwise empty police station, then leaves 
her to contemplate her actions. In this cell, no magick functions and 
mundane escape attempts all fail. After an agonizing wait (24 hours or 
so in the outside world, an apparent eternity for the mage), the prisoner 
faces arraignment for her crimes, and she must defend her actions toa 
heartless, merciless, judge — who is, of course, Judgment. If the mage 
lacks an excellent defense (self-defense, protecting the lives of Sleepers, 
or some similarly good reason), Judgment then locks the mage up in 
another cell for several years... or at least until someone manages to 
free her. A series of successful Social Trait-based rolls, backed up by 
evidence, might sway the judge; a bad attitude, on the other hand, 
merely assures a long and lonely sentence... 


Given the implacable power of Judgment and his Realm, this spirit 
might be an aspect of the totem Incarna called The Man. Although 
Judgment has been known to appear in a female guise (usually to 
punish sexist offenders), this entity almost always manifests as a large, 
imposing, and humorless man. 


Willpower 7, Rage 9, Gnosis 6, Essence 60 

Charms: Armor, Blast Flame (appears as a pistol or other 
appropriate weapon), Calcify, Disorient, Influence (“Surrender”), 
Materialize, Mist (as darkness, fog, or “smoke bombs"), Reform, 
Shapeshift (only when changing roles), Solidify Reality, Spirit 
Away, Track. Judgment also manifests a constant field of six dice 
in countermagick, pus the "field of Judgment" aura that renders all 
outside attacks ineffective. 

Materialized Attributes: Strength 6, Dexterity 6, Stamina 6; use 
Gnosis for Social and Mental Traits 

Abilities: Alertness 4, Awareness 4, Brawl 6, Drive 3, Firearms 
6, Intimidation 8, Investigation 4, Law 5, Melee 6, Streetwise 5, 
Subterfuge 3 


Materialized Health Levels: 20 


Wrinkle 

(Typically Time, Sometimes Other Spheres) 
One of the most infamous and powerful Paradox spirits, Wrinkle is 

also, in some ways, one of the least hostile. Appearing as an exceedingly 

old man or woman in a perfectly tailored, but extremely wrinkled, 


TN s 


rf 


white tuxedo, Wrinkle walks up to the offending mage and 
politely tells the mage that she’s caused a disturbance... and 
that he’ll help the mage repair it. “Old Man Wrinkle” then 
asks the mage if she’s willing to fix the problem. If the mage 
agrees, then she instantly finds herself, with her companions, 
back a few moments in the past, one turn before she cast the 
spell that caused the Paradox backlash that caught Wrinkle’s 
attention - and if she then chooses to avoid using magick that 
time around, all is forgiven. 


Should the mage elect to use magick again anyway - and 
if doing so brings about two or more points of Paradox - she'll 
find herself talking to Wrinkle again. With diminishing levels 
of politeness, he asks her to try another approach. If treated 
respectfully, Wrinkle can be exceedingly patient, willing to 
allow the mage up to three tries; that mage, however, cannot 
spend Willpower to stave off Paradox effects. Mages can't cheat 
Wrinkle in this fashion. 


If the mage mouths off to Wrinkle, or if she cannot find 
a way out of her situation that doesn't involve creating more 
than one point of Paradox, she disappears from consensual 
reality and finds herself frozen in time - conscious and aware, 
butremoved from existence. Trapped in a hellish no-time space, 
she periodically receives new visits from Wrinkle. If she agrees 
to behave herself, she finds herself back at that moment of 
choice. And if not, she may be gone for a very, very long time... 


Like the old-school spirit that he is, Wrinkle places great 
value on good manners and heartfelt apologies. By that same 
token, he has no patience with rudeness or pride. Obnoxious 
mages disappear from reality, their pasts edited so that everyone 
believes they died in some earlier tragedy. From time to time 
(so to speak...), a long-lost mage reappears, shaken, aged, and 
nearly mad with isolation. More often, though, a rude offender 
disappears for good... 


Willpower 8, Rage 5, Gnosis 8, Essence 30 


Charms: Freeze Time, Materialize, Time-Editing (3 
Essence], Unbirth (erases mage from reality; 10 Essence) 


Powers: Freeze Time, Edit Reality (see above for details) 


Materialized Attributes: Strength 2, Dexterity 2, 
Stamina 2, use Gnosis for all other Traits 

Abilities: Alertness 5, Enigmas 4, Intimidation 5 
Materialized Health Levels: 6 


Sendings 

Certain spirits are simply messages - disembodied commu- 
nications with images and voices and apparentconsciousness but 
no form to speak of, even in an ephemeral sense. In older times, 
these Sendings were considered omens, visions, or divine messages; 
in the wake of the Avatar Storm, they were viewed - rightly or 
otherwise - as communication from Masters trapped beyond 
the Gauntlet. Cosmic theories suggested that these Sendings 
had forged together rampant disembodied consciousness, bits 
of myth, shards of broken Avatars, fragmented ghosts, legendary 
heroes, and perhaps even aspects oflost and shattered gods. And 
although these entities do appear to have minds and identities of 
their own, their ultimate nature remains unknown. 


In game terms, a Sending is a walking story element, an 
enigma whose motivations and origins are whatever the Sto- 
ryteller wants them to be. Although these spirits might take 
the name and form of familiar archetypes or legends - Loki, 
Br'er Rabbit, Mother Mary and so on - they don't inhabit a 
relatable form for long. These are flashes in the sky that look 
like faces; wandering strangers who speak a few words and then 
disappear; the crying child or pathetic old man who reaches 
for a touch of kindness before fading away. A Sending can be 
the wizened twin of a player character, glimpsed in a bustling 
crowd but gone when they try to find him; or the strange, 
overheard words that come from nowhere when a mage's 
back is turned. One might resemble a panhandler on the side 
of the road whose face flickers into a skull, or the image of a 
distant parent when the mage drives past. Another might be a 
heap of broken roadkill that gets up, shakes itself vigorously, 
and walks off into the woods. In short, a Sending is a dash of 
weirdness added to your Mage chronicle. Though a Perception 
* Enigmas roll might suggest its identity, the truth behind such 
a vision should remain one of those odd moments that define 
a magickal life. 


my 
[5 


Appendix I: Allies and Antagonists 64l / 
Riv et 


i 


Appendix Il: 


Odd Ends 


Do not be misled by our errors, our lack of vision, or the fear that makes men cruel; 
we serve a reality, my child, though we may not always perceive it clearly. 


— Dr. Mulish Latimer, from Dion Fortune’s The Demon Lover 


Merits and Flaws 


Mages, as we've seen, are exceptional people. 
And so, certain Traits - the Merits and Flaws 
referred to in Chapter Six - mark elements of 
distinction in a mage’s life. Merits favor that 
mage with certain blessings, but Flaws curse 
him with particular frailties. Each Trait either 
costs points to buy (Merits) or else supplies extra 
points (Flaws) that you can use to purchase 
other things. 


As noted in Chapter Six (see p. 253 and p. 256), a player 
can purchase any number of Merits but can take a maximum of 
seven points of Flaws. As an optional rule, a character may instead 
have any one or two Flaws, regardless of their point cost, but the 
character is limited to only those one or two Flaws, and no more. 


Generally, Merits and Flaws cannot be purchased after 
character creation, although the Storyteller may decide to give 
them to characters in place of experience points if those Traits 
seem appropriate to the events within the chronicle. Depending 
upon those events, a player might be able to use experience 
points to buy off a troublesome Flaw. In all cases, Merits and 
Flaws are optional Traits. The Storyteller may disallow some, 
all, or none of them - it’s her choice. 


642 Mage: The Ascension 20" Anniversary Edition 


Merits and Flaws fall into five distinct categories: physical, 
mental, social, supernatural, and genetic. The last category reflects 
Flaws based upon the Enhancement Background or other 
long-term alterations to a character’s physical form. 


Given the dozens of Merits and Flaws presented throughout 
the Mage line, the full range of Merits and Flaws is too vast to 
fit within this small Appendix. You can find a compilation of 
additional Traits in the sourcebook The Book of Secrets. Several 
of the Merits and Flaws presented below have been modified 
from their old-school origins, in order to reflect rules changes 
in Mage 20 and the World of Darkness series as a whole. 


Merits 


Extra edges for the Awakened world, Merits can be 
purchased by anysort of character. Normal humans don'tusually 
have supernatural Merits, but they can easily have physical, 
mental, or social ones. Even so, many of these Traits tend to 
be unusual unless the person moves in fairly heroic circles. 


Acute Senses ( or 3 pt. Physical Merit) 


Your physical senses are unusuallysharp, capturing nuances 
that few people ever notice. In game terms, your character 


Merits and Flaws 


Name Cost/ Bonus Type 
Merits 

Acute Senses 1 or 3 Physical 

Berserker 4 Mental 

Dark Triad 3 Social 

Language 1 Mental 

Stormwarden/ 3 or 5 Supernatural 

Quantum Voyager 

Ties 3 Social 

Too Tough to Die 5 Physical 

True Faith 7 Supernatural 

Umbral Affinity 4 Supernatural 
Flaws 

Addiction lor3 Mental 

Construct 2 Social 

Cursed 1 to 5 Supernatural 

Deranged 3or5 Mental 

Echoes 1 t0 5 Supernatural 

Enemy 1105 Social 

PTSD 2105 Mental 

Stress Atavism 4 Mental 


reduces the difficulty of her Perception-based rolls by -2. At 
the 1-point level, a single sense (vision, hearing, touch, taste, 
smell) is more acute than usual; at the 3-point level, all five 
physical senses are equally sharp. 


Language (I pt. Mental Merib 

Beyond your native language, you understand another form 
of communication. Each 1-pt. Language Merit reflects a single 
language, typically in its written form as well as the spoken one. 


Mages - especially Hermetic wizards, Syndicate diplomats, 
and Technocratic field ops - tend to know a number of 
languages, both common (French, Latin, Mandarin, Spanish) 
and obscure (Old Kingdom Hieroglyphics, High Akkadian, 
Jovitos). If you possess five Language Merits or more, then you've 
begun to understand the principles of language itself and can 
try to unravel languages you don't already know (Intelligence 
* Enigmas, difficulty 7 or higher). 


Characters should have background-based reasons for 
understanding various languages. It's perfectly reasonable to 
assume thata barrio teenager might know English, Portuguese, 
several dialects of Spanish, and possibly even Arabic. If she's 
also got German, Sanskrit, and Classical Greek on her character 
sheet, however, then someone's got some explaining to do. 


Dark Triad (3 pt. Social Merit) 


A charming (and chilling) blend of narcissism, 
Machiavellianism, and sociopathy makes you a smooth-talking 
rule-breaker. Many people find your Fuck Authority attitude 
seductive, and they follow your lead even when it's not in their 
best interests to do so. To you, however, these devotees are 
simply toys - useful and enjoyable, of course, but ultimately 
expendable. Your own pleasure and convenience are the only 
vital things in life. 


A natural Merit for cult leaders, tempters, Fallen mages, 
and corporate tycoons, the Dark Triad adds three dice to all 
of your Seduction, Manipulation, Leadership, Subterfuge, 
and Charisma-based rolls. The fact that your character doesn't 
truly care about the people she inspires isn't readily apparent 
except to people who know what to look for. Because social 
consequences do not hinder your character, people find her 
exhilarating to be around. As a result, folks continue to follow 
and defend her, even when her actions should be indefensible. 


Despite its obvious power, this Merit contains a significant 
story-based downside: Dark Triad folks are amoral bastards who 
act only according to their own perceived interests. Even on a 
malignant Path, such sociopathy becomes dangerous, especially 
when other people notice that individual’s behavior. Not even 
the Nephandi trust such a person once her tendencies become 
clear - after all, she might sell out the Fallen as easily as she sells 
out anybody else. The Storyteller may decide that this Merit 
isn’t suitable for player characters, and restrict it to supporting 
roles. For more details about extreme self-focus, see Antisocial 
Personality Disorder on the Derangements sidebar, (p. 649). 


Stormwarden/ Quantum Voyager 
(3 or 5 pt. Supernatural MeriD 

Despite the fury of the Avatar Storm, some people 
remain immune. With this Merit (known as Quantum Voyager 
for Technocratic characters), you possess that precious rare 
immunity - the ability to reach through and travel beyond the 
Gauntlet without suffering the effects of the Storm. 


For 3 points, your character can pass without harm through 
the Gauntlet. For 5 points, she can take everyone and everything 
she touches and desires to protect. Correspondence-based touching 
protects a warded character as well as a physical touch, buta person 
that the mage does not want to protect will suffer the usual Avatar 
Storm effects even if he happens to be touching her at the time. 


Obviously, this Merit doesn’t apply if the Avatar Storm 
never happened in your chronicle. This protection does not 
in any way protect against Disembodiment or other potential 
hazards of the Otherworlds. Under the Mage Revised metaplot, 
Stormwardens are incredibly rare - almost legendary - and 
fiercely hoarded by the Awakened groups. 


Ties (3 pt. Social Merit 

You've got friends in high places, low places, or places in 
between. Maybe you know folks within the local police force, 
the gangscene, or an organized-crime cartel. Each type of Tie - a 


Appendix Il: Odd Ends 643 


TN v 4 


Merit that must be purchased separately for 3 points per group 
- reflects a culture in which your character has connections, 
goodwill, and a small amount of influence. These people are 
not your friends or servants (there are several Background 
Traits for that sort of relationship), but they might do the 
occasional favor for you. 


In story terms, the Ties Merit grants your character certain 
connections. Gamewise, those connections lower the difficulty 
rolls in certain situations, dependingupon whatyou're trying to do: 


e Fulfill a subtle request (pulling a license number, score 
some goodies, get an invite to some exclusive function, 


etc.): -2 difficulty 


Request a significant favor (plant a news story, spread 
a rumor, tamper with evidence, etc.): -1 difficulty 


Your character must have some story-based reasons for 
those ties - membership in the group, family legacy, favors 
owed to him, and so forth - and will need to maintain them. 
Actions that could hurt his relationship with the group might 
destroy this Merit too. The Storyteller can deny certain types 
of Ties to player characters and has the final say about whether 
or not the connections will do what the character requests. 


As mentioned above, different Ties must be purchased 
separately; each one costs 3 points. Potential Ties include: 
Local Police, Local Underworld, National Police, Organized 
Crime Cartel, Local Media Outlet, National Media Outlet, 
Black Market, Drug Trade, Hollywood, Interpol, Club Scene, 
Paparazzi, Local Journalism, Evangelical Community, Terrorism 
Underground, Counterterrorism Network, International 
Journalism, Corporations, and so forth. 


Berserker/ Stress Atavism 
(4. pt. Mental Merit or Flaw) 


Folks don't like you when you're angry. In combat, you 
becomea veritable monster, destroying everything and everyone 
insight. In certain ways, this is a blessing, in others, a curse - for 
although your dedication to slaughter has undeniable benefits, 
it's also a distinct liability... especially if you belong to a group 
that prizes discipline rather than brutality. 


As both a Merit and a Flaw, this Trait has the same effects: 
under intense stress (combat, injury, disgrace, the death or 
crippling of a comrade, and so forth), the red haze kicks in. A 
failed Willpower roll (difficulty 8) leads to a berserk rampage. 
Your character gains three temporary Bruised health levels, 
ignores wound penalties, and adds two dice to her Strength 
and one die to her Stamina until every enemy within easy reach 
or sight is dead or incapacitated. 


That's the good part; the bad part is that everyone becomes 
your enemy. Allies, enemies, and bystanders alike all look 
like targets until the blood-trance fades. Magick and strategic 
thinking become impossible, and your character uses every 
weapon in her hands for maximum carnage. Unless someone 
knocks her unconscious, incapacitates or kills her, or simply 
leaves her alone for several minutes (during which time she 


644 Mage: The Ascension 20" Anniversary Edition 


destroys everything within reach), she remains stuck in kill mode. 


Is this a Merit or a Flaw? That depends. If your character 
belongs to a group that prizes bloodlust and has the luxury of 
mass murder in the modern world (that is, she’s a shock-troop 
“cleaner” or an elite warrior for a wetwork organization), then 
it’s a Merit; if she belongs to a group that demands subtlety, 
control, and restraint, then it’s a definite Flaw. Either way, your 
character is the loosest of cannons - aimed in a convenient 
direction and then left alone to burn out or explode. 


Ombral Affinity 
(4. pt, Supernatural MeriD 

Something in your background grants you an innate affinity 
for the Otherworlds. Perhaps you have some distant relation 
to shapeshifter blood, or a Pagan heritage that links you to the 
oldest of Old Ways. Whatever the source might be, you can 
travel further and longer in the Otherworlds than most mortal 
humans can manage. 


Gamewise, your character suffers no ill effects from 
first- and second-degree Acclimation (see Chapter Nine, pp. 
482-483), and all other stages affect her at one stage less than 
usual. Beyond that, the character does not need to worry about 
Disembodiment until six full moon-cycles (roughly six months) 
have passed. In general, the character feels at home in most 
strange Umbral Realms, and she might be recognized as a 
natural traveler who has an innate right to be there. 


Too Tough to Die 
G pt. Physical Merit) 


You're badass enough to shrug off injuries. They still harm 
you, but they don't stop you. Game-wise, this Merit allows your 
character to soak lethal damage - NOT aggravated damage. 
Story-wise, those gunshots, knife wounds, broken bones, and 
so forth still tear your character up - he’s not bouncing shotgun 
rounds off his chest. By soaking the associated health levels, 
however, your character can push on through wounds that 
would cripple or kill most folks. 


Lethal injuries require the usual amount of time to heal. 
Soaking is not healing. If the Storyteller decides to use the 
Cinematic Damage option (Chapter Nine, p. 412), this Merit 
has no purpose and does not apply. 


True Faith (7 pt. MeriD 


Strong belief is essential for a mage. You, however, hold 
stronger beliefs than usual. Possessing convictions in a greater 
outside power, you can channel that power for miraculous feats 
that go beyond mere magick. 


Gamewise, your character has one dot of True Faith - a 
potent force, in the World of Darkness, that reflects devotion 
to a god or pantheon. Despite the usual association between 
Faith and Christianity, your character can belong to any sincere 
creed with an established moral code and historical legacy. 
(Sorry, but True Faith in postmodern satires like the Flying 
Spaghetti Monster does not count.) A Technocrat can hold 


Optional Rule: Powers of True Faith 


Folks who possess True Faith often perform other miracles. As an optional rule, the Storyteller may allow a character with 
that Merit to channel her convictions into a range of holy (or unholy) powers: 


e Conviction: By invoking the strength of her character's convictions, the player can spend a point of Faith like a point 
of Willpower. 


Healing: By laying on hands, the character can try to heal another character even if she lacks the Life Sphere. A 
successful Faith roll, difficulty 6, heals one bashing or lethal health level, and two successes can heal one aggravated 
health level. A character with malignant True Faith can cause damage at the same rate. 


Intercession: By praying for another person, the character can stabilize a sick or dying person, forgive sins, act as 
a "phone call.to God,” or perform some other intercession between a character and the Powers that Be. 


Penance: A firm or compassionate lecture might get another character to repent his sins and offer remorse and 
penance to the appropriate Powers That Be. Game-wise, this might demand a contested roll of True Faith versus the 
offender's Willpower. The difficulty is the offender's Willpower, although additional social-feat rolls during the lecture 
can lower that difficulty for the character with Faith. If the evangelist succeeds, the sinner hesitates, breaks down, or 
otherwise expresses remorse and potential conversion. 


Shielding: When assaulted by fire, torture, or other attacks, a Faith-full individual can try to soak the attack with a 
True Faith roll. Each success adds to the character's soak roll, even against aggravated attacks, for one turn. At the 
Storyteller’s discretion, a successful roll might protect the character entirely; flames, beasts, temptations, and other 
torments might be diverted by a strong display of Faith. 


Transmutation: With a successful Faith roll, the character can transmute water to wine, turn fire to air, negate the 
effects of poison, or perform other miracles even if she lacks the Matter or Forces Spheres. Essentially, that character's 
gods direct their powers through their chosen one, displaying their powers over Earthly phenomena. 


The Storyteller can, of course, create other miracles that suit the nature of the character and her chosen powers. As 
mentioned elsewhere, such miracles come from that higher power - that is, the Storyteller — not from the player. She can 
declare what she'd like to have happen, but the final manifestation of Faith... or lack of that miracle... is the Storyteller's 
call. Such acts - being miraculous, not magickal - do not invoke Paradox, even though they transcend Consensus Reality. 


Levels of Faith 


c You might be able to drive away vampires with a prayer. (Faith roll, difficulty = vampire's Willpower.) Enemies 
of your faith feel uneasy in your presence. One die added to countermagick and Willpower rolls. 


. You can sense magick as if you had an Awareness Trait equal to your True Faith rating. If you already have 
Awareness, add this Trait to that dice pool. Your prayers can cause physical pain to a vampire or other 
powerful enemy of your faith. Two additional dice for Willpower and countermagick rolls. 


ecc Intense devotion allows you to detect vampires or other supernatural beings whose essence is opposed to 
your creed. Such perceptions are intuitive, not perfect — you get feelings that suggest the presence of unclean 
things, rather than having an automatic Evil/ Goodness Detector. Night-Folk and mages whose nature 
opposes your Faith feel distinctly uncomfortable around you and generally try to corrupt you if possible, or 
escape you if not. Three additional dice for Willpower and countermagick rolls. 


esse Vampires cannot ghoul you, nor influence you with mind-altering Disciplines. Mages who try to sway you with 
Mind Sphere magicks add *2 to their difficulties. Your touch can burn powerful enemies of your creed (Faith 
roll, difficulty 7; one aggravated health level per success); and your prayers can harm enemies, or help allies, 
at the Storyteller's discretion. Four additional dice to Willpower and countermagick rolls. 


ooooc An incarnation of everything good or bad about your creed, you drive opponents of your creed to their knees 
when you address their presence. Sinners weep in anguish when you pray; enemies must spend a Willpower 
point, flee when you approach, or make a Stamina roll each turn to remain in your presence. (Difficulty is 5 * 
the enemy’s Intelligence Trait, because smarter enemies recognize how much they should fear you.) You can 
burn such enemies as above, or perhaps invoke other miracles at the Storyteller’s judgment. Five additional 
dice to Willpower and countermagick. At this pinnacle, you're one short step away from your vision of 
Ascension. 


Appendix Il: Odd Ends 645 


AE ai 


True Faith too, although such Faith is pretty unusual. (See 
Technocratic Faith, Chapter Five, p. 184.) Even Marauders 
and Nephandi can possess True Faith, although the Fallen 
version of this Merit inverts the usual purity associated with 
True Faith. Such Faith adds one die per point to Willpower 
rolls, offers countermagick rolls (even for characters who cannot 
normally use countermagick), and might allow the character 
to employ other miraculous powers at the Storyteller's option. 


Faith is no simple thing. It must be lived as well as 
recognized. A person with True Faith strives to bean exemplar 
of her creed, suffers crises of conviction, and might find 
herself losing the Faith entirely. Conversely, she can also grow 
into a paragon of her creed's virtues, embodying everything 
good (or evil) about her Path. Deeds in accord with that Faith 
strengthen or restore it, whereas acts opposed to the creed 
weaken this Merit. For a mage, such Faith is an innate part 
of her magickal focus - the two must be in alignment, because 
they both depend upon the same beliefs. Some people believe 
that mystics of the Celestial Chorus depend entirely upon 
True Faith and do not use True Magick at all. (For details 
about that option, see the Revised Edition Tradition Book: 
Celestial Chorus, pps. 63-65.) People who can see auras view 
True Faith as a shining corona of light... or a crackling storm 
of colors for malignant creeds. For details, see Aura Colors 
and Textures in Chapter Ten, (p. 507). 


True Faith costs 7 points per dot and may be purchased 
only during the character creation stage. Events within the 
chronicle can raise or lower it, at the Storyteller's discretion. 
People with True Faith are rare, and folks with Faith greater 
than 2 might as well be living saints. Again, a character must 
live, and perhaps die, by her convictions... a difficult thing, at 
times, for a mage, thanks to the compromises that a Path so 
often demands. 


Flaws 


Liabilities that plague a character at the most inopportune 
moments, Flaws offer extra freebie points during character 
creation. Even so, they're not only point-magnets; each Flaw 
presents a story-based challenge that must be faced and overcome 
throughout a character's life. Until and unless that Flaw gets 
bought off with experience points and some significant events 
within the chronicle, a Flaw remains a monumental pain in 
the ass for a mage, his companions, and the player who decides 
to take it. 


Addiction (I or 3 pt. Physical Flaw) 


You'readdicted to some activity or substance that interferes 
tosome degree with your daily life. Perhaps you crave sex, drink 
constantly, or can't stop playing video games. Whatever the 
nature of the addiction, it drives you to irrational and possibly 
dangerous extremes. A harmless habit, after all, isn't really a Flaw. 


646 Mage: The Ascension 20" Anniversary Edition 


The value of this Flaw depends upon the hazards of the 
addiction. A craving for some trivial enjoyment (games, tobacco, 
social media) is worth one point, buta drive to secure something 
illegal, dangerous, or both (cocaine, fight clubs, child porn, 
etc.) is worth three points. Severe addictions usually have a 
sense of moral wrongness about them as well, and they can 
cause social difficulties beyond the financial, legal, and physical 
and/ or psychological costs of the habit. The Flaw might come 
from any source - Ecstatic practices, psychological neurosis, 
physical compulsion, and so forth - that inspires deep-seated 
attachment to something troublesome. 


Cursed (l to 5 pt. Supernatural Flaw) 

Misfortune of apparently supernatural origins makes your 
character's life difficult; the more points the Flaw gives you, 
the greater the character's misfortune. 


* (1 point) Minor quirks of fate. Examples: You have a 
hard time keeping secrets; tech suffers tiny malfunctions in 
your presence; people tend to think ill of you. 


e (2 points) Small but annoying problems. Examples: You 
stutter at inopportune moments; tires go flat and warning lights 
go on when you depend upon your car; expensive clothes wind 
up ruined by stupid accidents. 


* (3 points) Chronic misfortune. Examples: Tools break 
when you use them; children fear you; red lights slow you down 
whenever you absolutely, positively need to be somewhere on 
time. 


e (4points) Major problems arise. Examples: People dislike 
you on principle; your greatest plans collapse for no predictable 
reason; your bank account keeps suffering unexpected 
withdrawals from sources that aren’t you. 


* (5 points) Pervasive bad luck. Examples: Your endeavors 
inevitably fail; tech never works the way it’s supposed to 
function; chronic pain or poor health sap whatever vitality 
you possess. 


The Storyteller determines the eventual effects of your 
curse, as well as the methods you might use to lift it. In any 
case, the curse becomes a major part of your character’s story 
and cannot be dispelled without some major effort on his part. 


Echoes (I to 5 pt. Supernatural Flaw) 

You display some of the weird phenomena associated 
with sorcery. Maybe the air quivers with strange vibrations, 
or music plays without a visible source, or shadows gather in 
your presence. It could be that Resonance has marked you 
in noticeable ways... or perhaps your own beliefs send out 
vibrations too strong to ignore. Some curse or blessing might 
have marked you for favor or damnation. 


This Flaw fits in well with certain Backgrounds (Blessing, 
Destiny, Influence, Totem), and can be used as a simple rule 
system for Resonance if your group doesn't want to employ the 
optional rules associated with that phenomenon - see Chapter 
Ten, (pp. 560-561). In this case, one point in the Flaw could 
reflect a single dot in Resonance, with more points reflecting 
more points in that Trait. The flaw, under these circumstances, 
could go up and down; the player, however, gets freebie points 
only for the level of the Flaw at the beginning of the chronicle, 
and so the number of freebie points involved does not go up 
or down unless the character loses the Echoes Flaw completely. 


As with other variable-cost Merits and Flaws, the 
different levels reflect increasing degrees of effect, their 
specific phenomena depending upon the mage and her 
overall temperament. The following five-level spectrum could 
complement the five dots of the Resonance/ Synergy Trait 
described in Chapters Six and Ten, showing the severity of the 
effects associated with really high levels of Resonance or Synergy. 


e (1 point) Slight manifestations of no real consequence: 
perhaps your shadow flickers, milk sours in your 
presence, or a vague scent that’s appropriate to your 
nature follows in your wake. 


e (2 points) Mild echoes cause noticeable effects: animals 
shy away from you or follow you around; you send 
out vibes that a sensitive person can notice; you feel 
profoundly uncomfortable around energies, symbols, 
locations, or people who’re opposed to your kind. 


* (3 points) People who know what to look for recognize 
you on sight... not simply as a mage, but as the sort of 
mage you are: plants bloom or wither in your presence; 
sounds or music echo through the air; holy or unholy 
symbols repulse you (possibly forcing you to make a 
Willpower roll to remain nearby). 


e (4points) You stand out in ways that even Sleepers notice: 
your shadow moves of its own accord; you don’t cast 
reflections in mirrors or liquid; cold winds blow even in 
astill room. People who know traditional folklore might 
be able to disrupt your magicks if they know the proper 
legendary precautions to take, essentially performing 
countermagick with a successful Intelligence + Occult 
roll (difficulty is the targeted mage’s Arete Trait +3). 


e (5 points) Reality shifts when you’re around, rippling 
with paranormal energies: animals adore you or run 
away when you approach; people feel sick or energized 
when you stand near; environmental shifts - rain, cold, 
shadows, warmth, etc. - radiate outward from you. A 
person who knows the proper folklore can try to attack 
or repel you using traditional charms or counterspells, 
inflicting one lethal health level of damage for each 
success they win in a contested Willpower roll against 
you. 


Enemy (to 5 pt. Social Flaw) 

Someone hates your guts and will do whatever he, she, it, or 
they can do in order to make your life unpleasant. Game-wise, 
the value of the Flaw determines the strength and hatred of 
that enemy; a single point reflects a minor grudge from some 
inconsequential party, and five points represent the deadly 
plans of some powerful entity or group. 


Construct (2 pt. Social Flaw) 

You came from a lab, not from a womb. Perhaps you were 
grown in a Progenitor facility, woven from plants, shaped from 
the elements, or crafted from parts of dead bodies in some 
flesh-tinkerer's workshop. Whatever your origins, you don’t 
truly fit in with natural-born humans. A combination of self- 
doubt and social alienation - or perhaps a sense that you're 
far better than your so-called peers - keeps you at arm's length 
from the human social realm. 


In game terms, this Flaw inflicts penalties on social rolls 
in many situations; the specifics depend upon your origins, 
attitude, and company, but they'll impede your character in 
significant ways. You don't need to take this Flaw, incidentally, 
if your character is a construct. Those penalties reflect an 
artificial person who stands out in a crowd, not one who fits 
in comfortably with her world. 


PTSD (2 to 5 pt. Mental Flaw) 


Awful experiences have given you a hair-trigger response 
to certain situations. Anxiety, aversions, phobias, sudden 
rage... whatever the symptoms might be, this posttraumatic 
stress disorder acts as a protective shield against further harm. 
Unlike a derangement, this Flaw doesn't induce delusions - 
your character remains lucid enough. Still, her fears kick in at 
difficult, sometimes unpredictable, times, undermining every 
attempt at whatever passes for a normal life in the Awakened 
world. 


As usual, the different levels of this Flaw manifest in 
various levels of severity: 


e (2points) Your PTSD conjures occasional nightmares and 
anxieties under certain rare circumstances (confronting 
ghosts, dealing with demons, entering the wilderness, 
and so forth). 


e (3 points) The trauma triggers phobias or other strong 
reactions to more common situations (dealing with 
elders, facing financial difficulty, etc.). 


e (4points) Reactions become more extreme - near-panic, 
powerful aversion, rapid mood swings - and provocations 
become more common (gunshots, confrontations, raised 
voices, etc.). 


e (5 points )Your PTSD kicks off major reactions - fight- 
orflight panic, vivid flashbacks, moments of stark 
terror, incapacitating catatonia - in fairly common 
situations (sex, arguments, financial transactions, etc.). 
Even without the specific stimulus, you suffer from 


Appendix Il: Odd Ends 647 


. 


Ne 7^: 


| 
| 
AE 


A 


P 
J 


/ i 
r a 
- E^ 
“ea a 
oy ok 


ga Pal 


648 


Ma$e: The Ascension 20^ Anniversary Edition 


nightmares, social anxieties, fear of common things, 
and other circumstances that could evoke the traumatic 
event(s). 


Sadly common in the World of Darkness, PTSD reflects 
deep-seated pain caused by things that a person might not 
even recall. Combat, torture, accidents, poverty, sexual 
violation, domestic violence, parental abuse... anything that 
can destroy a person's sense of safety might cause PTSD. 
Despite its sometimes extreme nature, PTSD is a perfectly 
rational response to harm. Because of that, it can be difficult 
to treat successfully, even with advanced psychiatry or Mind- 
based magicks. In most cases, a person suffering from PTSD 
simply learns to live with the symptoms and avoid the triggers 
that can set off a reaction. 


Deranged (3 or 5 pt. Mental Flaw) 


You suffer from a lasting form of mental illness. Although 
a successful Willpower roll (Storyteller's option) might allow 
you to cope with the effects for a short time, this insanity 
lingers until and unless it can be cured... which also involves 
buyingoffthe Flaw. An essential Flaw for Marauder characters 
(though it's not exclusive to the Mad), this Trait gives you one 
of the Derangements described in the sidebar of that name. 
This madness might also affect someone with a Genetic Flaw 
(see below), or who's been subjected to Room 101 or Things 
Man Was Not Meant to Know (see Chapters Five and Nine). 


A minor 3-point derangement reflects a troubling but 
manageable level of insanity; the 5-point level, meanwhile, 
represents an intensity of madness that makes your character 
a danger to herself and everyone nearby, if only because she's 
a crazy person with the power of a mage. 


Genetic Flaws 


Organisms are complex. When you alter one aspect of 
a living thing, other aspects change in response. And so, 
Genetic Flaws - innate problems with altered or constructed 
organisms - crop up when mages make permanent changes 
to the Patterns of living things. 


Each of the following Traits counts as one Genetic Flaw; 
these Traits don'tshare the usual point-based ratio that normal 
Flaws have. For each dotin the Enhancement Background (see 
Chapter Six, pp. 312-313), a character must also take either 
one Genetic Flaw or one point of permanent Paradox (see 
Chapter Ten, pp. 547-548). The same character can take a 
mixture of both - say, two Genetic Flaws and one permanent 
Paradox to balance out three dots in Enhancements. The same 
holds true for permanent changes with Life Sphere magicks; 
if Jennifer Rollins permanently raises her Stamina to 6, her 
player must either select one Genetic Flaw or else give the 
character a point of Paradox that never goes away. 


Despite the name, Genetic Flaws may be psychological, 
supernatural, or mechanical. The character in question could 
be a cyborg, a sellsoul bound by devilish pacts, a servant 
enhanced by witchcraft, or even a non-human entity whose 
strange nature breeds certain Flaws. Whatever their origins, 


Magick tends to break your brain. And so, when mages or the people near them experience various traumas, those 
experiences often leave derangements: mental and behavioral challenges that impair the character and her relationship 
with the rest of the world. 


Despite the crazy name, derangements don'tnecessarily turn a characterinto a raving loony-tune. Most times, a deranged 
character is simply a bit off-kilter by ordinary human standards. (The word means "out of alignment.") Still, these mental 
illnesses can cause profound difficulties, especially in their most extreme manifestations. 


At low levels, such challenges simply become quirks; if they reach irrational degrees, though, derangements can become 
extraordinarily dangerous... especially when the person afflicted with a given derangement has the power to tear reality 
apart. 


Amnesic 


locking out parts of her memory, a person suffering from amnesia doesn’t necessarily forget who and where she is, but 
she does lose recollections that feel traumatic, unsafe, or unreal. Depending upon the igniting incident(s), the amnesiac 
might block out parts of her identity, forget certain people or places, blank out specific incidents, or function in a level 
of reality where the forgotten thing (a brother, a home, a missing arm) simply does not exist. 


More commonly called sociopathy and psychopathy, ASPD reflects a pervasive disregard for societies or fellow organisms. 
Some folks compare this to a form of “emotional autism,” wherein the affected person literally cannot comprehend the 
feelings of other people or understand the impact of her actions on the emotional lives of anyone outside herself. Essentially, 
a sociopath can lie, cheat, steal, manipulate people, make rash decisions, violate propriety, turn the social contract into 
confetti, and apparently feel no remorse for any of it. Characterized by a lack of connection to or compassion for other 
entities, ASPD provides a key element of the so-called Dark Triad personality disorder (as per the Merit of that name), 
largely because a sociopath doesn’t give a shit about consequences... which can be intensely charming, so long as 
yov're not in his way. 


Also known as manic depression, bipolar illness swings a person from hyperactive manic states into depressive crashes. 
Occasionally, both states can exist at once, inspiring a mood of exuberant melancholy or agitated rage. Manic states 
tend to spark impulsive behavior, unrealistic expectations, and intense passions; depression saps energy, crushes self- 
esteem, and grinds motivation and confidence into black paste. 


A catch-all name for a variety of related illnesses, dementia inflicts hallucinations, delusions, perceptual alterations, 
disinhibition (lack of restraint, filters, and boundaries), unpredictable memory loss, personality changes, loss of language 
skills and physical coordination, and other debilitating afflictions. More commonly (and callously) known as lunacy, 
dementia ranges from minor but distressing quirks to significant personality shifts and full-blown irrationality. 


A person in a fugue state periodically disassociates herself from her identity and relationships, sometimes forgetting who 
she is/ was until she returns from that fugue state... probably in a very different situation than she had been in when that 
shift in identity began. Also known as dissociative amnesia, a fugue derangement compels a person to make drastic, 
unexpected separations. She'll drop her friends, leave her home, adopt a new personality, maybe forget who she had 
been before. Perhaps she'll return to her old self again... perhaps not. For many obvious reasons, this derangement tends 
to be pretty common among mages, who make abrupt changes in their lives and identities simply by virtue of who they 
are and what they do. 


Some folks also use the term fugue state to describe people who completely withdraw their consciousness from the rest 
of the world. Although that’s not the technical definition of such extreme dissociation (it’s actually called catalepsy or 
catatonic schizophrenia), it’s a common misnomer... and, especially in mages in Quiet Mindscapes, it’s notorious among 
the Awakened. 


The name commonly applied to narcissistic personality disorder, megalomania inspires grand delusions, power fantasies, 
intense feelings of superiority, and an inflated sense of self-esteem. For obvious reasons, it's really common among mages, 
who truly are superior to most other people — the derangement simply makes that person even more self-absorbed than 
usual. Certain authorities distinguish megalomania from narcissism, however. As Bertrand Russell said, “The megalomaniac... 
wishes to be powerful rather than charming, and seeks to be feared rather than loved.” 


Appendix Il: Odd Ends 


649 


Derangements (Continued) 
Multiple Personality Disorder (MPD) 


In what might be seen as an advanced fugue state, a person with MPD consciously and/ or subconsciously constructs 
several different identities. Each identity can become quite distinct, with its own speech patterns, memories, behaviors, 
and even physical appearance. Also called dissociative identity disorder (DID), MPD could manifest anywhere from two 
separate identities to a dozen or more... especially when it's augmented with Life, Mind, Correspondence, or a mixture 
ofthe three. MPD can be extremely common among Marauders, but it's frighteningly common among other mages too... 
especially if a mage and his Avatar begin to switch places or merge identities. 


Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder (OCD) 


Sometimes called monomania, OCD drives a person to anxious, repetitious, and often ritualistic behavior patterns. 
Essentially, a person with OCD fixates on intrusive doubts and fears - fixations she tries to banish by making sure that 
certain things are in order, even if they already are. Often seen as an attempt to control one's circumstances, OCD is 
especially common among ceremonial mages, technomancers, and mad scientists, thanks to the many things they do 
that really MUST be tightly controlled and perfectly organized. 


Paranoia 


In world full of enemies, paranoia seems like an appropriate response. At the point of derangement, however, those 
reasonable fears reach obsessive severity. A paranoid person sees plots and rivals everywhere, even among his friends. 
Trust becomes foolishness because no one can be trusted. And when someone really is out to get that character, the 
madness deepens to absurd proportions. 


Game-wise, a paranoid character adds +1 to the difficulties of all his social rolls... possibly more than that if the people 
he's interacting with have given him any reason at all to be suspicious. He'll use every available method to safeguard 
himself from treachery, and he'll keep even his closest companions at what feels to him like a safe distance... typically 
through abrasive, possibly abusive, behavior. At extreme levels, a paranoid mage isolates himself in every manner 
possible... at which point, he's alone with the terrors in his head, which never truly go away. 


Schizophrenia 


For folks with the power to change reality - and who live, by default, on a different level of reality than most people 
do - schizophrenia is frighteningly close to everyday existence. As a derangement, however, the disconnection from 
reality becomes profoundly dangerous. Hallucinations, phantom voices and sensations, vicious quirks of mood and 
temperament, leaps of (il)logic that feel extreme even by Awakened standards... such symptoms make it difficult to tell 
where reality ends and insanity begins. For mages, schizophrenia is the road to Marauderdom... or, in extreme cases, 
becomes that Mad destination from which no mage can return. 


these Flaws reflect complications that arise from major 
modification of a living organism's Pattern. Any character 
can take them as Paradox Flaws or basic, one-point Flaws. A 
handful of basic Flaws can be used as Genetic Flaws as well; if 
you choose that option, though, each Flaw counts as a single 
Genetic Flaw, even if the usual Flaw costs more than 1 point. 
Note that the Construct Flaw cannot also be taken as a Genetic 
Flaw - that Flaw already assumes a certain uncanny quality that 
Genetic Flaws reflect as well. 


Physical Flaws 

The following Flaws come in two varieties: uncanny physical 
characteristics, and drawbacks that involve physical ailments. Each 
different type counts as a separate Flaw. 


Enhanced Strength 
Characteristics: grossly muscular build; visibly tense muscle 
fibers; dense body mass; unusual weight (too much or too 
little) for build; unwieldy proportions; hypersteroidal physique. 
Drawbacks: constant hunger; bad temper; pervasive 
irritability; chronic pain; heart trouble; bone disease. 


650 Mage: The Ascension 20" Anniversary Edition 


Enhanced Dexterity 


Characteristics: long fingers or limbs; nervous tics; freakish 
reflexes; restless motion. 


Drawbacks: hypertension; restlessness; impatience 
with the slow clumsiness of everyone else; heart problems; 
hyperflexibility/ hypermobility syndrome; muscle pain; cancer. 


Enhanced Stamina 

Characteristics: expanded chest capacity; dense body 
structure; immunity to minor pain; imperviousness to most 
weather conditions. 


Drawbacks: ravenous hunger; obesity; unusual weight and 
density for build; gray, pale, leathery or otherwise discolored 
or oddly-textured skin. 


Enhanced Appearance 

Characteristics: Uncanny beauty; musky scent; too-perfect 
features and/ or proportions; lack of blemishes, scars, or 
birthmarks. 


Drawbacks: “plasticky” skin; micropores or no pores at 
all (increased sensitivity to heat, inability to sweat); excessive 


sweating; hypersensitivity to climate or sensation; pheromone 
scent that's too attractive for your own good! 


Enhanced Intelligence 

Characteristics: baldness; intense/ clinical gaze; staring eyes; 
tendency to speak quickly. 

Drawbacks: dyslexia/ dyscalculia; spaceyness; Asperger’s 
Syndrome/ Autistic Spectrum Disorder; headaches; 
hypersensitivity to stimulation; nightmares; restlessness. 


Enhanced Perception 

Characteristics: slightly oversized eyes or ears; unusual eye 
color; nervous tics; propensity to notice things before anyone 
else does. 

Drawbacks: hypersensitivity/ sensory overload; nervous tics; 
restless limb syndrome; hallucinations; trembling. 


Mental and Social Flaws 


Constructs, biomodded people, and otherwise altered 
folks are notorious for their personality quirks. Those quirks, 


in turn, often leave other people feeling uncomfortable. The 
following Flaws reflect common behavioral tendencies among 
the “more human than human” contingent. 


Genetic Flaws 

Pedantic/ condescending personality; flashes of rage; 
chronic depression; arrogance; weird vibes; jerky/ robotic 
movements; eerie stillness; unnerving intensity; obsessive- 
compulsive behavior (taking notes about everything, making 
constant adjustments to or critiques about your environment); 
talking to yourself even when other folks are watching; treating 
everything like a computer game or reality TV show in which 
you're the star; Tourette’s Syndrome; callousness or cruelty; 
intense self-focus; emotional extremes or apparent lack of 
emotions; the Dark Triad; breaking the fourth wall; a tendency 
to speak in a BBC accent even if you’re not British. 


Basic Flaws 


Berserker/ Stress Atavism, Deranged, PTSD, and other 
appropriate mental or social Flaws. 


The Toybox 


The tools and toys we use often define 
human culture. That’s especially true in the 
21* century, where our tools have shaped a 
radically different world than the one previous 
generations knew - a world where climate 
control, rapid transit, information technology, 
mass media, and many other innovations guide 
the human animal. Our tools alter our reality, 
and so it’s fitting that mages employ tools that 
fit their Path of choice. 


As suggested by the Wonder Background in Chapter Six, 
the many tools of a mage’s trade fall into different categories 
and levels of power. Some mages use an eclectic range of tools, 
and others wouldn’t be caught dead with a jetpack or rune 
stick in their hands. The following section offers a brief glance 
into the Awakened toybox - a diverse collection of tools and 
trinkets whose value to the Awakened Ones reflects our own 
obsession with imaginative technology. 


The following systems are, by necessity, brief and basic. 
For an expanded set of optional Wonder rules, see The Book 
of Secrets. 


Rules for Wonders 


With the exception of Fetishes and Trinkets (described 
below), Wonders are items that employ Sphere-based Effects 
in order to channel the reality-warping powers of a mage. 
That said, a character doesn’t have to be a mage in order to 
use one; consors can employ mystic Wonders, extraordinary 
citizens can employ tech-based Devices, and the average Joe, 
Jane, or Janus could pick up a Trinket or Fetish and get results 


even if that person has no idea what the item actually is. The 
Book of Secrets goes into detail about the ways in which a 
person’s paradigm allows her to use a Wonder (or forbids her 
from accessing its full abilities), but for now let’s simply say 
that people get what they expect to get from a Wonder. If that 
person loathes technology, then a suit of power armor won’t 
do her much good; if witchcraft seems silly, or is anathema, to 
her, then that flying broom ain’t goin’ nowhere. 


Wonders and Paradox 


Because they employ magick to alter reality, Wonders tend 
to generate Paradox. The amount of Paradox, however, relies 
upon whether a given item is considered coincidental or vulgar 
and whether Sleeper witnesses are present at the time of its use. 
A jetpack used around a military base at night won’t generate 
nearly as much Paradox energy as a flying carpet zipping down 
Wall Street. In all cases, the amount of Paradox follows the 
rules detailed in Chapter Ten, (pp. 547-553), with the points 
being added to the Quintessence/ Paradox wheel of the mage 
who’s using the Wonder. (See Chapter Six, (p. 331), for details 
about that wheel and its effects.) 


The Coincidental Edge 


Fortunately, Wonders tend to make many vulgar acts seem 
rather coincidental. Especially in mass-media cultures, folks are 
more willing to accept weird stuff if there’s a machine or similar 
object involved. For obvious reasons, this gives the coincidental 
edge to Wonders that involve some form of acceptable 
technology... which, in the 21* century, can get pretty advanced 
before people start questioning its viability! Even so, certain 
Wonders have strong footholds in the public imagination - a 


Appendix Il: Odd Ends 65l 


[ZA 


lls A 
4 YA. | 
x. 
Y | 
| 
| 
p 
" 


Ld 


cross, for example, brandished in the hands ofa priest, ora fistful 
of colorful dust in the hands of a wild stranger - and might be 
considered coincidental under the right circumstances. 


Silent Wonders 


Certain Wonders have no discernable effects, so they 
rarely generate Paradox at all. A bulletproof hoodie, for 
instance, doesn't seem unusual, and its protective effect could 
be interpreted as sheer luck or bad shooting. Other Wonders 
function in very subtle ways. A flask that gets someone drunk 
immediately, or a bullet that shatters inside the body and then 
disappears, both use Sphere magick in ways that no normal 
eyes can see. Again, this sort of Wonder avoids Paradox unless 
some Sleeper witness notices impossible things going on. 


Permanent Paradox 

On the flipside, certain Wonders ripple the Consensus 
simply by existing. The Enhancement Background (described 
in Chapter Six) invokes that kind of permanent Paradox, and 
certain other things do as well. For the most part, permanent 
Paradox comes about through certain lasting modifications: 
moving tattoos, glowing horns, and the like. In general, 
assume that a Wonder that can be turned off or set aside 
does not generate permanent Paradox. If a Wonder does 
involve permanent Paradox, add that Paradox to the wielder's 
Quintessence/ Paradox wheel whenever he has that Wonder 
in his possession.. (For details about Permanent Paradox, see 
that entry in Chapter Ten, pp. 547-548.) 


Essential Wonders 

The basic set of Wonders includes the following types of 
items. Other sourcebooks include a wider array of Wonders, 
with specific rules and limitations for each type. 


e Device: A sophisticated, selfpowered item of Enlightened 
technology. 


e Fetish: Capitalized, a power object containing a bound 
spirit entity. 


Periapt: A mystic source of Quintessence energy. A 
tech-based Periapt is called a Matrix. 


e Talisman: A sophisticated, self-contained magickal item. 


Trinket: A single-function item that has been crafted or 
enhanced using Sphere magicks but that isn’t magickal 
in the sense that other Wonders are magickal. 


Osing a Wonder 


As a general rule, Devices and Talismans have their own 
Enlightenment/ Arete Trait, which determines the dice pool for 
the item’s Effects. If Ryan uses a 4 Arete bafflejack, for example, 
his player rolls four dice to activate that Talisman’s Effect. 


A Fetish channels the power of a spirit within that item. To 
use one, the character asks the spirit to unleash its powers. Story- 
wise, this typically demands a decent relationship with the spirit 
in question; game-wise, the Storyteller might have the player make 


652 Mage: The Ascension 20" Anniversary Edition 


a Willpower roll (difficulty 7) against the spirit’s Gnosis Trait. 
A successful roll employs that Gnosis as the dice pool for the 
Fetish’s effects, so a Gnosis 5 Fetish would have a five-die pool. 


Periapts and Matrices simply store up Quintessence. Each 
item holds up to five points of Quintessence for each dot in 
that Wonder. Thus, a three-dot Matrix could hold a total of 
15 Quintessence. To access that Quintessence, or to refuel the 
Wonder, a character uses a Prime 2 Effect, plus at least one 
turn of focused concentration, to channel Quintessence back 
into the Periapt. Without Prime of 2 or higher, a mage cannot 
employ such a Wonder. 


Trinkets are easy to use, and pretty much anyone can do so. 
Jinx could put on a bulletproof hoodie and enjoy its protective 
effects without further skill or effort. Although such items - 
supersharp blades, Prime-strengthened clothing, glass forged 
with Matter to become damn near unbreakable - require Sphere 
Effects when they’re being crafted, their properties remain 
intact unless some other force (like unweaving countermagick) 
destroys them. 


Crafting Wonders 


The Crafting Wonders chart in Chapter Ten, (p. 508), 
shows the basic systems involved in creating these enchanted 
items. In order to craft a wonder, the character must have all of 
the necessary Spheres. Consequently, you need to be a pretty 
accomplished mage before you can create a new Wonder from 
scratch. 


Wondercrafting also involves mundane elbow grease. Dr. 
Hans von Roth, for example, needs to know a lot about cars 
before he can build his scrappy hotrods, and he must put in 
some serious hours in the garage, tinkering with car parts both 
standard and original. Gamewise, the character should have all 
the requisite Abilities, as well. To craft the Wonder, the player 
makes a variety of extended rolls, as detailed in Chapter Nine’s 
section about Inventing, Modifying, and Improving Technology. 


Quintessence Costs 

Wonder does not come cheap. Beyond the materials 
involved in the creation of such items (which, in most instances, 
must be high-quality materials whose symbolic significance fits 
the Wonder in question), a mage must invest at least five points 
of Quintessence into the Wonder for each dot in the Wonder's 
Background rating. A three-dot Wonder, for example, would 
require no less than 15 Quintessence, and a five-dot Wonder 
would need at least 25. 


Devices and Talismans also require one point of Quintessence 
for each roll the player makes while crafting the item, beyond 
the basic Quintessence points required for that item. If Dr. von 
Roth’s player needs to make five rolls while crafting a flying Prius, 
then the car requires a total of 25 Quintessence points (five rolls 
at 5 Quintessence each = 25 Quintessence). The source of that 
Quintessence, like the mundane materials involved, depends a lot 
on the nature of that Wonder. A sharp tux designed by Vittoria 
Falconi would demand some especially cold cash or other Primal 
Utility investment, but a Balath-Qada Madness Grenade might 
employ scraps of depleted uranium from an Iraqi bomb crater, 


corpse-dust from aserial killer's basement, and the charred scraps 


of a shredded Ann Coulter screed. 


Background Costs 
As described in the Wonder Background entryin Chapter 
Six (p. 328), Wonders get rated by their overall power level: 


e Minor item worth 1-3 freebie or experience 
points. 
ee Notable item worth 4-6 points. 


eco Significant item worth 7-9 points. 


ecco Impressive item worth 10-12 points. 


Mighty item worth 13-15 points. 


An individual Wonder can have up to one separate power 
for each dot in that Background. A three-dot Wonder, for 
instance, can have up to three different powers, although many 
three-dot Wonders have only one or two abilities. 


Because each Wonder uses Sphere-based Effects, those 
dots depend upon the Sphere Rank of the object's most 
powerful Effect. A Talisman, for instance, that uses a Forces 
4/ Prime 4 Effect would be a four-dot Background, its Arete 
Trait as high as 4. 


As an optional rule, a Wonder may have a higher Arete than 
usual; for one extra Background point, that four-dot Talisman 
could have an Arete of 5. Generally, Wonders have a capacity 
of five Quintessence points for each point of Arete. That four- 
dot Arete 5 Talisman, then, could hold up to 25 Quintessence 
and would cost nine freebie or experience points. 


Points and Requisitions 

The Requisitions Background (see Chapter Six, p. 321- 
322) gives Technocratic characters a range of points with which 
they can temporarily buy gear from their division. That gear 
doesn’t actually belong to those operatives, but, by pooling 
those points, the Background allows teams of Union agents 
to obtain vehicles, weapons, and other goodies that are usually 
way above their pay grade. 


Sample Wonders 


Each of the following Wonders features a dot rating that 
represents its Background value if your character happens to 
own such a thing, a point cost in case someone wants to buy 
that item with freebie or experience points, and the essential 
systems and descriptions that deal with that particular Wonder. 
You can use these items “straight out of the box,” take them 
as inspirations for your own original creations, or stick them 
in the hands of supporting-cast characters when an ally or 
villain needs a little extra edge. The Book of Secrets, The 
Technomancer’s Toybox, Guide to the Technocracy, Forged 
by Dragon’s Fire, and a variety of other Mage sourcebooks 
provide dozens of additional Wonders, and although the rules 
and formats of those other books aren’t always consistent with 
the rules in Chapter Ten (much less with one another...), the 
many concepts in those books can help you fill your Mage 


chronicle with Wonders of all kinds. 


Mystic Wonders 


Favored by mages dedicated to a mystic Path, these tools 
blend the mystique of traditional magic items with the realities 
of our present century. 


* fo eee Trushades (TrinkeD 
Arete N/A, Quintessence N/A, Background Cost 2-6 pts. 


In a simple, yet potentially powerful, variation on the old 
"X-ray specs" concept, many mages keep glasses or goggles that 
have been modified with between one and three perceptual 
Effects. The name Trushades comes from a variety marketed to 
Awakened customers by Greer Laboratories - a cabal composed 
of Ecstatic, Etherite, and VA mages whose slogan is "Look 
closer." Other, generic varieties exist under many different 
names. Although such shades - which range from simple reading 
glasses or sunglasses to stylish shades and wild eyewear - look 
perfectly normal, their enhancements allow the wearer to view 
things no human eyes should be able to see. 


System: Depending upon the Spheres involved, a pair of 
Trushades can employ any Rank 1 visual perception Effect. The 
mostcommon variations incorporate Forces (electrons or other 
physical energies), Life (overall health and the presence of life), 
Matter (the structure of inanimate items and surfaces), Mind 
(auras), and Prime (Quintessence and Resonance/ Synergy 
forces), but really - any visually perceivable Sphere works. 


Generally, a pair of modified glasses also features an 
activation word or touch; this way, the wearer can turn the 
Effects on and off at will. A one-dot pair holds a single Effect, 
and the three-dot sets feature three different Spheres working 
toward a single purpose. Three Spheres, however, is the 
maximum capacity for a non-Talisman pair of glasses... and any 
character who tries to use all three Spheres at once will suffer 
both a -2 penalty to her Perception rolls and a nasty (though 
nor-injurious) headache. 


ee or eee Bafflejack (Device or Talisman) 
Arete 2-5, Quintessence 10-25, Background Cost 2 to 6 pts. 


In a world of perpetual surveillance, folks have all the 
more reason to hide their private lives. That’s especially true 
of mages, who - regardless of their faction - have all too much 
to lose if information about their true lives gets into the wrong 
hands. And although all occult (that is, hidden) groups have 
21*century variations on this theme, the bafflejack favored 
by activist Tradition mages might be the most popular self- 
concealment measure in current circulation. 


Dependingupon who crafted and uses specific bafflejacks, 
these tiny Talismans and Devices could be items of jewelry 
(watches, cufflinks, rings, necklaces, etc.), clothing (shoes, 
scarves, jackets, and so forth), glasses, hats, pins, and so on. 
"Bafflejacking" has also become slang for a popular process 
through which a mage treats an object so that it holds the 
same properties as a bafflejack Wonder - essentially turning 
that object into a bafflejack. 


Appendix Il: Odd Ends — 653 


ZA 


So what's a bafflejack, and what does it do? It's an 
ordinary-seeming item that sends out small ripples of light, 
sound-, and mind-disruption. When worn, or clipped onto 
something that's supposed to be concealed, a bafflejack emits 
a low-level cloaking effect. Although this cloaking doesn't keep 
the object or wearer from being seen and heard, it does tend to 
scramble the precise impression that person or object leaves 
upon witnesses, electronic surveillance monitors, and cameras 
and microphones of all kinds. 


Because of that disruptive effect, though, bafflejacks tend to 
screw with electronic devices as a whole - which is a nasty side 
effect if you want to use electronic gear, drive a car, or go online. 
The Virtual Adepts (and certain Technocrats) craft bafflejacks 
that can interact selectively with electronic equipment, but those 
"jacks are far more difficult to come by (and, in game terms, 
more expensive). However, for protests, getaways, clandestine 
meetings, and other events, a bafflejack might be the must-have 
accessory for postmodern mages on the go. 


System: A simple yet useful combination of Forces 2 
Effects shifts the spectra for light, sound, and electrons where 
they interact with the surface of the person or object cloaked 
by the bafflejack. Meanwhile, a related Mind 2 Effect blurs the 


perceptions of people who interact with the protected party. 
Essentially, the bafflejack acts like several removable dots in 


the Arcane Background. People, machines, and intelligent animals 
(that is, animals able to be affected by the Mind Sphere) all suffer 


654 Mage: The Ascension 20" Anniversary Edition 


a-l penalty to their Perception rolls for each success on a roll of 
the Wonder's Arete, difficulty 7. (For simplicity, your Storyteller 
could just decide that this Wonder provides an automatic Arcane 
3, saving the roll for drastic circumstances.) Bafflejacks with 
higher Arete Traits bestow higher levels of protection. Again, the 
user is neither silent nor invisible; impressions of that character, 
though, will be rather indistinct, and various people will recall 
his features and activities differently. 


A two-dot bafflejack holds two Effects: some combination 
of the electronic baffling, the mental baffling, the light 
baffling, and the sound baffling. The three-dot version holds 
three, and the four-dot "jack baffles all four. Each point of 
Quintessence fuels the baffling Effects for one hour. Obviously, 
the Technocracy has sensors that can detect the Effects of a 
bafflejack; those sensors are too expensive to place everywhere, 
but sensitive security zones can spot a bafflejack on a roll of 
five dice against difficulty 5. 


eee Bulletproof Hoodie (TrinkeD 
Arete N/A, Quintessence N/A, Background Cost 6 pts. 


Crafted in reaction to the increase of racist shootings 
and ethnic violence, these paranormal fashion statements 
have begun appearing on the backs of young and not-so-young 
mages all over the industrialized world. Such hoodies tend to 
feature stylish logos (often in a modern graffiti style), occult 
designs, or outspoken political sentiments, though some 


default to a single, solid color - typically black, gray, red, or 
blue. And although they're not truly bullet-proof, the hoodies 
can deflect all kinds of major trauma, so long as such trauma 
hits between the wearer's waist and (if the hood is up) the top 
of his head. For obvious reasons, such hoodies are especially 
popular with orphans, Hollowers, urban shamans, and mages 
of commonly-attacked ethnicities. 


System: Matter 3 strengthens the fibers of these garments 
without adding noticeably to their weight. In game terms, a 
bulletproof hoodie provides four soak dice versus lethal slashing or 
projectile damage. Such hoodies do not protect against blunt trauma 
- only against blades, bullets, arrows, and so on. Still, a punch is 
easier to walk away from than a bullet, so the folks who wear these 
garments aren’t concerned about that particular limitation. 


Technocratic Hardware 


Crafted in the factories of the Technocratic Union, 
these tools help reinforce the Union’s dedication to futuristic 
technology, Inspired Science, and a world freed from the shackles 
of superstitious fear. The various Technocracy sourcebooks 
contain dozens of other hardware items, although the '90s-era 
ones seem rather out of date by now. 


ee Falconi & Associates Elite Business 

Aftire (Device/ Invention) 
Enlightenment special, Primal Energy N/A, 
Background Cost 4 pts. 


Impressions are everything, especially in the realm of high 
finance, media, and government. And although Armani suits 
retain their traditional allure, the real power draping today’s 
thrones comes from the studios of Vittoria Falconi, the most 
inspired (and Inspired) designer in the world today. Whereas 
other fashionistas play games of petty popularity, Falconi and 
her world-class artisans craft the finest, most subtle suits an 
executive could ever hope to wear. Their work is stratospherically 
expensive, of course... but then, the best things never come 
cheaply. 

Falconi and her collaborators - Holly Tanaka, Indira 
Chen, Enrique Castaneda, and Florian Wulff - employ 
Inspired Science and Enlightened Arts to craft 21*-century 
business fashion. Covert operatives of the Technocratic media 
elite, these artisans have surpassed the Savile Row Old Guard. 
These days, a real player orders his or her suits from Falconi 
or Tanaka, gets shoes from Castaneda & Chen, and books 
personal style consultations with Florian Associates. Together, 
their creations shape the power elite of the new millennium: 
assured, stylish, charismatic, and yet not in any way stuffy or 
old-fashioned. These suits reflect a grand global vision, rich 
with subtle tones of cross-cultured aristocracy... and, of course, 
Enlightened power too. 


The ties between Falconi, Tanaka, and the others remain 
a trade secret worth killing for. Only the tiniest ring of their 
collective inner circles knows (much less understands) the 
significance of Eris Design, an invisible umbrella that unites 
those designers into a cooperative whole. The various creations 


from Falconi and her associates interact to provide an impressive 
yet practical fashion suite: impeccable clothing, fascinating 
cosmetics, comfortable yet stylish footwear, and a range of 
benefits that only Enlightened operatives can truly utilize. 


System: Anyone looks good in Falconi or Tanaka suits; 
a character dressed by these fashion artisans can reduce the 
difficulty of social rolls by -3, thanks to the stylish impression he 
presents. The clothing acts as Reinforced Clothingarmor, worth 
two extra soak dice against bashing and lethal damage attacks, 
but it has no additional weight or bulk. The tailored lines of a 
Falconi or Tanaka suit also conceal all but the largest handguns 
or knives, and the clothing features tiny hidden pockets that can 
hold cards, wallets, and so forth without breaking the line of the 
suit. Thanks to superior craftsmanship (and Matterenhanced 
materials), these clothes rarely tear, stain, fade, fray, or retain 
unpleasant odors, even under the harshest of conditions. 


An Enlightened character can also use a built-in Mind 2 
Empathic Bond Effect. The dice pool for this Effect comes from 
the wearer’s own Enlightenment Trait, which makes a high-end 
Syndicate VP far more impressive than a low-level street op. 


When enhanced by Florian makeovers, a character gets an 
additional two dice of Charisma, thanks to the combination 
of poise, cosmetics, and confidence (plus a tiny Mind Sphere 
Adjustment) that Florian and his specialists employ. 


Castaneda & Chen shoes do not slip, break, blister, 
impede running, or lose traction on tricky surfaces. Although 
they definitely look good, these shoes lack the built-in social 
adjustments of other Falconi-associated clothing. Instead, 
they simply function as superior footwear that an operative 
can wear all day, under almost any conditions, without undue 
discomfort or risk. 


Combined, an outfit composed of all Falconi-associated 
brands can cost upwards of $50,000. The high price is part of 
the magick too - it confers value in the minds of its purchasers. 
Such outfits never come off the rack. Each one is carefully 
tailored and calibrated for the person it’s designed to suit. 
Hence, such fashions define the elite - after all, only the elite 
can afford them! 


eee Visual Data & Analysis Spectrum 
(VDAS) (Device) 

Enlightenment 3-6, Primal Energy N/A, 

Background Cost 6 pts. 


Known by the colloquialism the datacrawl and commonly 
pronounced vee-DAS, the VDAS allows a Technocratic field 
agent to access the Union’s databases for information. A faint 
green crawl of data (typically rendered in abbreviations and 
measured in the metric system) appears at the lower left side 
of the agent’s vision when the agent sends a mental impulse to 
trigger the crawl. See this book’s Prelude for a description of 
the VDAS in action and the sidebar VDAS: The Datacrawl in 
Chapter Five, (p. 182), for further details aboutthe technology. 


System: Essentially, this Device functions like the Right-Click 
rote detailed in Chapter Ten, (pp. 602-603). The agent might have 
VDAS implanted as a cybernetic interface, or she might wear it 


Appendix Il: Odd Ends 655 


eo 


Ne No AA 


oe ee 


as part of her field gear. The worn-gear option allows the agent 
to take VDAS off, which offers some measure of freedom and 
reflects a degree of trust on the Union's part. An agent wearing 
the VDAS can be tracked, even if the interface has been turned 
off, so an agent who has the option of taking off her gear has 
been granted some level of autonomy by her supervisors. 


In order to use VDAS, the character must be trained in its 
proper use. The combination of mental-impulse command and 
multitasking that lets someone use this Device requires Mind 1 
andashort, yetessential, training program. Withoutthattraining 
andacorrectunderstanding of Technocratic paradigms, a person 
who puts on VDAS gear would see nothing unusual; without Mind 
1, that person would see a crawl of green data on the surface of the 
lens but could not read it without massive amounts of eyestrain 
and distraction. Either way, VDAS gear has a Correspondence/ 
Data implant in its technology. The Technocracy can track a 
character wearing it unless she has somehow disabled the tech 
(as Secret Agent John Courage obviously has), which demands 
an extensive knowledge of classified Union technology. 


VDAS technology is standard issue for Black Suits and 
cyborgs. Other agents may requisition it, or be assigned that 
technology, on an as-needed basis. Thanks to Google Glass and 
other similar Sleeper technology, VDAS is coincidental... though 
not, as the Right-Click description reveals, always reliable. 


eeee Alanson R-25 Hardsuit (Device) 


Enlightenment 4, Primal Energy 20, 
Background Cost 8 pts. 


Among the standard gear for Iteration X monster-hunters, 
an Alanson R-25 Hardsuit provides strong yet flexible protection. 
With a few small modifications, an Alanson suit can be adapted 
to low-G environments, alternative dimensions (aka the Umbra), 
aquatic theatres of operation, and standard Earth ground settings. 
A hypertech variation on modern military body armor, the 
Alanson has stealth technologies, variable weapon mounts, life- 
supportattachments, infrared and ultraviolet viewing apparatus, 
stim-pack receptacles (to provide much-needed, albeit temporary, 
boosts), and a light yet formidable level of protection. 


Since the first Alanson units rolled off the assembly lines at 
the turn of the millennium, the original bulky armor has gained 
protective capabilities and slimmed its formidable profile. Current- 
generation hardsuits weigh about 30 pounds (less than half of 
the original 70), offer better armor, and lack the shutdown flaw 
of earlier designs. An agent in an R-25 unit still has an imposing 
silhouette, but the newest-generation armor can be concealed 
beneath a long coat if the agent removes the helmet. Thanks to 
the Age of Terror and its subsequent prevalence of armored police 
and military forces, the average Sleeper would regard an Alanson- 
suited operative as a cop or soldier in really cool gear. 


System: A compact network of form-fitting composite- 
material armor, micro-servos, a body-stocking, and a selection 
of modular kits that can be switched out within a turn or two 
(assuming that the user has access to the various modules, of 
course; each module costs extra points) allows an Alanson-suited 
agent to employ the following abilities: 


656 Mage: The Ascension 20" Anniversary Edition 


Armor: Seven additional soak dice of protection shield 
the character from bashing, lethal, and aggravated 
damage. The bulk of the suit and servos reduces the 
wearer’s Dexterity-based dice pools by two dice, and 
he must be wearing the helmet in order to get the full 
protection for his head. 


Strength: Those internal servos add two dice to the 
wearer’s Strength-based dice pools, except for feats 
that involve jumping or running. The agent can run a 
maximum of 20 yards per turn, and that level of activity 
quickly strains his muscles even with the help of the suit. 
(Assume one turn of running per dot of Stamina.) 


Temperature Control: Internal heatingand cooling units 
keep the wearer relatively comfortable in temperatures 
ranging between 0 and 110 degrees Fahrenheit (-18 to 
45 degrees Celsius). 


Hard Fists: The suit's reinforced gloves and boots add 
one die to the damage of all weaponless strikes. That 
damage, without weapons, inflicts bashing-style harm. 
Concealed blades can be deployed within the gloves, 
making that damage lethal instead. 


Integrated Communications Interface (ICI): Assuming 
that the agent’s wearing his helmet, each Alanson 
hardsuit has radio, Internet, VDAS, GPS, telephone, 
and video capability. 


Cross-Environment Life Support System (CELSS) 
(3 pts.): When fitted with an enclosed helmet and an 
integrated lifesupport pack, the hardsuit can sustain 
its operator in hazmat, underwater, deep cold, intense 
heat, and Deep Umbral environments. Each hour of 
operation costs one point of Quintessence. Such use is 
coincidental but not concealable. 


Enhanced Targeting Capacity (ETC) (4 pts.): After 
spending a turn engaging the ETC system, the operative 
can add four dice to distance-attack dice pools, thanks 
to the targeting-and-guidance computer interface. 


Heavy Armor (1 pt.): With a layer of reinforced plating, 
the suit gains three additional levels of protection (three 
soak dice, or 10 dice total), at the cost of reduced mobility 
(10-yard run) and increased bulk (three-die penalty to 
Dexterity-based rolls). 


High-Intensity Plasma Assault Unit (HIPAU) (9 pts.): 
A removable weapons system allows the operative to aim 
his arm and generate a blast of hot, focused, plasmic 
death. Each shot consumes a point of Quintessence. 
The player rolls a Dexterity * Energy Weapons attack, 
which acts as the focus instrument for a six-die Forces 3/ 
Prime 2 attack. This blast of energy inflicts aggravated 
damage. Outside of Technocracy Constructs or the 
Otherworlds, the HIPAU constitutes a vulgar Effect. 


e Nanotech Self-Repair Module (NSRM) (3 pts.): With a 
successful Enlightenment roll (difficulty 7), the suit can 
temporarily repair itself. Full repairs must be made back 
atheadquarters, butthe nanotech patch kitcan fix minor 
damage within a few minutes and major damage in an 
hour or two. On a botched roll, however, the systems 
go amok, wrecking the suit's integrity within a minute 
or two. The agent inside the suit had best get out of it 
quick; otherwise, she could find herself trapped inside 
it... or possibly - if she's been injured as well - integrated 
into the suit through various unpleasant "repairs." 


* Self-Contained Emergency Medical System (SCEMS) (4 
pts.): Ifthe operative deploys the "seams," advanced drugs 
and medical nanites conduct biopatch healing. Each use 
expends one Quintessence point. The player rolls four 
dice (the module's Enlightenment) against difficulty 6 to 
trigger the SCEMS' Life 2 Heal Self Effect - an Effect 
that remains coincidental so long as the operative isn't 
reattaching limbs or hauling his guts back into place. 


* Standardized Primal Energy Containment Matrix 
(SPECM) (5 pts. each): Removable Primal Energy 
units allow the suit to carry and utilize an additional 


10 points of Quintessence. One suit can accommodate 
two SPECM units. 


Other than the functions of certain vulgar modules, the 
Alanson hardsuit remains coincidental in tech-based reality zones. 
A lone operative needs about six turns to put the suit on or take it 
off, but he needs only half that time if he's got a trained assistant 
to help him into or out of the armor. Because it's an independent 
Device, any Technocracy-trained operative - Enlightened or 
otherwise - can use it. For obvious reasons, however, only the 
most trusted extraordinary citizens merit hardsuit training. These 
suits are far too expensive for common deployment. 


Biotech 


The remarkable treasures of hypertech bio-integration 
allow certain characters - usually, but not always, agents of the 
Technocratic Union - to employ cybernetic and genegineered 
biotech Wonders. Unlike other Wonders, these modifications 
cannot be removed except through agonizing (and often fatal) 
surgery. Essentially, man, magick, and machine become one 
entity. The Enhancements Background(pp. 312-313) represents 
those modifications, and several character templates in 
Appendix I feature a few examples of its applications in action. 


Contrary to the stereotypes of bulky exojocks and 
murderous HIT Marks, most biomodded personnel conceal 
their modifications until those improvements are needed. That's 
especially true in the 21* century, when the state of the art has 
been refined far past the clunky applications of the previous 
century. This refinement, combined with the adaptation of 
mundane prosthetics among the Masses, renders all but the 
wildest examples of biotech more or less coincidental in the 
industrialized world. Unless some dude suddenly pops blades 


or a machine gun out of his hand, people are likely to accept 
subtle biotech as legitimate advancements of science. 


(Biotech enhancements still add one point of permanent 
Paradox to the character for each dot in his Enhancements 
Background Trait. These days, however, people are less likely to 
freak out at the sight of mechanical devices worked into living 
tissue. After all, the recent wars have done a lot to advance the 
science of prosthetics. How distressingly convenient...) 


Cybernetics 


As mentioned in the appropriate entries in Chapter 
Ten, simple cybernetics serve as instruments and practices 
for hypertech procedures. (See p. 576 and 579.) Thus, many 
characters employ minor cybernetic adjustments too subtle for 
the Enhancements Background. 


Cybernetics as Advantages 

Such small pieces of technology could simply be considered 
focus instruments or special effects for Advantages like Armor, 
Claws, Nightsight, or Rapid Healing. (See the sidebar.) In this 
case, the player should simply buy the Advantage, define the 
tools, or both; add one dot of the Enhancements Background 
for every two points spenton the Advantage; and then consider 
those devices built-in cybernetic biomods. Those Traits and that 
equipment would then be subject to the conditions mentioned 
below - the potential for removal, the permanent Paradox, the 
susceptibility to Life magick, and so forth. Aside from that, 
however, you don't need a separate Wonder entry for claws... 
unless, of course, they're really special claws. More powerful 
cybernetic Wonders, though, have their own entries below. 


Cyberneticbiomods haveseveral special conditions within Mage: 


* Self-Contained Energy: Every piece of cybernetic 
hardware operates offa self-contained battery of Primal 
Energy. Minorenhancements (the Advantagesdescribed 
in the sidebar nearby) can operate indefinitely off the 
character's personal Quintessence, but larger ones use 
batteries. Game-wise, the Primal Energy rating of a 
cybernetic device reflects the size of its Quintessence 
battery. If that battery runs down, the cyborg can fuel 
the device with his personal Quintessence - his life 
force - until he's out of Quintessence. At that point, the 
cybernetics shut down and go offline until the Primal 
Energy gets restored one way or another. 


e Activation: Unless they ve been purchased as Advantages 
(again, see sidebar), cybernetic devices have an 
Enlightenment rating. To activate a device, the player 
rolls that Enlightenment as a dice pool. The difficulty 
depends upon whether those cybernetics are coincidental 
(asubdermal pouch) orvulgar (a plasma cannon). Failure 
on that roll means that the device does not function at 
all, and a botch reflects some calamitous malfunction... 
and probably a Paradox backlash as well. In any case, 
vulgar Effects and botched rolls add to the cyborg's 
Paradox pool, which might already be significant... 


Appendix Il: Odd Ends — 657 


. 


B SERES AA 


| 
| 
t 1 


A 


P 
J 


/ i 
r a 
- E^ 
“ea a 
oy ok 


658 


Optional Rule: Advantages 


Certain characters have innate yet unusual features: claws, wings, natural armor, and so forth. In system terms, such 
features are called Advantage Traits. Although the extensive details and systems surrounding Advantages go far beyond 
the scope of this book, cybernetics, genegineering, and. biomods can give certain Advantages to characters with the 


appropriate Enhancements. 


Like mostother Traits, Advantages cost points. The basic characteristics of certain Advantages and the associated pointcosts appear 
below. For more details about Advantages, see the Mage 20 sourcebook Gods, Monsters, and Familiar Strangers. 


Advantage Point Cost System 


Armor variable 


One soak die per point spent vs. bashing and lethal damage; one soak die 


vs. aggravated damage for every two points spent. 


Claws, Fangs, or Horns 3/5/7 


Claws inflict Strength +2 slash; fangs inflict Strength +1 bite; horns 


inflict Strength +2 gore. Three points buy one attack, five buy two, and 
seven buy all three. Normal cost inflicts lethal damage. Double cost inflicts 


aggravated damage. 


Climbing Pads/ Claws 2 
Nightsight 3 


-2 difficulty to all climbing rolls (minimum of 2). 


Allows for a sense that “sees” in near-total darkness, no roll needed. 


Perception + Alertness, difficulty 8, allows character to “see” in complete 


darkness. 


Rapid Healing variable 


Every two points spent on Advantage moves character one category 


higher on Healing Damage chart. 


Wings 3/5 


Permanent Paradox: As mentioned earlier, each dotin the 
Enhancement Background bestows a point of permanent 
Paradox. Enlightened characters add those points to their 
Paradox Effect backlashes. UnEnlightened characters with 
cybernetic implants suffer weird quirks and chronic health 
issues (see Genetic Flaws, pp. 648-651) and contribute 
to the overall backlash total when an allied mage suffers 
a Paradox backlash. Yes, this means that an Enlightened 
Technocrat surrounded by unEnlightened cyborgs can 
be really fucked if Paradox kicks in. 


A large Paradox backlash (10 points or more) drains all 
of the Primal Energy out of the cybernetic devices and 
kicks them offline until someone finds a new source of 
energy for them. 


Extraction: Cybernetic enhancements are machines, and 
machines can be removed. If a cyborg character winds 
up Incapacitated or otherwise immobilized, he might get 
chopped if his captors are skillful or ruthless enough to do 
so. In game terms, a skillful character has several dots in 
Biotech, Hypertech, Medicine, or Science (Cybernetics). 
An unskilled character could just use a chainsaw. 


Assume that a character whose cybernetics have been 
ganked loses one permanent health level for each dot of 
Enhancements. Three dots’ worth of cybernetics, then, 
would inflict three health levels’ worth of damage if 


Mage: The Ascension 20" Anniversary Edition 


Three points let character fly up to 13 yards/ turn. Five points let character 
fly up to 20 yards per turn. 


removed. Such removal inflicts aggravated damage that 
cannot be healed without significant restoration magick 
or medical treatment. Certain organs or improvements, 
of course, might prove immediately fatal if removed. As 
one might imagine, the threat of extraction keeps most 
Technocratic cyborgs in line. 


Magickal Vandalism: Despite the Technocracy’s best 
efforts, the awful power of the Spheres allows a skillful 
mage to take cyborgs apart. A vulgar Life 3/ Forces 2/ 
Prime 2 Effect can disrupt cybernetic devices if the mage 
knows what she’s doing - in game terms, the four Traits 
listed directly above this entry. If that mage rolls five 
successes or more, the poor cyborg goes offline until a 
repair tech can sort things out. Quite often, he remains 
conscious even while trapped in his malfunctioning 
body - a nightmarish fate that haunts each cybernetic 
Ascension Warrior. 


Implant Rejection: An even more gruesome fate involves 
the wholesale rejection of cybernetic devices. A vulgar 
Life 3 (or Life 3/ Matter 2) spell inflicts two additional 
health levels in aggravated damage if the spell gets past 
a cyborg’s countermagick. The cyborg cannot soak this 
damage in any way. A single assault that deals out six 
health levels or more actually rips the cybernetics out 
of the character’s body - a brutally effective tactic when 
faced with enhanced antagonists. 


* Non-Technocratic Cybernetics: Although other factions 
have cybernetic adaptations (notably the Society of 
Ether, Virtual Adepts, certain techno-wizards, and some 
Nephandi), the mostefficientand reliable enhancements 
come from the Technocratic Union. That Union has 
been refining such advances in a systematic form for 
over a century, so the more idiosyncratic inventions of 
rival technomancers can't even come close. 


As a rule, assume that a non-Technocracy character 
with cybernetic implants suffers from one Genetic Flaw 
Trait for every dot in the Enhancements Background. 
These Flaws reflect the unstable nature of cybernetic 
innovations outside the specialized disciplines of the 
Technocratic Union's laboratories. 


Asafinal note, it’s a really good idea for cybernetic characters 
to cultivate tight friendships with properly skilled technicians. 
Ascension War cybernauts take one hell of a beating. 


Some common cybernetic mods include: 


* Online Access 


Enlightenment N/A, Primal Energy N/A, 
Background Cost 2 pts. 


Itseems like everyone's online these days. A simple wireless 
sensory array lets the cyborg go online, using sub-vocal voice- 
activated interface capability. Remote locations limit access to 
the net, of course, and Umbral trips eliminate it altogether. This 
level of interface allows the character to use sensory visitation 
to reach the Digital Web but cannot project her into it on a 
deeper level. The online access mod includes two USB ports 
to allow for flash drives, computer connections, or other types 
of accessorization. 


System: Story element; allow the character to go online, 


receive GPS coordinates, or use the phone as if she had an 
internal smart phone and a wireless connection. 


¢ Skeletal Enhancement 
Enlightenment N/A, Primal Energy N/A, 
Background Cost 2 pts. 

This essential modification reinforces a cyborg’s bones 
and ligaments. Without it, an organic body can’t withstand the 
stresses of cybernetic hardware and its often-violent applications. 

System: Any Enhancement worth three dots or more 
demands this Enhancement as well. Without it, the character 
takes a level of aggravated damage every time he uses a cybernetic 
weapon or protection. This mod also gives the cyborg two extra 
Bruised health levels and may be purchased as a biomod as well. 


ee Bio-Cloakin$ 
Enlightenment 4, Primal Energy 20, Background 
Cost 6 pts. 

Invisible cyborgs? Not quite - the Union’s still working 


on that level of technology. Still, the bio-cloaking mod allows a 
cyborg to bend light and sounds around her body, bestowing a 


limited form of silence and concealment while the exo moves 
herself into position or makes a quick escape... 


System: Each success rolled from the Enlightenment dice 
pool adds +1 to the difficulty of all Perception-based efforts to 
find the cyborg. Alternately, the player could use her successes 
to reduce the difficulty of her Stealth or hiding rolls. (You 
can’t, however, add to and subtract from a difficulty at the 
same time - choose one or the other.) This cloaking function 
costs one Quintessence per turn. 


eee Drimium Countermeasures 
Enlightenment N/A, Primal Energy N/A, 
Background Cost 4/6/8/10 pts. 


To foil the Arts of Reality Deviants, the Technocracy has 
developed a microweave modification that implants flexible 
Primium underneath the skin of its valued agents. Even after two 
decades of experimentation, no other faction has successfully 
duplicated or countered the Union’s formula for Primium, 
which suggests that Technocracy scientists maintain a constant 
process of innovation and perfection with that material and its 
many applications. This, of course, renders it very expensive; 
the Union doesn’t waste such resources on just anyone, and 
it expects great things and unswerving loyalty from an agent 
implanted with such modifications. 


System: A Primium-implanted character has several dice of 
innate countermagick. Four points buy two dice of protection, 
six points buy three dice, eight points buy four, and 10 points 
secure five. Even in the 21* century, a character MUST be a 
Technocrat in good standing in order to enjoy the benefits of 
Primium. If an apparently disloyal cyborg earns an extraction 
penalty, this mod will be the first thing the technicians remove. 


eee Implanted Plasma Cannon 


Enlightenment 6/8, Primal Energy 30/40, 
Background Cost 9/11 pts. 


Yes, it’s true that Iteration X has been scaling back its more 
obvious warmongering in recent years. Even so, when some 
obnoxious RD needs to have his skin seared off, nothing but 
this beast will do. 


Implanted within the cyborg’s arm and back, a plasma 
conversion/ acceleration system extends along her reinforced 
bones. Upon activation, this system refines Primal Energy into 
superheated plasma, blazes up around her hand, and delivers 
the sort of unpleasant surprise that has made Iteration X the 
first and last name in havoc since roughly 1900. 


System: The player makes a Dexterity + Energy Weapons 
roll to deploy this nasty bit of business. Against a roughly man- 
sized target, the difficulty to hit is 7. To activate the cannon, 
the player rolls the device’s Enlightenment against a difficulty 
based upon whether the blast is coincidental (difficulty 6), vulgar 
(7), or vulgar with witnesses (8). Even in the new millennium, 
this sort of thing is vulgar as fuck; only in a Technocracy 
Construct or some regions of the Umbra would such an attack 
be considered a coincidence. 


Appendix Il: Odd Ends — 659 


ZA 


lls A 
CinP/ ^ ^ 
» 
a. | 
| 
| 
p 
" 


Each discharge costs one point of Primal Energy. This mod 
comes in two versions, both of which have been upgraded from 
their late-90s applications: a six-dice model and an eight-dice 
model. Both inflictaggravated damage and havea nasty tendency 
to bring down Paradox, buildings, and the local constabulary. 


Biomods and Genegineering Modifications 


Bigger, better, faster, more. The industrial consumer ideal finds 
its reflection in the endless innovations of biotech. Whereas 
Iteration X pursues perfection through the interface between 
humanity and machines, the messier sciences of bioengineering 
fall under the rubric of the Progenitors and their allies among 
the Syndicate and NWO. The various mutations, biomods, 
and constructs favored by these conventions tend to be less 
obvious than the traditional steelskin exojocks... except when 
they’re not, in which case they get locked away in secluded 
laboratories until their special talents become necessary. The 
Void Engineers, of course, use both cybernetics and biomods, 
and other factions sometimes play around with bio-adjustments 
as well. Like cybernetics, however, the Technocracy has a definite 
edge when it comes to biotechnology. 


Story-wise, organic biomods come in several varieties: genetic 
engineering, which facilitates organic mutations; biomodifications, 
which add new organic features to an existing body, and 
xenotransplants, which graft pieces of weird beasties (aliens, 
werecritters, vampires, and so forth) onto the bodies of humans 
and other familiar animals. All three require extensive - and 
often excruciating - laboratory work, although certain hot-ticket 
biomods can be added or removed with minimal fuss... minimal 
by biomod standards, anyway. And the majority of them reach 
beyond the boundaries of Sleeper medicine, although such 
borders keep shifting further every day. 


Rules-wise, biomods follow the same essential rules as 
cybernetics. They re covered by the Enhancements Background 
and cost character points to install in an existing character. 
Unlike cybernetics, however, biomods become organic fixtures 
in the character - they cannot be yanked out with Life magick, 
fouled by spells, cut off without surgical removal (although the 
definition of “surgery” can be rather crude), or shorted out 
with electricity or other Forces-based attacks. 


Paradox and Flaws 

Subtle biomods appear perfectly normal. Paradox strikes 
only if the character displays obviously unnatural qualities 
(wings, gills, extra limbs, and so forth) or performs activities 
that defy rational explanation. Given the popularity of media 
superheroes, though, and the many powers attributed to 
advanced medicine, “rational explanation” is quite a bit more 
flexible than it used to be. 


* Biomod Flaws: Because of the unnatural effect of 
biomods on an organism’s Pattern, a character with 
obvious biomodifications (wings, claws, gills, scaly skin, 
and the like) suffers both the normal permanent Paradox 
points (one per dot) and one Genetic Flaw to reflect 
the effects of those alterations upon the character’s 
physique. A character with invisible biomods (boosted 


Mage: The Ascension 20" Anniversary Edition 


Traits, tough skin, pheromones, etc.) doesn’t suffer from 
Paradox, but he must take one point of Genetic Flaws 
per dot in the Enhancements background. 


* Genegineering Flaws: Enlightened Science allows 
Genegineer Progenitors to create biomodifications at 
the genetic level. These mods aren’t showy, cannot be 
removed, and do not incur Paradox. Instead, each dot 
in a genegineered Enhancement requires one point in 
Genetic Flaws - chronic ailments, behavioral tics, and 
other symptoms of organic unease. 


Although a biomodded character doesn’t have to take the 
Construct Flaw (see p. 647), the social ramifications of that 
Flaw reflect the often alienated temperament of people who’ve 
been altered at the very level of their existence. 


Advantages as Biomods 

Common biomods can be purchased as the Advantage 
Traits described above. Other Advantages that aren’t in this 
book - extra limbs, dimensional phasing (that is, the ability 
to step sideways), and so forth - can be purchased with your 
Storyteller's approval. These Advantages might also include 
xenotransplants, which go beyond the scope of Mage 20. A 
more extensive treatment of those biomods can be found in 
Convention Book: Progenitors, pps. 70-72. 


Unlike cybernetics, biomods do not use Enlightenment or 
cost Quintessence to employ. Because they’re integral parts of 
the body, they simply work whenever needed. A range of sample 
biomods includes (but is not limited to) the following options: 


Enhanced Pheromones 
Background Cost variable 


By boosting and enhancing the body’s natural social 
chemistry, Progenitor physicians can help an agent seem more 
enticing or intimidating. By programming his innate scent, the 
biomodded operative sends out subtle but potent cues about 
dominance, availability, or submission... and because he’s not 
casting spells in the magickal sense, his targets won’t realize 
just how deeply they’re being played. 


System: For every point spent on this biomod, the character 
gains two additional dice for certain Social-based dice pools, 
provided that he’s got an opportunity to turn on the charm 
and let his pheromones do the work. Although such chemistry 
experiments don’t confer Talents and Skills he does not already 
possess, they do add to his attempts at Etiquette, Expression, 
Intimidation, Leadership, Style, Subterfuge, and, of course, 
Seduction. 


Environmental Sustainability Adjustment 
Background Cost 3 pts. 


Behind that awkward moniker lies a simple yet useful 
modification: the ability to survive extremes of heat, cold, high 
(or low) pressure, underwater or deep-space environments, and 
other hostile climates. Each type of environment, however, 
requires a different sort of modification: the ability to breathe 


underwater won't get you through Death Valley unscathed. 


System: Story element: your character can survive an 
environment that would probably (or certainly) kill a normal 
human being. As an extra bonus, you double your effective 
Stamina Trait when soaking damage from the environment you 
were engineered to survive - fire for heat-adaptation, vacuum 
for space-adaptation, and so forth. Unlike other biomods, this 
one can verge into the vulgar spectrum if the agent is doing 
something she shouldn’t be able to endure; holding your breath 
for an absurd amount of time is one thing, but surviving a blast 
furnace ora nuclear bomb detonation is another thing entirely! 


Facial Reconstruction 
Background Cost 2 pts. 


Advanced plastic surgery techniques allow Progenitors to 
craft facial structures and features that can be switched out with 
an hour or two under the knife. Such facial reconstructions 
require asmall geneticsample from the party being impersonated 
(assuming that the disguise duplicates a particular individual), 
and might include profound shifts of bone structure, skin 
pigmentation, and muscular configuration. Even without the 
surgery, an agent treated with this biomod can rearrange his 
features at will - not well enough to assume another person's 
identity, but with alterations that might allow him to pass for 
someone other than the person he normally is. 


System: After Progenitor surgery, the character's features 
add +2 to the difficulty of all attempts to see through the disguise. 
Even without surgery, the agent reduces his own difficulty on 
rolls to remain unrecognized by -3. 


Physical Structure Enhancement 
Background Cost varies 


Perhaps the most common sort of biomod (or, for that 
matter, cybernetic enhancement) strengthens the agent’s bones, 
muscles, nerves, ligaments, and other organs. Available at many 
levels of customization, such alterations raise a human being 
(or other organism) to heroic heights of physicality. Brave 
Progenitors and lab-grown Victors display amazing physiques, 
but they often seem too perfect, as if their bodies had been 
Photoshopped... which really isn’t far from the truth. 


System: As described in the Genegineering section of 
the Enhancements Background entry, this biomod allows 
you to raise your character’s Strength, Dexterity, Stamina, 
Appearance, Perception, or Health Trait beyond normal 
human limits. Genegineering and cybernetics can also raise 
Intelligence, though biomodifications cannot. The cybernetic 
enhancements can be removed, but for the organic ones, such 
removal is impossible. 


Sensory Enhancers 
Background Cost 3-5 pts. 

Thanks to altered sensory organs, an agent can enhance her 
senses to inhuman acuity. The basic biomod simply heightens 
the existing human senses. With a little extra work, however, 
the Progenitors can expand upon the human sensory range, 


opening up the infrared and ultraviolet spectra, high frequencies 
of sound, and amazing levels of tactile or olfactory perception. 


System: At its basic level, this mod gives the character 
the higher-level Acute Senses Merit. The expanded version of 
sensory enhancement, however, allows the player to purchase 
the Nightsight Advantage or some equivalent of that ability 
that applies to taste, smell, hearing, or touch. 


Weird Science 


Whereas the Technocracy specializes in sleekly standardized 
hardware, the inventive creations of Etherites, VAs, and other 
visionary technologists can be quite unique. Although a given 
inventor might mass-produce a useful widget, most weird 
scientists tackle their pet theories with swashbuckling élan and 
stubborn individuality. 


eee The DDGR Card (Device/ Gadget) 
Arete 5, Quintessence N/A, Background Cost 1 pt. 
(per card) 


Crafted by an anonymous (go figure...) Virtual Adept, this 
walletsized hackattack has found its way into all kinds of eager 
little hands, Awakened and otherwise. For all the world, the 
DDGR (Dirt-DiGgeR) card looks like a typical debit card. Inserted 
into a bank’s Automated Teller Machine, however, it scans for 
the most recent questionable activities on behalf of that bank’s 
executive board. Within seconds, the activated trawler program 
skims its way past the usual protections and digs up dirt. Because 
the bank’s usual protective networks have been designed to foil 
theft, the DDGR program remains unrecognized as a threat. 
When the ATM spits out the user’s receipt, the information on 
it details the names, amounts, and hinky activities associated 
with that bank within the last week. And because bank executives 
always seem to be pulling some kind of shit (especially in the 
World of Darkness), that information comes in very handy... 
especially for activist bloggers, journalists, and hackers with a 
few scores to settle with the local elite. 


System: A conjunctional Data/ Forces/ Mind Effect digs 
up the latest dirt. Essentially, this is a story element, although 
a Storyteller who wants to have the player roll for the card’s 
efficiency can use the card’s Arete as a roll versus difficulty 7. 
Each success turns up one nasty deed and the associated guilty 
parties. The card remains coincidental unless some Sleeper 
who’s not hip to the DDRG’s true purpose happens to see the 
receipt, at which point the card’s Effect incurs three Paradox... 
and possibly a call to the police. Each DDGR card works only 
once, hence the low Background cost; after that, the trace 
program spontaneously erases itself to avoid detection. 


eee Kid Kimota’s Jovian Thundergloves 
(Device) 
Arete 6, Quintessence 30, Background Cost 9 pts. 


In the dwindling days of the last century, when HIT Marks 
stalked the night and the Pogrom boiled at an intensity not 
seen since the Second World War, Kid Kimota - an Etherite 
of blazing wit and perspicacious vocabulary - decided to fight 


Appendix Il: Odd Ends 66l 


IASA 


1 
i 
r3 


back. While the citadels of his many allies were falling to 
the mechanized hordes, Kid Kimota perfected a number of 
thunderbolt-hurling Devices, configured to deploy a variety 
of electronic assaults. When the HIT Marks arrived, Kid 
Kimota and his surviving allies made their Olympian stand. 
The resulting Paradox storm wiped both sides off the Earth... 
but several Jovian Thundergloves have since reappeared in the 
possession of various mages whose nerve outweighs their sense 
of self-preservation. 


Using advanced technologies to draw upon and amplify 
static electricity (not to mention using quantum gates to draw 
power from remote Tesla coils), the Jovian Thundergloves 
concentrate phenomenal power into compact, wearable, 
and - dare we say it? - elegant accessories. Although each 
Thunderglove has a slightly different configuration, caused 
by Kid Kimota's rather rushed production time, each one 
resembles an insulated gauntlet of metal, leather, and glass. 
Once primed (a process that demands half a minute to 
activate the quantum gates), the glove can discharge a bolt 
of staggering electrical force once every few seconds. The 
attack is, of course, vulgar in the extreme. When devastating 
measures are called for, of course, the Jovian Thunderglove 
makes a magnificently unsubtle choice. 


System: The glove's attack combines a Forces 3/ Prime 2 
lightning bolt (six dice, aggravated damage - see Electrocution 
in Chapter Nine, p. 438-439) with a Correspondence 3/ Forces 
2 Effectthat pulls the electricity from the Tesla coil (which should 
be situated some distance away from the Thunderglove's user). 
Given the titanic voltage involved, electronic systems hit by this 
discharge are quite likely to go offline... possibly for good. The 
glove's insulation protects the wearer from electricity so long as 
she's not grounded, wet, or otherwise conducting electricity. If she's 
foolish enough to use the glove while in a selfconductive state, 
that character takes the full amount of damage herself. As Kid 
Kimota will attest if his ghost can be reached for comment, this 
weapon isn't exactly the ticket to a long and prosperous career. 


The massive Tesla coil that powers the Thunderglove must 
remain accessible to the weapon's user. The glove itself adds 
three dice of bashing damage to a punch, and it can conduct a 
single six-die blast of static electricity in a hand-to-hand attack 
before it discharges its self-contained power. Beyond that, the 
Jovian Thunderglove is more or less useless on its own. To 
access its full power (and its Quintessence supply), the wielder 
needs to own one of Kid Kimota's Tesla coils and generators 
as well as the glove. 


Access to the coil gives your character up to 25 
Quintessence per hour, assuming thatthe generator's running 
the whole time. Each blast drains one Quintessence and 
requires two turns between blasts so that the glove's delivery 
system can build up and channel a new charge to the glove. 
As noted earlier, this Device is vulgar - both because of the 
massive electrical charge involved and because of the gateway 
Effect that allows the lightning to jump from the generator 
to the glove without passing through the intervening space. 
On a botch, VERY bad things happen. Don't botch with this 
weapon. Really, don't... 


Ma$e: The Ascension 20^ Anniversary Edition 


eeeec Madness Grenade 
(Fetish/ Talisman) 


Arete 7, Quintessence N/A, Background Cost 10 pts. 
(per case of five) 


Spectra Widow 6, an agent of the Chaioth Ha-Quadesh 
division Team 23, devised a horrific party favor: the Balath- 
Qada Madness Grenade. Once you pull the pin and hurl this 
gibbering sphere of glassine dementia (filled with insanity 
spirits) to a suitable location, the sphere explodes, releasing a 
blast of concentrated chaos. Witnesses have likened that blast 
toascreaming blacklight rainbow-storm, whatever that means... 
In the aftermath, mechanical systems run haywire, material 
substances crumble, and living things go stark batshit crazy. 
Mages caught in the blast can sometimes resist the worst effects 
of this insanity. Other folks aren’t quite so lucky. 


System: Each madness grenade contains a spiritual wasp- 
nest of furious Umbrood, seething with hatred for everything 
alive. When freed, this compressed ball of chaos unleashes a 
combined Entropy 5/ Mind 4/ Matter 3 explosion of madness 
and decay. The spirits merely provide a focus for the Effect 
itself, which spreads out over a radius of roughly 20 yards (or 
18 meters) around the center of the blast. 


The Arete of 7 activates an insanity-producing Mind 4 Effect, 
an ordershattering Entropy 5 Effect, a probability-skewing Entropy 
2 Effect, and a substance-cracking Entropy 3/ Matter 3 Effect. 
Essentially, anyone and anything within the blast radius is fucked 
unless it has countermagick or can resist the Mind Effect with 
Willpower. Mages and other Night-Folk stand a decent chance 
of avoiding the direct impact of the insanity wave (assume that 
each of the grenade's successes affects one character), but Sleepers 
might as well enjoy the ride - it’s probably gonna last a while. 


Thankfully, the grenade's Effects are extremely vulgar 
in Earth's material reality. The explosion part is perfectly 
coincidental, but the howling vortex of spirits and the 
subsequent wave of craziness are not exactly the sort of things 
you expectwhen a grenade goes off. In an Umbral environment, 
however, this is an especiallyvicious weapon - both coincidental 
and bound to attract spirits that want to join the fun. 


Obviously, each grenade works only once. The detonation 
entirely consumes the shell, spirits, and waves of insanity. The 
ripples of probability and mental disruption echo around the 
blastzone for the normal Duration (as per the Base Damage 
or Duration chart); the Matter devastation is permanent, of 
course, and the insanity might be permanent as well if the 
grenade's Arete rolls five successes or more. For more details 
about madness - singular and en masse - see Sanity Sinks in 
Chapter Five, (p. 242), and Things Man Was Not Meant to 
Know in Chapter Nine, (p. 407). 


eeeec The Rebooter Self-Retrieval 
Bio-Printer (Device/ Artifact) 
Arete 8, Quintessence 40, Not Available for Purchase 


Knownsnarkilyas The Get Out of Death Free Card, the ultimate 
3D printer allows a mage to reboot herself after an apparent death. 


It's not the first resurrection device, of course - such attempts to 
sidestep mortality are almost as old as magick itself. The Rebooter, 
though, utilizes technology of an edge so keen it defies tired 
metaphors. Inspired by the endless survivability of comic-book 
heroes and villains, the multiple lives of video-game characters, and 
the selfdownloading hypertech innovations for online immersion, 
a cabal of unknown Masters crafted the Rebooter. Rumors credit 
Dante, Dr. Volcano, Heasha Morningblade, Raging Eagle, X-Chel, 
Doc Eon, Kibo, the Rogue Council, and even Archmaster Porthos 
with the invention, but the truth behind its manufacture remains a 
deeply occulted secret. Shortly after the Los Angeles Convocation 
of 2001, however, these machines began appearing in Tradition 
Chantries across the mortal world. No one knows who installed 
them, nor has any credible source for them appeared as of yet. The 
exact number of them remains unknown, but the most accurate 
count puts the existing Rebooter units at 10 - one foreach Tradition 
within the Council, plus one left as an enduring mystery. 


Essentially a gigantic printer filled with cartridges of raw, 
Quintessence-rich biomass, the Rebooter employs computerstored 
data to recreate the dead mage from backup files made when that 
mage was alive. Obviously, the rebooted person must allow her 
innermost self to be downloaded into the Rebooter's memory 
before she dies. The printer spins out the reconstituted self and 
"bakes" it in a complex process of arcane technologies that takes 
three days. (Clearly, the creators of this Artifact had a poetic sense 
ofhumor...orsomething...) Oncerebooted, the mage emerges from 
a large bath-cylinder where the respawned body has been formed. 
That new self exists in the state that mage occupied when she was 
downloaded into the data banks, without subsequent memories, 
skills, or attachments. For that reason, among others, mages who 
are aware of the Rebooter's existence like to update their personal 
files as often as possible. Of course, the possibility that those files 
might be hacked hangs over anyone who has allowed herself to be 
downloaded into the printer's database. Those precious Rebooters 
are heavily secured, of course... but, as any hacker knows, any data 
that can be accessed will be accessed... 


System: A monumental Life 5/ Mind 5/ Prime 5/ Spirit 5/ 
Time4 Effect recreates the character from her save point, reconstitut- 
ing her body, memories, soul, personal essence, and sense of self at 
the momentwhen she downloaded them into the Rebooter (hence, 
the Time4 component). This feat goes far beyond the Technocracy's 
clonechambers because the self created by the Rebooter includes 
a bit of the real mage's soul - a feature the Union cannot bring 
itself to accept. Hence, this Artifact can be used only by Awakened 
mages whose beliefs include both mysticism and hypertech. The 
Rebooter is an abomination to sheer faith (for which the machine 
usurps the power of divinity) and science (for which its functions 
remain impossible). Only magick that's composed of all things can 
explain the miracles this machine performs. 


That doesn't mean that the Rebooter is perfect. A reboot 
uses the machine's entire store of Quintessence points - 30 
for the mage, 10 for the process - which means that it must 
be refueled with massive amounts of energy whenever anyone 
uses it. Each time a mage respawns, she earns one point of 
permanent Paradox. Some of her memories and emotions glitch 
after each reconstitution, thanks to miniscule imperfections 
in the data. That mage returns to her save point without the 
Traits she had upgraded since that point; her Arete, Spheres, 
Abilities, and so on are as she left them when she downloaded 
that bit of herself into the machine. Oddly enough, however, 
certain distinctdifferences appear in her respawned self - quirks 
of personality and appearance that were not there when she 
existed in her previous incarnation. Those differences might 
be puzzling to the mage herself, who has no explanation for 
where they might have come from. And folks who knew her 
well might notice those differences and begin to wonder what 
happened to the friend they once knew... 


Above all, the new incarnation bears a hint of existential 
dread. After all, if she exists now, that means that she once 
died... and that she lived some part of her life that is now lost 
forever. Add to that the various philosophical conundrums 
about identity, self, and the place of magick, faith, and science 
in a world where machines can reconstruct your soul, and 
you've got a mage who's thankful to be alive but uncertain 
about what that life might mean. 


There's always a chance, of course, that the mage won't have 
to worry about that. A failed roll means that the respawning 
attempt failed and must be attempted again... with a +1 difficulty 
modifier added, thanks to glitches in the software, hardware, 
and materials. A botch fouls the process forever, erasing the 
mage’s saved identity and preventing any form of reconstitution 
from that point onward. The machine is vulgar, of course, 
anywhere outside a Sanctum or Horizon Realm whose internal 
reality accepts fusions of magick, faith, and science. And the 
reappearance of a person who was considered dead could raise 
some uncomfortable questions - especially if that person is 
younger than the person her associates recall, lacking memories 
of the time between her save point and apparent demise, and 
most especially if her demise was spectacular enough that “no 
one could have survived THAT." 


Still, life is life, and new starts can be wonderful things. The 
Rebooter might invite tangled questions about past and present, 
but it offers a future where none had seemed possible before. 
A mage restored to life experiences a fresh sense of purpose, 
tempered with mortality and the understanding that nothing 
is forever. If nothing else, then, the Rebooter’s existence just 
goes to show that you can’t keep a good mage down. 


663 


Appendix Il: Odd Ends 


IA 7 


A 


saf 
r ue 
V 2 
n 

y^ T ENG 


ak 


Whiting is a curious endeavor, swerving from moments of splendid delirium into others of stunned puzzlement, 
and from there into stretches of calm, focused craft. 


— David Abram, Becoming Animal: An Earthly Cosmology 


We published the first edition of Mage: The Ascension in 
1993, but the game was effectively born in 1991, ahead of the 
release of the first game set in our World of Darkness, Vampire: 
The Masquerade. That's when my partner Mark Rein * Hagen 
and I decided that Vampire would be the first of a five-book 
sequence of games. Werewolf would be second in 1992, and 


Mage third in 1993 [1]. 


To begin the process of tying the games together, we 
included the Tremere as a clan in Vampire. The Tremere are 
magi from the Order ofthe Hermes who originate in Ars Magica, 
a game that White Wolf owned at that time, and so we knew 
that somehow the remainder of the Order of Hermes would 
be included in Mage. 


And so, effectively, Mage was born. 


Noteverything with the World of Darkness went according 
to our 1991 plans. We didn't know yet that every WoD game 
would have a colon in the title. Ghost turned into Wraith: The 
Oblivion, and Faerie became Changeling: The Dreaming. 
There was one thing that remained unwavering: My desire to be 
the development lead on Mage. It was the World of Darkness 
concept that sang to me. 


Initially, I was primarily determined to revolutionize magic 
in roleplaying games. I was determined that the magic system 
would represent more than just a codification of powers for 
characters. No matter how elaborate or elegant the magic systems 
in prior games, they all seemed to be extensions of the game 
systems, and not of the game worlds. At White Wolf, setting was 
a predilection that guided many of our design decisions. So 


664 Ma$e: the Ascension 20" Anniversary Edition 


EN 


I felt the magic system needed to arise from the setting, and 
that meant creating a comprehensive metaphysic that served 
both as a philosophical basis for the setting and a mechanical 
basis for the magick system. Yes, now with a "k". 


In 1992, once Werewolf: The Apocalypse was through 
the development process, I turned my attention to Mage. 
After dealing with the Kindreds’ Gehenna and the Garou's 
Apocalypse for the past two years, I made an essential decision 
for Mage: The game would be essentially uplifting. Where 
Golconda was a state few vampires desired, Ascension would 
be the aspiration of every mage. 


For a year I buried myself in Mage [2]. I spent 16 hours 
a day absorbing texts of all sorts, and then waited as all the 
concepts bubbled double, double, toil and trouble-style. I pitched 
the initial results of this process to my White Wolf cohorts, and 
then proceeded to recruit co-creators. Christopher Earley and 
my brother Steve Wieck were the most important of these, and 
both wrote substantial sections in the first edition of the game. 


Thelynchpin in thecreation process was the development of 
theideaofcoincidental magick. This single conceptbridged the 
divide between the game as theory and the game in execution, 
the metaphysics of reality and the mechanics of the game-system 
in play. The concept tied magick not just to the setting, but 
also made the ongoing use of the magick system an integral 
part of the cooperative storytelling process that was central to 
White Wolf's roleplaying conceits. 


When I spearheaded Mage: The Ascension 20 years ago, 
I assumed that I would go on to author or design a number of 


. 


additional works. As assumption transforms into hindsight, I see 
that Mage still stands as my magnum opus. I'm not distressed 
by that thought for two reasons. The less-important of them is 


. theconviction that I have other great works forthcoming. More 


importantis the heartfelt understanding that Mage completely 
gratifies me and my fellow creators, and I could not ask for any 
greater accomplishment with an artistic work than to touch in 
a profound way such a large number of people. 


The reality of changing people's lives is surely the ultimate 
achievement of a game about changing reality. 


Stewart Wieck 
Houston, TX 


1. The fact that many to most of you are reading this on a screen — 
very likely a portable screen — is, from a 1993 perspective, the domain 
of the Virtual Adepts. At that time, we didn't even have a website. 


2. Almost literally, at least as we joked. Richard Thomas and 
I, at one point, contemplated a plan to circulate a rumor that I had 
died during the writing and that my ashes were mixed. with the paper 
pulp used to print the book. 


The dude on the bus looked like a future Me - not the Me 
Iam today, roughly 22 years later, happy and healthy and just a 
tad overweight, buta MeI could have been had I continued on 
the path I was trudging along back in 1993. That dude looked 
miserable, haggard, utterly without hope. And yeah, 22 years 
ago, that's exactly how I felt. The details aren't important. 
Let's just say I was one sad motherfucker. And seeing that 
dude sitting across from me on the bus, I thought Oh my gods, 
I don't ever want to look like that. 


Now, by that time I had already ensconced myself with this 
brawling little startup called White Wolf Game Studio. Thanks 
to my college friend and gaming-buddy Bill Bridges, I'd been 
hammering away on a handful of Werewolf: The Apocalypse 
sourcebooks in addition to another handful of short stories and 
magazine articles in other venues. Those gigs, however, were 
most assuredly not paying the bills. And so I was grinding away 
at an ironic day-job, selling shoes (which I loathe) at “Virginia’s 
Largest Shoe Store.” Anyone who’s read “Food for Wyrms” in 
Freak Legion: A Players Guide to Fomori knows how I felt 
about that job... and about my life in general. (Thank all the 
gods I did not have kids.) 


I needed to Get. Out. 


On the “advice” of Joseph Campbell (courtesy of my old 
friends John and Laurie Robey), I took a few weeks off and 
went to go visit my college friend Jennifer Starling out in San 
Francisco. There, I underwent a “bust down the doors” ritual 
so that I could get through the blocks that were ruining my life. 


A few days after my return, I told Bill that I wanted to apply 
for the Mage Line Developer position. “You don’t want this 
job,” Bill told me. “It’s harder than you can possibly believe.” 


“My life is hell,” I told him. “Anything is an improvement.” 
And y'know what? I got it. And it was. 
Three days before Gen Con 93, Stewart Wieck called me 


at work to offer me the job. Within 24 hours, I was on a plane 
to Atlanta, and shortly afterward, Ken Cliffe handed me the 
first copy of Mage: The Ascension to come back from the 
press. “It’s all yours,” he told me. “We don’t have the slightest 
idea what to do with it.” 


Ispent the next five years figuring outwhere to take that line. 


Mage became my life, my labor, my lover, my quest. With 
a wildly creative crew, we made magick, mistakes, and miracles. 
Kathleen Ryan, Brian Campbell, Mark Jackson, Sam Chupp, 
Beth Fischi, Rachelle Udell, Rich Thomas, Heather McKinney 
(now known as Echo Chernik), J. Porter Wiseman, Jackie Cassada 
and Nicky Rea, Deena McKinney, Allen Varney, Bill Bridges, 
Jim Estes, James A. Moore... We brainstormed at all hours, 
beat our heads and hearts against metaphysical conceits. And 
somehow, we turned one of the most crazily ambitious RPGs 
ever created into an award-winning epic about “reality on the 
brink.” We did some great stuff, some awful stuff, and a lot of 
stuff in between. By the time I handed Mage off to Jesse Heinig 
in late 1998, that purplejacketed enigma had racked up over 
50 volumes and changed a lot of lives... my own life most of all. 


In the many years since I encountered Mage, I’ve talked to 
lots of people whose lives have been transformed by the things 
we crafted and the ideas we put out there on the gaming table. 
It means more to me than I can say (and as this book shows, 
I can say quite a bit!) to learn how influential our work has 
been. And so - to all of you - THANK YOU. Thanks to all of 
our collaborators, all of our fans, all the many, many friends 
I have made in these last 22 years. Thank you, Stewart, and 
thank you, Bill. 


And thank you also, whoever you are, Sad Old Dude On 
The Bus. I'm not sure whether you actually existed or whether 
you were some sort of self-projection - some Phil-Of-Futures- 
Yet To-Come sent to me in order to get me to change the path 
I was on back then. Whoever you might have been, I hope you 
got your happy ending. I certainly got mine, and as the days 
roll by, I appreciate it even more. 


To all of you reading these words right now, I wish you 
magick, hope, and love. 


Never let your world destroy the miracle you can be. 
Satyros Phil Brucato 
Seattle, WA 


Afterwords 665 


I remember being knocked down and laughed at as I 
walked to the mall to buy Mage: The Ascension 20 years 
ago. I can still hear the other teenagers laugh at the nerd 
who was awkwardly ambling towards the book store. I 
remember climbing back into the car after my purchase. 
My father asking me why I was crying. I never told him. 


That night, I buried myself between the purple covers of 
this great game. I wanted to get away from reality. I wanted to 
be someone else. Mage wouldn’t let me. It taught me about 
paradigms, reality, and what it truly meant to be Awakened. 
All the power of the universe lay in my own perceptions. It 
taught me to forge my own reality. Not with Spheres, not with 
rotes (as badass as those things are), but with thoughts. From 
those thoughts came actions. And those actions created the 
reality I experience today, and all the gifts in it. My wife, my 
home, my sense of who I am, all started on that day in 1994 
when a geeky high school freshman Awakened. 


James Michael Spahn (Greensboro, North Carolina) 


We tell stories about ourselves. That’s the “paradigm” we 
weave to make sense of coincidences, accidents, and just or 
unjustacts. We lash them to ideas about howwe think the world 
works. Mage is our storytelling life on a cosmic scale, with pulp, 
occult, and SF embellishments to intrigue and tempt us into 
grandiose dreams: kickass adventures and the trap of hubris. 


To me, Ascension’s message is that no myth, paradigm, 
prop, focus or trope can replace compassion: listening to stories 
outside of our experience, acting on them for love or justice, and 
drawing the threads into a rope stronger than any single belief. 


Malcolm Sheppard (Toronto, Ontario) 
Mage: The Ascension line author (Revised Edition) 


Mage is a gem in the sea of broken glass we commonly call 
“entertainment.” Before I had happened upon an old copy of 
Mage in a used-book store - work that showed us love, hate, 
and finding the meanings of power and godhood - it seemed 
as though such things were all left to the past, to be partitioned 
out by state institutions and argued over by academics. Mage 
showed meauniqueworld of freedom (and limitations) thatwas 
interactiveand commutative beyond traditional understandings 
of such. It showed me that games could be art. 


Dustin McPherson (San Diego, CA) 


Once upon a time, someone introduced me to the Mighty 
Purple Books. It was a dark period at my life, and I lacked 
hope. Reading Mage, playing it, I found my best friends and 
I changed my perspective. In a world where YOU can shape 
reality with your own hands, I found hope. Mage is about 
willing a better world for yourself, about changing reality and 
fighting for what you truly believe. I can’t see a better fable for 
the days in which we are living. BELIEVE! And for everything 
else... don’t forget your fireball. 


Emili Lemanski (Santa Maria, Brazil) 


666 Mage: The Ascension 20" Anniversary Edition 


Mage gave me the ability to put my true inner self into a 
character I loved to play. Over the years, more and more of that 
innerselfthatwasoriginallyexpressed in my character Tachete has 
become the evolving being that has become my public selfas well. 


Hope Basoco (Phoenix, AZ) 


Dante was/ is me. He is a young Black technophile with 
a smartass mouth, and just enough power to get himself in/ 
out of trouble. So if you can "bend" reality, do some good. Do 
good even if that means shaking off some Paradox. That means 
you're doing it right. If you are playing Mage, and the stakes 
aren't epic in nature, then you are doing it wrong. We created 
Mage for elite storytellers. If reality really is a ^work in progress," 
then you got some work to do. Oh, and if anyone tells you 
“That ain't possible!" then congratulations. Dante approves. 


Travis L. "Dante" Williams (San Mateo, CA) 
Mage: The Ascension Author (1st Edition) 


Myjourneywith Mage: The Ascension began during my 
junior year as a religion major in college, when I discovered 
that the sourcebook was just as worthy of study as my theology 
textbooks. Not once have I merely "played" a Mage campaign 
- it’s more that the product line became reference material as 
I continued my education in both life and academia. It was 
that good, that complex and insightful. Fiction can explore 
in equal measure the fantastical and the possible, and like the 
best of the real-life mystics and sages its resounding message 
was this: Follow your own Path, and life fiercely. 


Sean-Michael Argo 
Filmmaker, Ember Days 


No kidding, this book taught me something I'll take to all my 
life: Hope. With heroes and anti-heroes, humans like ourselves who 
live their lives to change the world like they do, how can we not allow 
ourselves be “contaminated” by this belief as well? Okay, it’s just a 
game... but once you enter the world of Mage, you will understand: 
The Will can change the world - the World of Darkness, and our 
own world too. For all this, I’m eternally grateful to Mage. 


Eva Morrissey (Guarulhos, Brazil) 


The first time I grabbed Mage: The Ascension, | felt 
suspicious. I had long since given up on playing mage 
characters in roleplaying games, as I have never liked the 
closed lists of magical effects or powers, each to be triggered 
within each level of each school you have learned. However, 
I took a look at it... and then I could not stop until the 
end. Mage is not only an open-ended guide, but also a 
challenge to your imagination. It is as simple as This: If 
you have the knowledge and you have the means, then you can 
do it. So weave your own spells. The glory has always been 
there for you to get it. It’s yours. It’s you. 


Antoni Giménez (Barcelona, Spain) 


Twenty years ago, I’m hanging around with friends and 
one says, “Hey! I just got this new RPG. Let’s try it out.” And 
everything changed forever. I created a Goth Verbena named 


. Tantras. Silly, really, but when you're an angsty teen playing 


in the World of Darkness, this is what you come up with. 


Our first firefight, I have no combat skills, but I have 
Life 3: “Hey Eric? Life 3 says I can create simple invertebrates. Can 
I create a clam in that guy’s heart?” “Sure, why not? Roll for it.” 


As a result of that afternoon, I have become a longtime 


A game where you are a mage, in modern times, and with no spell- 
lists: That’s how Mage was introduced to me when I began playing 
RPG’s. Being the mage» type myself, I was instantly attracted to it. 
Iread it, I discussed it and, of course, I played and told stories with 
it. My first Mage character is someone I can’t forget. My best and 
most intense LARP moment occurred while playing a mage, and 
some of my most memorable gaming sessions - whether serious or 
just plain wacky - have all been related to Mage. And, of course, 
these experiences changed me and shaped me. Because, to me, 
it’s not about the Ascension anymore. It's about the Memories. 


player of World of Darkness, and more specifically of Mage: 
The Ascension. Who out there has never dreamed of a world 
that was different than the one we have? Belief is a powerful 
thing, and in dreaming we create a new world. So, thanks, folks, 
for giving us an unbelievable sandbox to create our worlds in. 


Julio Romacho (Madrid, Spain) 


Notonlyis Mage an awesome game for exploringa rich 
imaginative mythology and epic storytelling. If you hold 


Valentine Graves (Seattle, WA) 


Mage, for me, has always been one ofthe greatestand most 
intriguing games: a game about discovery, about philosophy, 
about thinking differently. It was original, itwas unique, and it 
wasn’t about killing the antagonist. However, it was also one of 
the hardest paradigms to master I have ever encountered in my 
careerasaStorytelleratconventions. It’s oftena misunderstood 
game, and I hope that M20 will incite the adults thatwe became 
to rethink the worlds - both the World of Darkness and also 
our own world, Reading and mastering the amazing paradigm 
of Mage has made me think over my existence in other terms 
- to go beyond my perspective and see a larger Reality. 


Emmanuelle Usselmann Nadin (World Citizen) 


I’ve always loved stories. Much of my childhood was spent 


your mind right, it also lends an unparalleled framework 
for pondering the reality Behind the fiction... and perhaps, 
if you're lucky, for finding a deeper connection to the very 
real magick that moves in our own world. 


Arjil (Central AR) 


In the 20-years plus of enchanting myself and others with 
roleplaying games, one encounter - an “Awakening,” if you will 
- took hold of my imagination, because Mage: The Ascension 
tackles the fragile balance between the fabric of reality and Magick. 
It engages all participants by bringing the shared experience of 
our imagination through storytelling, weaving our minds into 
a fabric - an embrace. Allowing us to seek that opening in the 
soul, where once we used to dwell when we were children and 
still believed in Magick. A gateway to visiting the world beyond 
our own and seeking the new wonders we may find there. 


Isabelle Hénault (Montreal, Quebec) 


absorbing comic books, movies, and television. My older brother 
initiated me in the art of the dungeon-crawl before I could shave. 
In high school, I encountered a purple book full of rules and 
ideas for telling stories of modern Magick and wonder. I spent 
the next several years surrounded by dice, empty coffee cups, 
and an ever-growing stack of purple books. My love of stories 
grew into a love of storytelling. Mage taught me to dream the 
impossible. Mage taught me to write. Mage taught me to believe. 


Mage has given me words for things I didn’t know there 
was a language for, ideas I had in my head but didn’t know 
anyone else could understand. We live in a world where 
growth is good but change is threatening. How do we balance 
this? Whether this is a society thing or a mechanical human 
function I don’t know - only that it’s part of the currently 


Travis Legge (Rockford, IL) 


www.aegisstudios.com 


Mage came at a time when I was still forming my 
worldview and metaphysics... and I cannot discount the 
impact it had on me. It was a confirmation that we have 
unlimited potential to create our own reality, as filtered 
by our perceptions. To this day, I see Mage’s philosophy 
confirmed in myself and in the people around me. Tending 
your paradigm can be intentional. Belief spawns reality. 
Because of Mage, I am so much more keenly sensitive of 
how my thoughts affect my life. Through roleplay, I’ve 
become able to practice intention within the real world. 


Miguel Eduardo Ludert (Richmond, VA) 


running program. Who knows which lines of code are old 
and which are new? It's a puzzle I’m still sorting out. Knowing 
that the cataclysm is coming, I feel a need to formalize my 
cabal - to bring the things I have learned from Mage into 
the daily practice of our own magic... Reading the first page 
of the Intro [to Mage 20], the best I can say to myself is: Stop 
whining, chica. Time-out’s over. Time to get back in the war. 


Coyote Ashley Ward (Woodbridge, VA) 


Afterwords 667 


I have so many amazing memories of Mage, from both 
tabletop and live-action games. Those stories opened a world 
of myth and dreams, the fine line between static reality and 
the unexplained universe. It gave me a place and a time to 
push mental and emotional boundaries, and play out the great 
"whatifs" that enchant and plague us. Mage gifted me with new 
eyes to really see all the beauty and possibility in our amazing 
world. I continue to share that dream with my children: the 
great gift of stories, myth, and unlimited possibility. 


Jenn Isyllt (Dallas, TX) 


I would not be the man I am without Mage. 


I discovered the game my first year in college. Though 
I was always a creative person in my youth, and was aware 
of various religions, the concept of Reality as a fluid 
construct fueled entirely by willpower did nothing short of 
crack open my intellectual and spiritual foundations. The 
game itself - with its story of personal enlightenment, the 
struggle to use that power to forge a new Creation - did 
more than simply present to me an alternative concept of 
Reality. It also drove me to create, and to think in ways 
that I would never have done before. Mage remade my 
concept of the world. For that, I will be forever grateful. 


Michael Shean (Springfield, VA) 


Magick is about how we become ourselves. Every path we 
choose leads us to the most exciting travel into us... but outside 
us, and that's a paradox! Ha-ha! We all are connected in many 
levels: our lives, our thoughts, our histories. And Mage brings 
us the convergence and joy of the extraordinary. I’m happy to 
be part of this world, happy to have made great friends playing 
this game. Let the Quintessence flow through our souls, and 
live! Good vibes and good luck for everyone! 


Thaynah "Young Phoenix" Leal (Pernambuco, Brazil) 


Ironic as it may sound, Mage is not about magick. 
Mage is about the Self and how we handle it. 


The questions that guide the Awakened along the 
Path to Ascension are the same fundamental questions 
that most "sleepers" ignore and some "awakened" dare 
to answer: Who am I, why I am, and what am I supposed to 
do with that “I”? 


Being yourself is a tough but rewarding task, and 
though it sounds easy, it is not. Everyday factors make 
us twist and turn ourselves upside down and inside-out, 
making us unwitting conformists of a larger, false- 
collective behavior. Mage, however, is about having the 
will to be your True Self regardless of circumstance, 
and about handling the power and responsibility that 
comes with it. 


In a few words, Mage is not about magick. Mage is 
about people... about us. 


Antonios Raven Galatis (Piraeus, Greece) 


Mage is freedom. Mage is the ability to be who you want 
to be for a day. It is the chance to walk a mile in someone 
else's shoes. It is the chance to be a hero or a leader. It is also 
the opportunity to become a challenge, to safely vent, and 
to see the world in a new light. In this world that makes you 
feel so small, so ordinary, Mage makes you feel important, 
needed, powerful, smart, strong and skilled. Who am I? I 
am a car-wash attendant; a nerd who was - until I joined 
the LARP community - very much alone. When I play 
Mage, I am Eris, Hierarch of the City of New Callicum, a 
leader of the mage community - a protector, a dark knight. 
Playing Mage was the best decision I have ever made, and the 
community has been the most loving and accepting group 
of people I have ever met. Mage is freedom. Your only limit 
is your imagination. 

Amy J. Redfern (Bellingham, Washington) 


Luse to think that Mage's books provided the ground to 
cease my agonies. But this is actually not true. After Mage, 
I am still confused, amazed, and scared. But I can point 
forth and say I have Awakened. Mage: The Ascension is 
indeed a game - a life-changing game. It changed the way 
I relate to people, ideas, and life itself. Like an endless 
stream of energy, it taught me that there is always more 
inside our souls, things which we can touch and share for 
a higher life experience. 


Thanks for making many years of our lives happier. 
I love you all. 


Rafael “Kaichkull” Mastromauro (Campinas, Sao Paulo, Brazil) 


IAY YOU RAISE YOUR EYES AND NEVER BOW/ YOUR HEAD 
W/E ARE NOT ALONE 
SJ. TUCKER, “Come TO. THE LABYRINTH” 


668 Mage: The Ascension 20" Anniversary Edition 


Gschiko 

Adam W. R. Martins 

Adan Smith 

Aleksandra Petreska 

Alexander Marshall 

Alice C. 

Ana Claudia Silva 

Andrea Gausman 

Andrew Kissinger 

Andrew McGrath 

Anna Elizabeth Hickok 
Archimedean Point Cabal - 
Cheshire, bani Virtual Adepts 
Archimedean Point Cabal - Elen 
Wu, bani Verbena 
Archimedean Point Cabal - Ethan 
Maynard, bani Hermes 
Archimedean Point Cabal - 
Hope Lambert, bani Verbena 
Archimedean Point Cabal - Lucas 
Diaz, bani Akashic 
Archimedean Point Cabal - 
Melissa Gardner, bani Hermes 
Archimedean Point Cabal - Rudy 
Ulrick, bani Dreamspeakers 
Archimedean Point Cabal - 
Samuel Damascus, bani Hermes 
Archimedean Point Cabal - Sara 
Lee, bani Ether 

Archimedean Point Cabal - 
Starshine, bani Ecstasy 

Ashley Skallicky 

Avram R. Shannon 

Bell-X 

Bookplate Ana 

Brandon Dee Rogers 

Brandon Lane 

Brandon Paul 

Brian Horstmann 

Bryan Allen Hickok 

Camila Montenegro bani 
Flambeau 

Carl Matheson, Son of Ether 


Awakened 
Roll Call 


Army of the Night 


Carol Darnell 

Charles Knight, Royal 
Ethernautical Society 
Chastity Pilgrim 

Chazz Kellner 

Chriss 

Christian Magnaghi 
Christofer Sandell 

CJ Romer 

Daniel Belmont 

Dann Kriss Games 

Darin Kerr 

David “Hollow One” Martinez 
Diego Segura Luengo 
Doc Eon 

Doctor Esoteric 

Dr Gertrude Primordium 
Dr. Anthony Maynard 

Dr. Joel McCall 
Dr.NAKAGAWA Kozi 
Edward Murphy 

Eric Minton 

Esper, the Quintessential 
Dimensional Crafter 
Ezekial Jones 

Frater Hormaku 

Gareth Hodges 

Glauco Vieira 

Grzegorz Kohorewicz 
Guardián de las Sombras, 
Doctor Steranko, Hijo del Eter. 
Guardian de las Sombras, 
Zacarias Fernandez, Coro 
Celestial 

Guardián de las Sombras, Alex 
Sánchez, Culto del Éxtasis 
Guardián de las Sombras, Tomas 
Díaz, Orden de Hermes 
Gwen Black 

Helen Febrie 

Horace Ashcroft 

Inky Grrl 

James Mendez Hodes 


Janya Levin 

Jarrell Fletcher 

Jay Collins 

Jefferson Silva de Almeida 
Jeremiah Quinn 

Jessica Dent 

Jessica Purdy 

Jim Schofield 

Joe Zavcer 

Joel "Lostkith" Cotton 

John 

John "King" Roberts 

John Bridges 

Johnny Applegoth 

Johnny Crow 

Jorge's Puppy 

Joseph Fong 

Joshua Curcuro 

JP Sugarbroad 

Julie Guérot 

Karina Gillis-Bugg 

Kimberley "Phoenix" Laycraft 
Ko Fong 

Kristastic 

Lillaine Morus 

Lillian Cohen-Moore 

Lincoln Cheah Zhuo Hua 
Lord Absinthe (Graham Alstan) 
Lord Cochise 

Lou Silvers 

Lucius Vayne 

Magister Mundi Lancelyn 
Verdery bani Bonisagus bani 
Order of Hermes, pars Quaesitor 
Magus Rex 

Maih Barahona 

Marcus Terrance, Order of 
Hermes House Esoterica-Thig, 
Son of Uktena and Marianna of 
Balador 

Mark Huba 

Matt M McElroy 

Matthew Broome 


à 


Matthew J. Locke 
Michael "Whalelover" Strumm 
Michael Tree 

Michelle Bradbeer 

Miranda Silva 

Mog 

Moreno Bianconcini 

Nina Elisaberh Blain 

Ol’ Nev 

Ophelia de Guerre 
Parallax.bat 

Parhelia Games 

Please do not list my name 
Rafael Verolla, the NWO agent 
Raffaele Passarelli 

Random 

Regina "Aqua Regia" Lisak 
Richard Downs 

Richard Hertz 

R'kaiyu 

Robert Daines 

Ronald Corn 

Sam Gunn 

Samantha Davis, Akashic 
Brotherhood, Ferryman and 
Dragon Emissary 

Samuel "Ness" Davis 
Samuel Brana-Soto 
Sandra Mitze Powell 
(Mirrorshades) 

Secret Agent John Courage 
Silas (Riley) Mason 

Simon Black 

Simon Linder 

Stephen Ball 

Stylianos Bakas 

Tadashi Wu 

Tauanui Stone 

Team Ether Toronto Chantry 
The Keeper of Crystalline 
Memory 

The Nikolaidis Family 
Thomas A. Schneider 


Kickstarter Backers 


mE dd 


669 y 


3 
-ağ 


~ 


Travis McFee - Cult of Ecstasy, 


of Time, Wanderer of the years 


the Highways of All-Time 


Adam Morgan 
Aislyn Dawkins, VA.RH 
C C Magnus Gustavsson 
| Davide Pongiluppi 
| | Duncan Brennan 
| Fahrenheit Desaier 
James Ebert 
Michael Lawson 
|... Will Rawson 


| Mark Sauren (XenOtech/ 
, X3nOXM /pithatharouse] 


Aaron Alberg 

Aaron Westphal 

Abie Ekenezar 

Adalhart "Window Jumper" 
Travers 

Adam "Magus" Loyd 
Aelinea 

Ajoxer 

Alan-Michael Havens 
Alessandro Masi 
Alessandro Vario 

Alex T Dillon 

Alexander Lucard 
Alexander Williams 
Alexander Y. Hawson 
Alexis Hastings 

Álvaro "Galael" Molina 
Alwin Penterman 

Amanda "Laughing Hyena" 
Johnson 

Amelia Gearheart 

Amy Luke 

Amy Veeres 

Ana Mizuki 

Andreas Melhorn 

Andrew "Dropbear" Noble 
Andrew Hauptman 
Andrew Howell 

Andy Harsent 

Angelo Pileggi 

Ansel Alexander Hamilton 
Davies VI 

Antoine DuBois, 3rd Initiate of 
the Ninth Circle 

Antti Knutas 

Aran Carmon 

Arthur Nascimento 

Ash Walter 

Asia Davidson 

Atticus Winterton-Perks 
Beckett 


Time-travelling hippie Arch-Mage 


1952-2054, Owner and Operator 
of the Magic Bus, Guardian of the 
Lava Lamp Time Beacon through 


Tresi Arvizo 
Vasilis Dalitsikas 


Vivian Black, Head of The Order 


Of The Dawning Truth 
William May 
Xavier Stanton 


Ben Bonds 

Ben Stewart 

Benton Little 

Bernie Frick 

Bert Isla 

Bob Hafer 

Bobby Chow 
Booghost Chantry 
Bovolon 

Brad Gunnels 
Braden Kanipes 
Brett Alexander 
Brett Bowen 

Brian King 

Brian Rock 

Britian Oates 

Bruce Gray 

Bruce N. Stein 
Bruce Ralston 

Bruno Zilli 

Bryan 

bwgustaf 

Cam Lewis 
Caoimhghin 

Cara Milne 

Caran Carch 

Carl L. Congdon 
Carlton W. Anderson 
Carly Ho 

Carrie Hitt 

Castille Condracus 
Cesarius 

Chance Weiss 
Chapel 

Chris Challice 

Chris Helsabeck 
Chris Lackey 

Chris Michael Jahn 
Chris Stehlik 
Christopher Hill 
Christopher Lee 
Christopher Saldaña 
Christopher Wiegand 
Clan DAM 
Clarence Washington III 
Clayton R Huettemann 
Cody Black 

Colin Anders Brodd 
Craig “Doc Ryder” Brown 
Craig Oxbrow 

Cris Hundley 

CS Williams 

D.J. Dittman 

Dan Cameron 


670 Mage: The Ascension 20" Anniversary Edition 


UP ah 
— e 07 = "s 


Zachariah Hicks 
Zachary Hensley 


Ember K. Miller 
His High Potentate 
Martin A. Milne 


Acolyte 


Daniel Cazan 

Daniel Flood 

Daniel Laloggia 

Daniel Rabinovich 
Danilo Alexandre Soares Takano 
Dante Sunchaser 

Dario Monaco 
Darkshifter 

Darryl Johnson 

Dave Chalker 

Dave Mendiola 

David "Weimann" Karlson- 
Weimann 

David A. Cuneo 

David Annandale 
David Chart 

David Fuller 

David Gordon Buresh 
David John Williams Jr. 
David Komonee 

David Millians 

Davin Wárter 

Dennis Czeluscinski 
Diego Rivera 
DiomedesRex 

Dionysia Jones 

Dolran 

Doug Hagler 

Douglas Jacobson 
Drunar 

Duane Tomlinson 
Dustin Westfall 
Edoardo Franco 

Elissa "The Miss E" Ayadi 
Elizabeth Davis 

Emilius Cobalt 

English Bob 

Eric "Lameth" Folco 
Eric C. Magnuson 

Eric Massicotte 

Eric Poh 

Eric The Pipe 

Eric Thompson 

Erico 

Erik Thurman 

Eriol Diethel, Voice of the Celestial 
Chorus, Lyserg's twin soul. 
Erwin Burema 

Eu 

Francois RAUTMANN 
Frederic SO 

Frothers 

Gaby Lax 

Gaius of Xor 


Johan Eklund 

Jonathan Garcia-Carabajal 
Kelley Barnes 

Kristen "Kitty Wood 
Tasnica 

Yseulte Cass 


gajoos 

Garret Hilfer 

garvin anders 

Gary Robinson Hermes bani Ex 
Miscellanea 

Geoff Squire 

Gerardo Zamora 
Gideon Wolfe 
Gintaras Jasiulionis 
Graeme Rigg 

Graham Starfelt 

Greg Harris 

Gregory Eburn 
Gregory Siron 
Guilherme Spindola 
HANATAKA Shinya 
Harley Silver Wolf 
Hex Cross 

Hieu "Tony" Nguyen aka Xyrus 
Oblisk 

HPLustcraft 

Igor Toscano 

Imran Inayat 
Inserirenomequi 

Ixis Wieland 

J.B. ten Berg 

Jaakko Saari 

Jack "The Dragon" 
Jack Vivace 

Jackson Brantley 
Jacob A Helton 

Jacob Bruhn Paasch 
Jael Harmon 

Jake Mandel 

Jame Scholl 

James Ford 

James Pasque 

James Post 

James Valadas Marques 
Jamie Dupree 

Jan Kilpinen 

Janus ex Merinita 
Jarvis Stone 

Jason Brandt 

Jason Hockley - 
jaymi elford 

Jeb Woodard 
Jeff Tabrum 

Jen "Loopy" Smith 
Jessica Hammer 
Jesus O Luzon 
João Mariano 
Joe Robbins 

Joel "GLENNGAR" Leyton 


- 


Joey Martin 
Johan Norton 

John "Myth" Kennedy 

John Anthony Fox 

John Bogart 

John Canter 

John Morel 

Johnathan Byerly 

Jonathan Ruffin 

Jordan Springer 

Joseph "Mage Hunter" Coyle 
Joseph Eich 

Joshua and Kevin-Lynn Kubli 
Joshua Gorfain 

Joshua W. Pittman 

Juan Sangrós Alcalde 

Justin Shullick 

Justin Woo 

Kahoali the Mad 

Karl Norberg III 

katie-kat 

Kendall Uyeji 

Kevin C. Carpenter 

Kevin Drugan 

Kevin ‘Supreme’ Sharpe 
Kimberely Altomere 

Kissara Leigh 

Knut Borchert 

Kristian A. Bjarkelo 

Kristine Roper 

Kurt Hanna and Maire Bourke 
Kyle Monroe 

Kyndyl Greyland 

KZ 

Larry Stanton 

Lauren Anne Perpetua Marino 
Laurie J Rich 

Lee Chan-Woo 

leo “Seeker” Caldas 
Leonardo Thymon Fachin 
Lewis Cassidey 

Linda “Eel” Lee 

Liz Ruifrok 

LordofArcana 

Lorenzo Bracchi 

tukasz Korzeń 

tukasz Raczkowski 

Lyserg Diethel, Sword of the 
Celestial Chorus, Eriol’s twin 
soul. 

M Gabriel Colbaugh 
Maclntoush 

Maetell 

Majestic-MJ 

Marcelo Sepulveda 

Marcus Brissman 

Marina Patelos 

Mark Alello 

Marsha “Mags the Axe” White 
Martianus Nil 

Martin Denton 

Martin Silver 

Maskaradry & LeoDoray 
Matheus Pitta 

Matt and Janet Houck 

Matt Betts of Black Hole 


Trebuchet 

Matt Dempsey 

Matt Rice 

Matt Wontroba 
Matthew Campbell 
Matthew Earlywine 
Matthew McDonnell 
Matthew Turner 

Max 

Maxime Berar 

Maxwell Heath 
Mechalith 

Merle Blue 

Metal Fatigue 

Michael Godwin 
Michael Kusnetsov 
Michael 'Minder' Riabov 
Michael Nelson Wagner 
Michael Nutt 

Michael Parker 

Michael R. Underwood 
Michele Glasnovic Zapf 
Mikael Barbo 

Mike Craft 

Mike Horton 

Mike Spector 

Mike W. Leavitt 

Miriam 

Mo 

Morgan "Kyp Manning" Wessler 
MPIII 

Mustafa Nuri Kemal 
Myke and Alicia 

Nancy Feldman 
NeoParn 

Nicholas Peterson 
Niferbelle 

Nigel Wright 

Nikki Winters 

Nimbral Montes Rosa 
Noah Crow 

Noelle “SnowJackal” Turner 
Nuno Vargas 

Olatunji Nuga 

Omar Amador 
OrangeNewton 

Orpho Wynne 

Oskar “Samadhir” Avén 
P. J. Hightower 

Patrick Sullivan 

Patrick Welsh 

Paul Wyatt 

Pawel “Matoos” Matusiak 
Peter Klewvall 

Peter McGyrk 

Peter Steponaitis 

Peter Trueman 

Phil “The Barbarian” Martin 
Phil Hattie 

Philipp Hattemer 
Philippe Daigneault 
Phillip Bailey 
Picks-at-Flies 

Pierre “Vahn Kergonan” 
Feunteun 

Preston Bruce 


Project Grayskull 
Quentin Kowalski, of the Golden 
Chalice Euthanatoi 
Rakhi Chauduri 

Ralph Young 

Ramnesis 

Random Madness 
Raphael Bressel 

Rib 

Richard “Dick” Goodyear 
Richard Addy 

Richard Javier “Blaque” 
Stephenson 

Richard M. Alchemist 
Richard Morris 

Richard Ross 

Rob Carroll 

Robert Huether 

Robert Sullivan 
Ronaldo Mascarenhas 
Ross MacKenzie 
Rostislav Tumanov 
Rosto Lasombra 
Roxane Tourigny 

Ryan “The Magician” Van Every 
Ryan Adair Green 

S J Jennings 

S Leigh Schmidt 
Sahajiya Al Provance 
Sandra Damiana Buskirk 
Sapphire Balseraph 
Sarah 

Scott Alvarado 

Scott Andrews 

Scott Hamilton 

Scott Rick 

Scott Wachter 

Sean Casey 

Sebastian Lindeberg 
Sebastian T. Gebski 
Sergio Jaimez Rivas 
Shan Wolf 

Shannon Keniry 

Shawn Campbell 
Shawn M Moore 

Sibyl Corvix 

Silence Dogood 
silversaint 

Sir Norvil McGee, Capt. SS 
Boulon-Blairaeu 
Sophia Jessamyn Baron 
Soreth 

Sparrow 

St. Augustine 

Stacy M. Gossett 
Star-Star 

Sten Bugge 

Stephen Childs 
Stephen Delear 

Steve Cotterill 

Steve Shearer 

Steven S. Long 

Sven Holub 

Sylvain “Sly” Pronovost 
T. L. "Hotwire" Webb 
Talia Dumarc 


Tamasis 
Tapani Tiilikainen 
Tavis Charles 
Team Miller 
Tessa St. Claire 
The Black Gaming Club 

The Eye of Night 

The Plaid Mentat 

The Wildfire Clan 

Theo 

Thomas and Megan Thompson 
Thomas Gerlick 

Thomas Gronek 

Thomas White 

Thomas Wolf 

Tikaani Yuralria 

Tobias Dornbusch 

Tom Breeze 

Tom Wilkinson 

Tony Love 

Toran 

Touri 

Travis Legge 

Trish Pettinati and Stephen 
Michael DiPesa 

Tristan Hendrick-Beattie 
Two Wolves 

Tyler Foss 

V. Rantavalli 

Vincent 

violinjosh 

Vise 

Vutshishl 

Wade Jones 

Wade Rothchild 

Walking Storm 

Walter Soto 

Walter Torcatte 

Wei-Hua Hsieh 

William Duhane Tarvol bani 
Flambeau 

William Ruby 

Wong Kum Yew 

Wren Wicks 

Yone Santana 

Zak Kotlow 

Zed Lopez 

Zeke Hubris 

Zhaph 


Zoviir 


Adam "Karpomatic" Karpolorich 


Alastor Doyle 

Alon Krause 

Anne Petersen 
Arnodd "Hrafn" Heiriksson 
Ashton Knight 

Chris Mortika 

Colin Rosario 
Crystal A. Chappelle 
D.A Lascelles 
Damien Hunter 

Dan Hagy 

Dannoh Cohen 
David Stanley 
DharkMojo 


Kickstarter Backers 671 


HE 


4 


 -— ——H ul 


: 
ye 


Doctor Stephen Vincent Strange 
elhuevo 

Gargamel Le Noir 

Greg Peterson 

Gustavo Felipe de Oliveira 
Harry Dresden 

lan "Professor Atlas" Irelan 
Irog Silenzo 

Jace C. 

Jaime Robertson 

JamieO 

Jason L 

Jennifer Etsu - Hollow One 
Jennifer Weinstein 

Joseph Keenan 
Kailindorian 

Manlio Calvi 

Mark Schmidt 

Melanie Kiviaq 

Morik Trask 

Nathan Soderland 
Paradox Captain 

PatrickH 

R.A. Mc Reynolds 
ReverendRumbleFish 

Ria Loader 

Richard "Morningstar" Rossato 
Rob R. 

Robbie Laoten 

Robert F Towell 

Rocjol 

Russel Lee 

Ryan Mathes 

S2 "D" Kahler 

Sarah M Stewart 

Steven Eubanks 

Steven Maloney 

Ted Stephens 

Tobias Gottschalk 

Tom Doncom 

Vincent Pasko 

Wes Frazier 

wraith808 

Yes 


Alexander "Kuein" Yatskov 
Capricia Bruns 

Carlos Federico Pedraza 
Gutierrez 


Chris ‘AkatsukiLeader 13’ Gawne 


Darell Lubahn 


Elijah Grey 

John Walter Biles 

Josh Loomis 

Kevin Harrison 
Leishmaniose DeLira 

Nick B. & Kate O. 

No.5127 

Romaine, Capo, Shell, Airy, 
Muse, and Chokecherry 
Salem" Voodooking" Mathius 
Tom Ladegard 

Will Hudson 


Alyssa Curby 
Aymeric Lancien 

Ben Fitzpatrick 
Brandon Logan 

Brian "Fuzzy Mushroom Head" 
Speicher 

Brian Wheeler 
Cameron Wise 
Christopher Farrington 
Damien Carmichael 
Declan O'Neill 
Gunnar Högberg 
Hrvoje Ruhek 

lan Morgenheim 
Ilarion Andrykovich 
James Camilleri 

Joe Thater 

John “johnkzin” Rudd 
Kenny Crowe 

Luca “Gotrek” Barcella 
Lucas Gallindo 
Matthew Roark 

Mike de Jong 

Nicole Mezzasalma 
Omar Sanchez 

Paul Hayes 

Phil Stafford 

PsyCow 

Redavatar 

S. R. Dreamholde 
Scott Elmer 
Simbelmyne 

Stephen Egolf 

Steven Matthews 
Thierry Nouza 

Tim Bogosh 

tindal 


Vicente Sampedro 
Zack Kline 


Alejandro J. de León 
Alexander Lambert 
Andrea Colonna 
Andrew Kirschbaum 
Andros Baphomet 
Aphrae Lovelace 

Ben Fifield 

Clifton James F. Sawit 
Danny Fisher 

David B. Mitchell 

Derek C Taylor 

Dorothy P. 

Doug & Joy Staudt 
Dustin Rector 

Elias Helfer 

Emiliano "Ethrigant 

D ^Pendrakken" Zeni 
Estrella Vinces 

Ethan Bremner 

Frederick Black the 
Shadowdancer 

Fredric Dalqvist 

George Henry Hepker VI 
Gilgamesh Hale 

Han Lim 

Hex Arcana 

lan D. Ward 

lan Schanning 

Irene "Running Gag" Posey, 
Nuwisha supporter of the 
fantastical 

J Moore 

J.R. Farley 

James "Jimbojones" Robertson 
Jason Waltz 

Joe Pridham 

John & Audrey Cook 
Joshua Epperson 
Kenneth Lathan 

Kevin Ross Rogers 
Masani McGee 

Matt Shursen 

Matthew Madden 

Mike Eckman 

Oscar Ulloa 

Paul Prescott 

Professor Highland Wolland 


Reyhan Sadaka 
Scott Cosner 
Shafi Ziauddin 
Sir Chris 
Sophie Máchtl 
Stephen Bond 
Steven Owen 
Steveotep 

THE Adam Warlock (Accept No 
Substitutes) 

Thomas Faine 

Thomas George Huber Jr. 
Thomas O'Gorman 

Will Sayart 


Albert L Perrien Il 

Clayton Weeks 

Coyote WalkingTall 

Dan Summers 

Dave "Wintergreen" Harrison 
David B. Feig 

David Dalton 

Fernando Jacobson 
George Koutsikos 

Jacob Dylan Riddle 

jason "Ulysses Minor" bean 
Jessica Pitre Jones 

John Courage 

John D. Cornelius 

Joseph Stonecraft, Master 
Etherical Scientist 

Joseph W. Berriman 
Nathanael Espino aka Rin 
Kyrilson,D.Thau. 

Nicholas Muehlenweg 

Perl 

Ray Hegge 

Rebecca “Rhiannon O’Reilley” 
Tordoff 

Rebekah “Demoness” Sloan 
Rich Beaulieu 

Sean Padgett 

Simon "Pykon" Baptista 
spiderglow 

Stephen Drew (Raama) 
Steve Lord 

Surrey Borges 

Teppo Pennanen 

Teru 

Wizzat 


Mage 


“Bogey” Williams 

/tg/ 

Aaron & Heidi Chiles 

Aaron Buttery 

Aaron Denney 

Aaron Nowack 

Aaron Reimer 

Aaron Scott 

Adam “Beacon” Strangelove 


672 Mage: The Ascension 20" Anniversary Edition 


Adam "WhirlwindMonk" 
Bednarek 

Adam Bosman 

Adam Graham 

Adam Koebel 

Adam Kost 

Adam Kroll 

Adam Krump 

Adam Thomas-Brashier 


Adam Waggenspack 

Adam Zielinski 

Adept Paragon Julian 
duCharbaine, PhD; Comte de 
Toulouse bani Bonisagus 
Adrian Hughson 

Adrian Masters 

Adrien & Kim Ladouceur 


Aidenn Ossorio & Rain Pletcher 


Akariel Ford 

Akili Daniels 

Alan Gill 

Alanna "Firebug" McAllen 
Albert Schroter 

Alec "Michel" Wills 

Alec Whitney 

Alex Lavoie 

Alex 'Munk' Munkelwitz 


Alex Putman 
Alex 'Roman' DiSanpietro 
Alex Wawro 

Alexander Chobot 
Alexander Ducharme 
Alice King 

Alice Lanteigne 

Alt255 

Amanda Plageman 
Amber Lind 

Amber Vietzke 
Amdramnar 

Ammariel Melwasul 
Anadrell 

André Gagné 

Andrew “Operative Kyle 
Quintana, Amalgam NM-027" 
Cummings 

Andrew Cherry 

Andrew Twyman 

Andy Rosequist 

Andy Zeiner 

Anna Fae 

Annida Christofi-Clark 
Anonymous 

Anonymous 

Anthony “Iris” Kuchta 
Anthony Damiani 
Anthony Howell 
Anthony Rybarczyk 
Arden Mors 

arthexis 

Ashley Paschal 

Asmoor 

Atomic "Jason Best" 
Dragonpuncher 

Aubrey Levinge-Barton, 
bani Solificati Hermetici 
Austin Haught 

Azriel 

Azryela Abysma 

Barra Sargtlin 

Bartleby 

Bearhat Walker 

Becca Bowen 
Becksworth Was Here’); DROP 
ALL TABLES; 

Becky Smith 

Ben “Damocles Thread” Walker 
Ben Dinsmore 

Ben Rosenblum 

Ben W Bell 

Ben Willcox 

Ben Woerner, bani Thig 
Benoit Devost 

Big Money Butz 

Billy Thatcher 

BJ "Ki" McManus 
Blogg 

Bob Bonsall 

Brannen 

Brendan McCann 
Brennen "Merik Lance" Willer 
Brent Cerrato 

Bret Anderson 

Brian & Allison Dellinger 


Brian Campbell 

Brian Griffith 

Brian J Phillip 

Brian Johnson 

Brian K. Scott 

Brian Koonce 

Brian Lynch 

Brian Misamore 
Brian Poe 

Brian Weir 

Brian Zuber 

Bryan "Kaelten" McLemore 
Bryant Durrell 

Bryce Perry 

Budgie 

Cade Maclire 
CAGWorks 
Capritisha the Forsaken 
Carl Pilon 

Carlos Ovalle 

Carlos Restrepo 
Carolyn Lachance 
Carraig Heldon 
Casey DeWitt 

Casey Geyer 
Cassandra Matteis 
Catch22 

Celcian Adreth 
Cerigo 

Chaas Cordero 

Chad Hazel-Kepler 
Chad S. Pendreki 
Chainsaw Todd 
Charles A. Wright 
Charles Brown 
Charles Minucie 
Charlie Vick 

Cheryl Nortz 

Chris “Shallow-Tracks” Shaffer 
Chris “Technovandal” Harvey 
Chris Allen 

Chris Brashier 

Chris Chaney 

Chris Cowger 

Chris Harrington 
Chris Huddleston 
Chris Johnson 

Chris Moreno 

Chris Roames 

Chris Smaldone 

Chris Snyder 
Christian Walters 
Christopher Buser 
Christopher Coward 
Christopher Kobbe 
Christopher Pelletier bani 
Alexandrian Society 
Christopher Penczak 
Christopher V. Martin 
Christopher W Smythe 
Clan Ekotusay 
Claude Marlte-Olvier 
Clone #731 

Cochi Hirogawa 
Cody L. Dobbs 

Colin Fredericks 


Cora Anderson 

Corey Reddin 

Cory Eicher 

Cory Hodge 

Craig Gaddis 

Craig M. Smith 

crawlkill 

Creagan MacCairngorm 
Crothian 

CtrlAltFaceroll 

Curtis Montgomery 
Curtis Uvon Grogins JR 
Cynesra James 

Dan Goldberg 

Dan Sanford 

Dana Myers 

Dane Breker 

Dani ‘Borogove’ Barnsley 
Daniel “Damon Cane” Wright 
Daniel Arbuckle 

Daniel B Nissman 
Daniel C. Mainwaring 
Daniel Hillen 

Daniel Purdy 

Daniel Quinn 

Daniel Scribner 

Daniel Sellers 

Danisty Paisley 

Dante Argyle 

Dante Laughing-Coyote 
Dante527 

Darcey Wunker 

Darius Westchester 
Darker Days Radio 
Darren MacNeil 

Darryl Green 

Darryl Park 

Daru 

Daryl Markey 

Daryl McLaurine, Ph.D. 
Dave "Hamza" Bruno 
Dave Scheidecker 
David "Glitz" Levesque 
David Brekelmans 
David Carroll 

David Drewelow 

David E. Melgar 

David Kusy 

David Michael Felt 
David Miller 

David Paul 

David Reed 

David Stoddard 

David Tapanes 

David Turner 

Decerto 

Deke Reisig 

derekticon 

Devin P. Owens 

Doc Rampart 

Doctor lon 

Doctor Malcolm Addler, 
Member in Good Standing of the 
Hermetic Orders bani Flambeau, 
Masgister Mundi Ars Essentiae 
and Copperfield. 


Doctor Marigold Farmer 
Dolce Miryam 

Don Moonglow 
Doongar 

Doug Nordwall 
Douglass Kern 

Dr. Jimmy 

Dr. Luke Maynard 
Dr. Rev. Diamond J, K.S.C. 
Dr. Scott Hedberg 

Dr. Walter Lesko 

Dr. Zharkov 

Drake Williams 

Drew Mays 

Drew Price 

Duckie 

Dustin D. Dalton 

Dustin Dickerson 

Dustin Schmidt 

Dusty Hodges 

Dylan "Z" Knight 

Dylan Boates 

Eben Lowe 

Edward Carpenter 
Edward Monical-Vuylsteke 
Eli Cross 

Elil 

Elizabeth Salazar 

Enzo Christiano 

Erebus & Ariadne Cote 
Eric Hutchings-Goetz 
Eric Nail 

Eric Nathaniel M. Henson 
Eric Sikora 

Erik Bear 

Erik Rutherford Cartman bani 
Flambeau of the Order of 
Hermes 

Eris Avery Redwood 
Ethan Renwood 

Eustache Porrihma 

Evan Jeffrey 

Evelyn & Nigel 

Exonym 

flowerysong 

Forrest Lee Spilker 

Forrest McKinley 

Francois Boucher 

Frank "Satori" Toich 
Frank Marshall 

Freja Tsukikage 

Gabriel heraldstorm 
Gabriel Miller 

Gabriel Moreno 

Gabriel Sorrel 

Galen Fabic 

Garth deumbra 

Gary “Madu” Montgomery 
Gary Berg 

Genevieve Robinson 
Geoff Vogel 

Geoffar 

George Pitre 

Gestalt Valance 

Geza Letso 

Gideon Nightshade 


Kickstarter Backers 673 


HE 


4 


4 


Gilbert Mllner 
Glen Adams 
Glen Barrett 
Goresnout 
Greg Engel 
Greg Freeman 

Greg Roy 

Greg Scott Neuman 
Gwydion Angus McBryde 
H.C. 

Harvey Spectre 

Harvin Torres 

Heather A. Harrelson 
Heather Claudia Chastity 
Alexandria Snyder Ira 
Henry Jones 

Himeko Hoshino 
HOGAR!!! 

Holden Shearer 
Hopesend 

Horatio Hex 

lago Drake 

lan Blackmer 

lan Nusskern 

lan R 

lan Sargeant 

larlais 

Ignatius Montenegro 
Indraneel Dutt 

J. Anthony Malerich 

J. H. Frank 

J. Noah Wiley 

J.D. Cohen 

J.J. & Lana Mason 

Jack and Gloria Kelnhofer 
Jack Thompson 

Jacob Juenger 

Jacob Osterhaus 

Jaime M Garmendia III 
Jaime Sandoval 

Jake Street & Rick Woods 
Jamal Freeman and Reverend 
James Daniel 

James “Tony” Hudson 
James (Christian Faulds) 
Einsbrook 

James Chatham 

James Estes 

James Havelocke 

James L Hays 

James Nelson 

James Pierson 

Janus Warlock 

Jared Buckley 

Jared Fattmann 

Jared Knight Leadbetter 
Jared Koon 

Jaron Kaplan-Parr 
Jasmine Black 

Jason & Amy Berteotti 
Jason C Marshall 

Jason Kenney 

Jason MacGillivray 

Jason Marks 

Jason Martinez 

Jason Nell 


674 . Mage: The Ascension 20" Anniversary Edition 


Jason Parachoniak 
Jason R Goodwin 
Jason Stierle 
Jayashi Devyani 

JD Langeland 

Jeff Clark 

Jeff Ewing 

Jeffery Bishop 
Jeffrey LaLuc 
Jeffrey Palmer 
Jeffrey Taylor 

JEG 

Jen Kuipers 
Jen1701D 

Jenn Kellam 
Jennifer Jenkins 
Jeremey D Walker 
Jeremiah Marquette 
Jeremy “opsirus” Roberts 
Jeremy Kostiew 
Jeremy Purdom 
Jeremy Putman 
Jeremy Zimmerman 
Jerimiah Whitmer of House 
Bonisagus 

Jesse Larson 

Jesse Mazer 
Jessica Reardon Smith 
Jessica Yates Martin 
Jim Jones 

Jim Morrison 

Joe “Big Dog” Bianco 
Joe Fusion 

Joel Scott 

John & Kimberly Poole 
John Abbott 

John Armstrong 
John Carnathan 
John Cooey 

John DiPietro, Jr. 
John Lovejoy 

John Niceley 

John Olszewski 
John Paulus 

jon hicks 

Jon Lang 

Jonas Beardsley 
Jonathan D. Harter 
Jonathan Lafortune 
Jonathan Osterhaus 
Jonathan Reichman 
Jonathon Burgess 
Joseph Krause 
Joseph Russo 
Joseph Surico 
Joshua fairfield 
Joshua Mayworth, bani Tytalus 
Joshua Pluta 

Julia Czarniecki 
Julian Siano 

Justin Carroll 

Justin Delaney 
Justin Michael 

Kahir de Umbras 
Kaliban 

Katelynn Guerra 


— e 07 = er 


Katy Crumb 

Kaydence ‘KOticQt’ Phillips 
Keegan Clements-Housser 
Keith Rice 

Kelly Schultz 

Kerrus Magrus 

Kevin "Seamus" Barrett 
Kevin DeVormer 

Kevin Mueller 

Kevin Wolfe 

Kim Miller 

Kimberly Horne 

Kitt Byth 

Kodeir Ralford 
Kristopher Deters 

Kyle A. Fisher 

Kyle Jonas Ross 

Kyle Rimmer 

Kyle Wiley 

Lafing Cat 

Laine "Glaistig" DeLaney 
Larry "Halacon" Odom 
Larry Castleberry 

Le Mateo 

Lee Beckers 

Lee Dignam 

Lee Leggett 

Lee Nicholson 

Lee Taber 

Leif Hassell 

Leo "The Dilsnik" Navas 
Leo Gentile 

Leslie Jones 

Lester Ward 

Lindsay McNulty 

Logan MacCaskill 
Lorrraine 

Louis Malis 

Lucas and Megan Engelhardt 
Lucas McCauslin 
Lucyfersam 

Luke lehl 

Lydia "Frost" Herbison 
Lydia Eickstaedt 
Lyinggod 

M Newton Moore 
Madeupasaurus-Rex 
Magentawolf 

Majdi Badri 


Malcolm Sheppard and Jupiter's 


Forge 

Marc Ouimet 
Marc-André Perreault 
Marco Palou 

Mario Breton 

Mark Allen 

Mark ‘Keleas’ Webb 
Mark Lozano 

Mark Thompson 
Mark van Esch 
Marlja 

Martin W. Capdevielle 
Mason 

Mason Jones 

Mason Jones 
Mathieu Bellemare 


Matt “Catapult” Wang 
Matt "Toasty" Homentosky 
Matt Carman 

Matt Davis 

Matt Donaldson 

Matt Duval 

Matt Jett 

Matt Murphy 
MatThePhat 

Matthew Ashby 
Matthew Hedge 
Matthew Jacoby 
Matthew Lynn 
Matthew M Middleton 
Matthew Oakes 
Matthew Solomon 
Megan 

Megan K. McGuire 
Melissa Krause 
Melpomene White 
Mereneith de Passerohé, e 
Merceri 

Michael “Marsh” Marshall 
Michael “Xail” Durrell 
Michael & Danielle 
Michael Bowman 
Michael G. 

Michael Hopkins 
Michael Kilduff 
Michael Parra 
Michael Richards 
Michael Sims 

Michael Watts 
Michael Zenke 
Michelle Boucher 
Mike Delaney 

Mike Maxson 

Mike Rotch 

Miles Ward 

Mitch Gross 

Natasha Grey 

Nate Adams 

Nathan Fraser 

Nathan Henderson 
Nathan Legg 

Nathan Mitchell 
Nathan Newlon 
Nathan Rush 
Nathaniel Ogilvie 
Nathaniel Rogers 
Neall Raemonn Price 
Nejlah Al-Rahab- Gangrel 
Antitribu 

Nicholas A. DeLateur 
Nicholas Alexander Holmgren 
Nicholas Kirkpatrick 
Nicholas McDylan 
Nicholas Racz 
Nicholas Richardson 
Nick Pilon & Sasha Dillman 
Nicole Porter 

Nicos Sphaeridian 
Nikela Hartman 
Norngremlin 

Omer Ahmed 

Orren Locke 


Outlander 
Owen Wesley Kerschner 
Oz Sozen 

Patrick Fagan 

Patrick Harron 

Patrick Knowles 

Patrick O‘Leary>Fianchetto 
Patrick Sullivan 

Patrick, Order of the Dawning 
Truth 

Paul "The Voice" Boudreau 
Paul Davis 

Paul J. Banyai 

Paul Reed 

Peter Engebos 

Peter H Krulder II 

Peter Nielsen 

Peter Vescera 

Philip Weston 

Phill Calle 

Pieter Spealman 

Pina’s, Matthew "Mongol" & 
Ashley "Renegade" 

Pip Padden 

PJ Frack 

PJ Saad 

Posey 

prOxy 

Pratigya Mehta 

Preston Lee Bobo 

Prospero 

qazinus 

Qu33qu3g, Proprietor of the 
Pequod Cafe 

Rachel Cardul bani Tytalus 
Raefex 

Ralph C. Lacy IV 

Rand Brittain 

Randi Condrey-Babino 
Ray C. Spees 

Rebecca Smythe 

Reuben Israel Beattie 

Rev. Malcus Dorroga 

Rhea Shelley 

Rhian Slane 

Rich Warren 

Richard Chilton 

Richard Gault 

Richard Pruiett 

Richard Taylor 

Ritin Black 

Rob Carlos 

Robert L. Flowers Jr. 

Robert MacNinch 

Robert T. Sagris 

Roberto Hoyle 

Roland Phoenix and Morgan 
Greywolf 

ROS - Gabriel Rhys 

ROS - Leviticus Mason 
ROS - Unit Nine 

Rosetta 

Ross Thomas 

Rowena de Galliarde 
Roxane Sabourin 

Roy Berman 


Ruben Catinchi 

Rurik Dimanevsky 

Ryan Evans 

Ryan Gracey 

Ryan Owens 

S L Koch 

S. Snyder 

Saleem Halabi 

Sam Feipel 

Sam Spencer 
Sanzuwu 

Sara Stewart 

Sarah Perry-Shipp 
Schatzie! 

Scott Kendrick 

Scott Michael Coutcher bani 
Tytalus 

Scott Shapiro 

Scott Sytten 

Sean Dial 

Sean M. Dunstan 

Sean Mattox 

Sean Schbley 

Sean Silva-Miramon 
Sean W 

SeanPatrick Zeitler 
Senji Sassinak 

Shane Phillips 
Shannon Patrick 

Shaun McRae 

Shauna Forrister 
Shawn Becker 

Shawn “Tezbak” Warren 
Shelby 

Shelton Windham 
Shoshana Kessock 
Simon Kelly Hale 

Sir Gor 

Skarsol 

Skeleton Jack 

Skye “skyknyt” Knighton 
SOLtien 

Star Eagle 

Stephen Beck Fey 
Stephen Lea Sheppard 
Stephen M. Pomeroy 
Stephen Post 

Sterling Hitchcock 
Sterling R. Gustin 

Steve "Hedgehog39" Rubio 
Steve & Katherine Magana 
Steve Darnell 

Steve Hinck 

Steve Musal, US2002126981 
Steven Thesken 

Tam and Danks 

Tathel 

Ted Ludemann 

Ted Pertzborn 
Tentaclese McTentacles 
Teresa Oswald 
Terrance Colligan 

The Crazy Player 

The Feingolds 

TheAlY 

Thomas Blackstone 


Thomas Devine 
Thomas H. Elsom 
Thomas McGee 
Thomas Slaughter 
Tiffany Pusatello and Stacie 
Bullough 

Tim Boser 

Tim Darr 

Tim Rich 

Tim Warman 
Timothy A. Gurno Il 
Timothy Flanders 
Timothy Jay 

TJ Wilson 

Todd Thomas 

Tom Bither 

Tommie Boatwright 
Tommy “all worlds are open to 
me” G. 

Tony Adkins 

Tracy Pinkelton 
Travis Foster 
Treesong 

Trevor Stamper 
Tristan Vann 

Tronoth Sarum 
Tucker Brown 

Tyler Dion 

Tym Keeney 

Ululi 

Val Wikblad 

Veros 

Victor “Sylvan” Allen 
Victor Fiszer 

Vijay Kiran Challa 
Vincent Longobardi 
Violet R. Hargreaves, Cogsmith, 
Society of Ether 
Vitamancer 

Voltarin Ravenstorm 
Wayne Seeger 
Wayne Welgush 
Wei-min Fong 
Wesley Norman 
Weston Harper 
WHIPIVA] 

William Franks 
William Rodrigue 
Wolfgar Amadeus Malcolm Lyles 
Working Artist 
Xander 

Yamaguchi Shimeiko 
(il I) 
Yatziri Rodriguez 
Yener Balci 

Zachary Holman 
Zakkary Ahern 
Zhimar 

Zoey Starr 

Zombie Orpheus Entertainment 


“Doc” Tomas Sparks 
“Rabbi” Rueben Schwartz 
“Thothmes” Mathew Rush 
A. “Doc Wonder” Walker 
A. Leslie 


Kickstarter Backers 


A. Quentin Murlin 
Aariea 
Aaron “Siphon” Woodside 
Aaron C. McLaughlin 
Aaron J Lowry 

Aaron J. Schrader 

Aaron McKay 

Aaron Riutta 

Abraham Garcia 

Adam Debus 

Adam L 

Adam Mock 

Agent Fountainpen 

Aiden Finney 

Aishlynn L’blanc 

Alberto Arias S 

Alec McClain 

Alex Barth 

Alex Flagg 

Alex Putnam 

Alexandra Petra Cadia Lleras 
Alexis & Jeremy 

Alexis Michailidou 

Alison Gill 

Allan Jenkinson 

Alonso O. Rubio 

Alyssia Ashkevron 

Amelia “Sid” Weston - Verbena 
Disciple 

Ancellius 

Ander Rabann 

Andrés Lazcano 

Andrés Montañez 

Andrés Rodriguez 

Andrew “Roll Damage” Ulrich 
Andrew Cermak 

Andrew Goodman 
Andrew Graham aka Kain the 
Seeker 

Andrew Heston 

Andrew Jay Cardinal 
Andrew Laliberte 

Andrew Lenk, Virtual Adept and 
survivor of Bloody Mary 
Andrew P Gibson 

Andrew R Nagel 

Andrew Stephen Coombs 
Andrew Weston 

Andy Blanchard 

Andy Colson 

Angelborn 

Anonymous 

Anthony ‘Islefox’ Blea 
Anthony Jennings 

Antoine Mistral 

Ariketh 

Arthur “Torakhan” Dreese 
Ashwyn Faust 

Austin Goodnight 
babelMatrix 

Babylon Sanctum 
bastsbreath 

Baxter Johann Flynn 
Beachfox 

Bekkua 

Ben Loukota 


HE 


675 


 -— ——— ul 


4 


4 


dm 


Benjamin "eSca" Reed 
Benjamin R. Terry 
Benjamin Yamada 
Bia Paige 
Big L 
Bill James 
Bill Shaffer 
Blake Thomas 
Bob Harrison 
Bob Jones 
Bob Ooton 
Boomer H. 
Brad Bazor 
Brad D. Kane 
Bradley Yesko 
Brandon Duarte 
Brendan Sullivan 
Brendan Thomas 
Brent Erdman 
. Brian Leist 
Brian Quinn 
Brianne M. Sifert 
. Bridget Bishop 
Brion M. 
Bruno Durivage 
Bulgroth Kral 
Bulshock 
C. Martin Coulter 
C.J. Short 
C.W.Richeson 
Caitlin Eckert 
Caitlin O'Brien 
Caity Grace 
| Cale Hawthorne 
Caleb "Mahto" Schuller 
Calum Russel 
Calvin D. Jim 
Cameron Loewen 
Cameron Wright 
cantrip 
Capt. O'Malley 
Captain Cyril Thunder, RES, 
Sky Calvary 
Carrie Scott 
Cecoyotl 
Cedryck Mimault 
Cesar Cesarotti 
Chad "Tecrogue" Long 
Chad Griffith 
Chance Thorton 
Charlie "PookaKnight" Cantrell 
Chasym 
Chris "Diablerist" Hitchcock 
Chris "Vengeance" Green 
Chris Aronen 
Chris Bell 
Chris Briley 
Chris Carpinello 
Chris Collins 
Chris Czerniak 
Chris Dyer 
Chris Lavin 
Chris Mancuso 
Chris Taylor 
Chris Tulach 


676 


Ma$e: The Ascension 20^ Anniversary Edition 


Chris Tyk; 

A friend of John Courage 
Chris White 

Chris Woodruff 

Christina "Moira Angela 
Darling" Backus 
Christoph Schulz 
Christopher "Dragon" Sloan 
Christopher Avery 
Christopher Campione 
Christopher Skeen 
Chuck and Rebecca Rozakis 
CLAN PLOEGER 
Clémence Dufresne 
Clete D. Collum 

Cliff Winnig 

Collin "Maleclypse" Smith 
Connor Hallisey 

Conor Tuohy 
Constantine Thomas 
Corey Alambar 

Corin James 

Cory Williamsen 

Craig Bonnes 

Craig Nuckels 

Crystal Amara Corrigan 
Cydrake 

D Sonderling 

DJ. Trindle 

Dace 

Daggothus 

Dak F Powers 

Damien Starlurker 

Dan & Chaney Edwards 
Dan and Lindsey Brounstein 
Dan Charland 

Dan Keller 

Dan Luxenberg 

Dan Williams 

Dana Bayer 

Dane “Kota” Allington 
Daniel “Dukal” Bell 
Daniel “Hunting Moon” Weber 
Daniel “The Nameless 1” 
Gaghan 

Daniel and Jessica Daubenspeck 
Daniel Balderas 

Daniel C. Barton 

Daniel H. Spain 

Daniel Ingraham 

Daniel Stack 

Daniel Suzzi 

Daniel Yauger 
darksfallen 

Dashekita N. Brooks 
Dave Ferguson 

Dave Glasser 

David "Freerun" Bryan 
David "JustDave" Talboy 
David Barasch 

David Bresson 

David Doucey 

David Futterrer 

David H. Clements 

David Harrison 


= 


David Huston 

David K Uspal 

David M Sylvia 

David McFall 

David Viars 

David Weidendorf 

David Yellope 

Dean Steward 

Del 

Dennis V. Stanley 

Derek Guder 

Derek the Bard 

Desdemona Pumpernickel 
Devoid-Q 

Devon Troy 

Diaz Del Fuego 

Dick Willmeth 

Diego “Juanca” Ubago 
Dione Rameses 

DJ VOltage 

Doc Saturn 

Doctor Stephen Vincent Strange, 
Sorcerer Supreme 

Don 

Don Cleary 

Don Enzo Benetti 

Don Tucker 

Donnie “Lord Aludian” Roos, Jr. 
Doug Atkinson 

Doug Grayson, Steven Evans, 
Obediah "Ark" Jackson 
Doug Seipel 

Dr. Mina "Impossible" 
Steponavitch 

Drew and Tia McLeroy 
Drew Littell 

Drew Tattrie 

Dylan Guerrero 

Dylan Muttram 

Dyne Atol 

E. C. Saulness 

E. G. J. Weston 

Ed Shannon 

Edward Thane, Nethermancer 
Eifion Jones 

Elisia Ragaller 

Elizabeth Leggett 

Emily Brumfield & Susann Hessen 
Emily McCabe 

Enedino Fernandez 

Enigma 

EnnuiStreet 

Enoch "Dancing Bat" Ulmer 
Eric Casey 

Eric Danz 

Eric France 

Erin Ruston 

Ernie "pookie" LaFountain 
ErusUmbros 

Etienne Lapointe-Blackburn 
Evan "JabberWokky" and Sarah 
Edwards 

Evan Manchester 

Evan Myers 

Evan Odensky 


Evo Shandor (aka Scott R) 
Fawn Galbraith, Dreamspeaker 
Francois Labaye 

Frank Marcelli 

Fred Herman 

Frequency 

G. Allen Johnson 

Gabe Moreno 

Gabe Palkert 

Gabriel Vogt 

Garon Niehaus 

Gary R Smith Il 

George Redson 

German Andres Naranjo Faccini 
goeticgeek 

Gordon "Eldagusto" G. Gordon 
Grady McEwen 

Grant "Richard Prescott" Parsons 
Grant G. Gruenbaum 

Greg Foster 

Greg Meyer 

Greg Tipton 

Greg Walters 

Gregory Bullard 

Grynner 

Guillaume Tremblay 

Gunther Pendercoste 

Guy Seggev 

guyblade 

Hákon Odinson 

Haroon Alsaif 

Heathbrook Rowan Badhwar 
Heather Shannon 

Helical Scorn 

Henry F. Bruckman Vargas 
Herbert Nowell 

Holden 'Abhaya' Kormos 
Hugo Richard 

lan A. A. Watson 

lan Hamilton 

lan Roberson 

lan S. Frazier 

Ikalios 

Invasor Odin 

Isaac Carr 

J Desaulniers - Alberta 

J. Brad Hicks 

J. James Craig 

J. Romero 

J.P. Anderson 

Jack Armstrong 

Jackson Page 

James "Speaks-with-Pups" 
Wagner 

James & JP Sugarbroad 
James ChaoticCore Roberts 
James L. Bell 

James May 

James Morr 

James T. 

Janessa Tjara Portner 

Jared Shaver 

Jarys "Helios" Maragopoulos 
Jason and Kai Wodicka 
Jason Brannen 


Jason Dickerson 
Jason Freston 
Jason Geis 
Jason Levine 
Jason Ludwig 
Jason Parker 
Jason T. DeForge 

Javier "Maren" Morante 
Javier Palenzuela 

Jayna Pavlin 

JAYSON "the l4thguest" 
TURNER 

JC Spears 
Jean-Francois Burroughs 
Jean-Francois Dufresne 
Jean-Francois Ethier 
Jeff "Shadow" Fowler 
Jeff 'Boo Boo' Jones 
Jeff Zitomer 

Jeffrey Pittman 

Jeffrey S. James 

Jeffrey Taylor 

Jenni Marion Foggo 
Jeremy "JDazzle" Marshall 
Jeremy Danielson 
Jeremy Marshall 

Jerrin Strongblade 
Jesse "Octavo" Webster 
Jesse Butler 

Jesse J. Burnette 

Jessica "SpOOky" Smith 
Jessica Gains 

Jessica Tabbard 

Jessy Tremblay-Bigras 
Jim Burdo 

Jim Flood 

Jim Groves 

Jim H. Henderson 
Jimmy ‘Kestrel’ Acevedo 
Jinriksha 

JLL 

J-M DeFoggi 

Jody Bowman 

Joe Page 

Joe Dunham 

Joe McGinnis 

Joe Parrino 

Joe Ragsdale 

Joel “Pika” Keeney 
John “Wolfe” Kelley 
John Arthur Bartley III 
John C Spainhour 

John Henley 

John J Kaufman 

John P. Baggett 

John R. Trapasso 
Johnathon “Icarus” Foulk 
Johnny Gutwound 
Jonathan D. Head 
Jonathan Whyte 
Jonathon Blade 

Jonci Aguillard 

Jordan Manis 

Joseph Andrew Hill 
Joseph Cottin 

Joseph Lonergan 


Joseph Oliveira 

Josh “dalarpguy” Parrish 
Joshua Ramsey 

Jude Vais 

Julian Krause 

Justin Caletges 

Justin Deneke 

Justin Haruo Sawai 
Justin Jones 

Justin Melton 

Justin Tack 

Kacie Shelton 

Karen Yurek 

Karl Fournier 

Karl Latrémouille bani Rien 
Karl Pamona 

Kat Tyler 

Kat: The long suffering, purple- 
daisied, omni-dimensional tea pot 
Kate Gryn 

Kathryn McKay 

Katt T Awesome 

Kaze Velara 

Ken Burling 

Kenny Beale 

Kerry Birmingham 
Kevin “Norus” Boisvert 
Kevin & Sarah Williams 
Kevin Andrew Murphy 
Kevin C. Wong 

Kevin Caldwell 

Kevin Lewis 

Khaos Nitemare 
Kimberly Morris 

Kirk Foote 

Kneedles 

Kody W. Stinson 
Komplx 

Korusef 

Kraig Blackwelder 
Krys Rose 

Kurt McMahon 

Kyle Krebs 

Kyle McCarty 

Kyle Niedzwiecki 

Kyle Patrick Brennan 

L. David Napier II 
Lachrymite 

Lars Haymaker 
Lawrence Stranges 
Leonard Helding 
Leoza Ranza 

Levin Serra 

Liang Hei 

Lilliandrei Sohor 
LiQUiD 

Logan Ratica 
Lostinplace 

Luke Brewer 

Luke Van Buren 

Lynn L262 Ryers 

M Arendt 

M. Publius Warsop 
Maggie "Neon" Keller 
Magister Arthington 
Magister Guigui bani Awesome 


Magus 

Magus Vox Anteron 
Malcolm John Brown 
Mansa Dorhej 

Marc Kuczborski "Londonmarc" 
Marc Larouche 
Marc-André Laurence 
Marcel G. Paler Jr. 

Marcus "Eagle" Landry 
Marcus Maniakes 

Marcus Xavier Figuerola 
Mario Baumann 

Mark A Moore 

Mark Adair 

Mark Austin Fleming 

Mark Cockerham 

Mark Hobson 

Mark Kung 

Mark Roemer 

Matt and Miranda Gnepper 
Matt Hufstetler 

Matthew "Frater Ramadan" 
Boren 

Matthew "Proffel" Proehl 
Matthew (Elnaur) Smith 
Matthew C Snyder 
Matthew Casella 

Matthew Dames 

Matthew Dashner 
Matthew Finco 

Matthew Gorsky 

Matthew Horoszowski 
Matthew Koelling 

Matthew Laine 

Matthew Pauze 

Matthew Smithwick bani Tytalus 
Matthew York 

Maverick & Veronica 5ever 
Max Nevill 

Max Peters 

Meaghan Bullock 

Megan "Nezumi" Greathouse 
Methandrela 

Michael 

Michael "Benji" Hall 
Michael Greaney 

Michael Homola Jr. 
Michael J. Chernicoff 
Michael Jacobson 

Michael Kiesling 

Michael M Kelly 

Michael Martinus 

Michael Matthews 

Michael Nightingale 
Michael P. Buono 

Michael Patrick Benedictus 
Foight 

Michael Pietrelli 

Michael Rhodd AkA Sir Noir 
Michael S. Follis 

Michael Tousignant 
Michael W. Robins 
Michelle Golz 

Micro 

Mikaleon 

Mike & Brian Goubeaux 


 -— ——— ul 


Mike Macary 
Mike Montgomery 
Mike Todd 
Mitchell Roggeveen 

Morgan Weeks 

Morpheus Constantine 
Morrvainum Bani Ex Miscellanea 
Mortain 

Mranth Kumpf 

Mrs. René A. Vandros 

N8 V. 

Nathan Andrew John Laskey 
Nathaneal Vogeding 

Neal Maclntyre 

Neale Carter 

Nicholas Davis 

Nick Keyuravong 

Nick wingedferret Brown 
Nicodemus Locke 

Nicolas Chrétien bani Tremere 
Nik Caruso 

Nikika Giovanni 

Nikki Koulouris 

Noble Thayer Graves, Former 
Euthanatos, now Clan Tremere 
Nolan White 

Nogoilpi (the Gambler) 
Norma Lyons 

Noskavian 

Octavio Arango 

Odanuki 

Oliver Reed 

Olivier Jobin 

Olotie Lothwen 

Orin Spiess 

Orion 

Orphan Jim 

Oukan Koshiro 

O’ulana Mhasi 

Owen Milton 

PABB 

Pat Bedua 

Pat Doherty 

Patrick “Scarabus” Hanna 
Patrick and Michelle 
Cunningham 

Patrick Dunn 

Patrick E. Bright 

Patrick Hutchison 

Patrick Walters 

Paul (Farwalker) Smith 

Paul A Timm 

Paul | Bever Jr 

Paul Stefko 

Pete Woodworth 

Peter "Nekose" Rucker 

Phil Brown 

Philip "Pip!" Martinez 

Philip Grassie 

Phillip Gleason 

Preston Davis, Hermes bani Xaos 
Prof. Abel Redstone, bani Shaea 
Professeur K 

Professor Absinthe 

Professor Skye Moonbeam 
PsyberOwl 


Kickstarter Backers 677 


HE 


: 
je 


X X 


Quark O'Doom 
Quinn Marlowe 

R. Harmon Smith 

R.R. Callaway Rea 

Raak 

Raevyn 'Vinyl Frog' Fletcher 
Randall Crawford 

Randall Wald 

ravenskana 

Ravnicor 

Regina "Onyx" O'Reilly 
Reno Marino 

Rev. Phillip Malerich 

Rhett Greenfield 

Rich "HardwareJedi" Frost 
Richard and Lori Varner 
Richard deMorris 

Richard ‘EllwynX’ Ayars 
Richard Forest 

Richard Pundurs 

Riley Glaser 

Rob Belkowski 

Rob Buck 

Rob Gatlin 

Rob Skipper 

Rob Trimarco 

Rob Wieland 

Robb & Mike 

Robert "Jefepato" Dall 
Robert "Rev. Bob" Hood 
Robert E Kemp 

Robert Hahn 

Robert Jazo 

Robert Jordan 

Robert L 

Robert Lundgren III 

Robert Majes 

Robert Thomas 

Roberto Flores 

Robin Scott 

Rogan “Etheric Librarian” Hamby 
Roger Poellot-- Cult of Ecstasy, 
Master of Entropy 

ron beck 

Ron Plunket 

Ronald Conner bani Hermes 
Ronan Garvedian bani Order of 
Hermes, House Shaea 
Roo Wetzel 

ROS - Father Fredrick 
Melanchthon 

Rowdy Ferret 

Russ Trippett 

Ryan Hinson 

Ryan Porter 

Ryan Reynolds 

Sam Conway 

Sameer Yalamanchi 
Samuel (Canada) Mitson 
Samuel D'Amours-Fortier 
Samuel L. Van Buskirk 
Samuel Sampson 

Savan Gupta, Steam-Funk 
Studios 

Scott "Duck" Bryant 

Scott "The Hanged Man" 


678 Mage: The Ascension 20" Anniversary Edition 


McNabb Corpany 

Scott Cohen 

Scott Ephriam Vigil 

Scott Forward 

Scott Mann 

Scott McIntosh 

Scott Rogers Mitchell 
Sean A. Ashcraft 

Sean J. M. O'Connor 
Sean K.I.W. Steele/Arcane 
Sean Littlepage 
Sebastien "Bash Bizznet" 
Bissonnette 

Selene Dawn 

Sethreich Ardestahdt 
Shadowstepó 

Shan "Shanathan" Morris 
Shaun D. Burton 

Shawn "Sutekh" Glass 
Shawn Kehoe 

Shawn Marier 

Shawn Roberts 

Shimon Klein 

Shrapnel 

Siguardson Baylorson 
SilentSlade 

Snowyrat 

Someonelse (SLC=) 
Soren Haurberg 

Spencer Quinn 

Spyke Alexander & Majack 
Stark 

Standa Panda Bear 
Stefanie Googe 

Stephen Cheney 
Stephen Gawrit 

Steve "Korbeau" Bouchard 
Steve Brule 

Steve Burnett 

Steve Farmer 

Steve Huntsberry 

Steven A. Torres-Roman 
Steven Johnson 

Steven McIntosh 

Steven P. Alfer Jr. 

Steven ‘Ryudo’ LaFollette 
Steven Sauer 

Stray Lung 

Streamjumper 

Sudama 

Summer Breeze 

Tabletop Audio 

Tad Duncan 

Taylor Dale Wright 
Thaddeus Ryker 

Thaine Hepler III 

The Acarya “Matches” 
The Bard 

The High Lord Mhoram 
The Lords of Chance 

The Misfits 

The Tate Fitzgerald Foundation 
Thierry De Gagne 
Thomas “Doc Epsilon” Young 
Thomas Jason Davies 
Thor “Nathaniel Greene” 


Thorson Jr 

Tiffany MacLean 

Tim “Bear” Forster 

Tim “Faileas” Dahlia 
Tim Flannigan 

Tim Ryan 

Tobias Nufruten 

Tobias Tolarian 

Tom Hicks 

Tommy Newcomer 
Tonja Davis 

Tony Bellegante 

Torin 

Tracy Cook 

Travis Carpenter 

Trevor Curtis 

Trevor Gere 

Tristan Marriner Boyd 
Tristan T. Andersen 

Troy Baker 

Tute 

Ty Tran 

Tyler 

U2mad (David Wild) 
Varden Fhaling 

Vaughn E Allen 

Versel Leveux 

Vincent “digiconda” Arebalo 
Vincent Lavigne 
Vincenza Romano 
Walter F. Croft 

Warren P Nelson 
Wesley Joaquin Botham 
Whitney Lee 

William “The Dresden” Barnes 
William bloodworth 
William Halverton 
William Kokolis 
William Lockwood 
Wolfgang “Bezalel” Xylander 
Wyatt Cerilli 

Xavier Gaston - Order of 
Hermes, House Ex Miscellanea 
Xelinor 

Yuyue. Sun 

Zach Davis 

Zachary J. Walton 
Zander 

Zane Graves 

Zero Ishida 

Zethar 

Zin 

Ziv Ragowsky 


2nirwana 

421 

Abner Rodrigues 

Adrià “#942” Seguer Vicente 
Aidan Menzies 

Alex R 

Alexander Burnett 
Alexander Nikandros 
Alexandre "Magnamagister" 
Joly 

Almoni 

Anastenazontas 


Andara Shadowfang 
Anders Westerkam 

Andre Braghini 

Andreas G Schramm, Speaker 
in Dreams, warden of the 
Esesfeldburg and Guest-in- 
Caern in Itzehoe 

Andrew Roberts 

Andrew Skelton 

Andrzej Lepper 

Andy Finnan 

Angel Spiliopoulos 

Anja Kraus 

Anthony Ferguson, Elias 
Coldwood, GhO5t 

Antón "Agua que Fluye" 
Arman Kia 

Arthur Van den Bulke 
Ashiko 

Avani Deo Valentine 

Axel Nitsch 

Baptiste ‘Krazilec’ Moulinier 
Bashir Marlowe - House Tremere 
Bastiaan Smit 

Ben Johnson 

Billy-Ray Gara Persephone 
Bjorn, The fell handed 
Boris "Borinel" Ulyanskiy 
Brett SinDex Whittaker 
Bruno Pereira 

Butch2k 

C James Blukacz 

Cameron Murtagh 

Carlos Vergara 

Carolius Animis 

Caué Guimaráes 

Ceira 

Cesar da Mota 

Charles Crowe 

Charles Strange 

Chris "Eva, Fan" Trace 
Chris Reay 

Christopher Williams 
Claus Larsen 

Cobalt 

Colin Anderson 

Colm O'Labhradha 

Craig "Renfield286" Crowe 
Craig Bishell 

Craig Chapman 

Craig 'VI' Slee 

Dacar Arunsone 

Daniel "Morthar" Wernered 
Daniel dos Santos Esteves 
Daniel Krongaard 

Daniel Rickmann 

Daniele Cappelletti 

David "Davegotsu" Mann 
David Bigg 

David Duerschlag 

David Ramsden 

David Rego 

David Short 

Davide Orlandi 

Dawidis 

Dinel 


Dmitry Avramenko 
Doc Syonide 
Dominic Ellis 
Dominic Robertson 

Donizeti da Silva Nunes 

Dr Marc Brown 

Dr. Enrique Montaño Torres 
El Sombrero Diablo 

Elias Ebert 

Elsanor the Sage 

Eoin Burke 

Eol (Krzysztof Zawieja) 

Erik ‘Pasty White’ Gartner 
Ernesto F. Montemayor a.k.a. 
Professor John McDougal 
Esben Malgaard 
Esserhaden 

Felipe Recka de Almeida 
Fernando Küpper 

Filip Danielsson 

Fingerbone Bill 

firesock 

Flavio Moreira Vieira 
Florent ‘killerklown’ Didier 
Franco Frare 

Ganesh Subramaniam 
George Taher 

Gervasio da Silva Filho 
Gilmar Pozo 

Giuliano "Kiusugi" Gianfriglia 
Glenn Clifford 

Grand Maester W 
Guillaume "Nocker" 
Guillaume Boutigny 

HAL 

Harry Richardson 

Hecate. Aletheia 

Helder Lavigne 

Helen Orosco bani Bonisagus 
Henri 

Henrik Augustsson 

Hermes Trismegistus 

Hikaru Sumeragi 

| wouldn't. 

Ignacio Granados Jiménez 
Ivan Orlov 

Jacob “Jack” Guldbrandsen 
Jakov 

Jakub “Behalior” Roczniak 
James Alexander Mellor 
James David Robertson 
James Dyer 

James Walker 

Jason Coleman (BinaryX) 
Javier "He-who-walks-between- 
worlds" Montegrís 

Jester Minute 

Joe Arnaud 

Johan 

Johannes Jórgensen 
Johannes Paavola 

John "FearMeForlAmPink" 
Franglen 

John K Morris 

John Malan 

John Yngve Fredrik Lundgren 


Johnny Peng 

Jonatan Wikstróm 
Jonathan Romulo Geronimo 
Jonne Arjoranta 

Jose M lglesias 

Josema "Yrdin" Romeo 
Juan Pablo Reyes Gómez 
Jukka Koskelin 

Kasper Blomdell 

Kay Hoddy 

Keiran Sparksman 
Kevin Paul Warmerdam 
Kevin Turner 

Kilian Exares 

Kirke Rafael 

Kristensen, K. 

Krzysztof Zajkowski 
Lachlan Smith 

Lady Margot 

Láquesis Larrondo 

Lau Bannenberg 

Lee Rimmer 

Leonard "Nik" Petit-Breuilh 
Leslie Weathetstone 
Lewis Davies 

LHSimon 

Liam Maguire 

Lloyd Pledger 
lobachevsky 

Lord Boserup 

Luca “Lukos” Carnevale 
Lucas the Great 

Luke Parsons 

M. Cunningham 
MADCAP 

Magick Nickel 

Magnus Eriksson 
Magnus Lundberg 
Magnus Ostergárd 
Malte Schultz 

Marc Collins 

Marc van Wanrooij 
Marcin "Forseti" Pazdziora 
Marcus R. Gilman 
Marino Santirso Ruiz 
Mark Hunter 

Marko Vojnovic 
Markus Bedenk 

Martin Brown 

Martin Taylor 
Masilmani Singh 
Matthew "Random Interrupt 
Keevil 

Matthew Barker 
Matthew Dive 

Matthew Ledgerwood 
Melusine of the Roses 
Merrox 

Michael "Curtis" Daley 
Michael Burnett 
Michael D Stein 
Michael Ehrhardt 
Michat Januszewski 
Mikael "Krank" Bergstróm 
Mike Nudd 

Mike Tidman 


Mikko Leho 

Mikko Parviainen 

Monty “I was right about the 
butterfly!" Nash 

Morani 

Muiris Daniels 

Nathaniel "Verbanotos" O'Neil 
Nibbio 

Nic Matuzic 

Nicholas Fabergé 

Niclas Holmqvist 

Nihilio 

Nikica Puksic 

Nilson Valdevino Soares 
Nimrod Jones 

Ninnanuam 

nirvanaheim (SHIMIZU Toshiki) 
Noelor 

Oliver Griffin 

Oliver Hambsch 

Oliver Hoffmann 

Oliver Peltier 

Ols Jonas Petter Olsson 
Ondiej Bohm 

Paaj 

Pablo "Hersho" Domínguez 
Pablo Andres "Charly" Bullotta 
Pablo Pérez Gómez 
Panagiotis 'Ginomai Mecha' 
Perrakis 

Pantognost 

Paolla Luchetti (Destiny) 
Pascal Alexander 

Pascal Caillaud 

Patricio Carlos Júnior 
Patrick Sandoval 

Patrik Nordebo 

Paul "Athanase" Rollier 
Paulo Marcelo Soares Brito 
Pawet "nimdil" Matysiak 
Peter De Kinder 

Peter Gates 

PhallicBoy 

Phil Wheatley 

Pierre E. Besedovsky 
Pierre-Jean Cottalorda 
Praktfulle Halvor Sehested 
Groenaas 

Prof. Haffar, Harim 
ProfessionalNihilist 

Racheet 

Rainer Voswinkel 

Raphael Bourdot 

Rasmus Nicolaj West 
Raven DeBorgia 

Reece Howe 

Renn Ascari 

Rich Harrison 

Richard “Spyder” Partridge 
Richard Litzkow 

Robert Roig 

Robert Watson 

Robin Low 

Rodrigo “Ezequiel Stone” D' 
Alecio 

Rodrigo Carvalho Silva 


Rui AVELINO 
Rune Printzlau 
Sara “Ennoia” de Lindt 
SaxMan the Woolly 
Saykin Ryoni 
Scaut 

Schlumpf 

Sean Riley 

Sergio Delgado 
sev 

Seven Tan 
Shaman Loves Tania (1996) 
Shaman Spiritchaser (Alexandre 
Dias) 

Skafte 

Solfi 

Sondre Øverås 

Sophie Islington 

Seren Berthelsen Holm 
Sparks 

Special Agent Jack Brubeck 
Spellforger 

Stalks-the-Reef 

Stefan Breuker 

Stefano Miorelli 

Stelio Passaris 

Steve Symons 

Stew Wilson 

Stuart ‘Badger’ Quinton 
Stuart Moreton 

Suviko Korhonen 

Sven Bothe 

Synapse 

T.R.L 

Ta2’ “The Eye” 

Tamsyn ‘Destroyer of Worlds’ 
Kennedy 

Ted A. Sanne 

terminal] 

Thaleia Flessa 

Thalles de Mello 

Théa Capek 

Theo Evans 

Thomas Schindler 

Thomas Trifon Giokas 

Tiago Bardo 

Tim Everson 

Tina “Tinzel” Parker 

Todd Hill 

Tommy Svensson 

Tomsdad 

Tyrellus The Mad 

Victor Jiménez Merino 

Ville Ojanperà 

Vincent Verhoeven 

Vistani Radanavic 
waelcyrge 

Wajanai Snidvongs 
Weltwandler 

Westmark Gajhede 
William Dovan 

Xavier Carlier 

Yoo, Seung Hyun 

Yves Sprinke 

Z3RO 

Zeven 


Kickstarter Backers 


HE 


679 


 -— —— Ss 


1 
4; 
3j 


"LOS 


| 
: 


"Danger" Will Robinson 
"Jumping" Johnny Cunningham 
(un]reason 

A. Vesseur 

Aaron Hays 

Abhsalonikas Benaeliz 
Adam “Shadowfox" Tullett 
Adam Nathanson 

Adrian Calasahan Leegaard 
Jensen 

Adrian Reynolds 

Aecio Borba 

Alan “DjinnJah” Watson 
Alan Douglas 

Alan McNevin 

Alan Orr 

Alasdair Watson 

Aldrema 

Alessandro Bruschi 
Alessandro Rossi 

a Alex A. Biral 

" Alex Moran 

Alexandru Tsernenku-Kennedy 
Alexis Hodieux 

Allan Lawrence 

Alvaro Saavedra 

Ammad Javaid 

Anastasios "Cipher" Barbisis 
Anders Hole 

Anders Holmstróm 

y, Andrea Buratta 

Andrea Migone 

Andreas "Sockis" Spovfelt 
Andreas "Zanity" Bengtsson 
Andrei Antonio Gonzalez Reyes 
Andres Villavicencio 
Andrew Cain 

Andrew ' Whitenoise' Rogers 
Andy "Andreas Rayne" Dodd 
Ángel Martínez Murillo 
Angela van Willhem and the 
Dark Souls Cabal 
Angelithus Berseik 

Angus MacThunder Maitre du 
Force 

Anhell change 

ANIMAfelis 

Anja Rebekka Schultze 
Aquarios Victor 

Arcade Lancelot de Isengard 
Arjun Nagaphui 

Arkyn 

Arnaud “Khentar” Martin 
Arthur Boff 

Ashley Williams 

Austin Balfour 

Azrael von Braunschweig 
Balancer 

Bardo de valfenda 
Barthélemy ‘Skender’ 
Alezandaru 

Basil “The Q” Kioustelidis 
Bekir Cihangir Buyukataman 
Ben "Aritei" Bandelow 

Ben Liddell 


680 


Ev Zr 


Ma$e: The Ascension 20^ Anniversary Edition 


Ben Neilsen 

Ben Treeby 

Benjamin David Hardy 
Bidule 

Björn S 

bondetamp 

Boris Barkovic 

Borja García de los Ríos 
Brendon ‘Ipsisimus’ Dare 
Brian Nisbet 

Bruno "Potato" Oliveira 
Bruno Jack 

Bruno Pavani Bertolino 
Bruno Soares Jardim 
Brynjar Sigurdsson 
burningcrow 

Cabiere 

Cael Winters 

Calianthe 

Cammeron Manski 

Candy Oldcar Guadalupe 
Canto Mac 

Carlo Ledezma 

Casidhe Nebulosa, bani 
Merinita 

Cel. Andrew "Folha do Outono" 
Bates 

Che "UbiquitousRat" Webster 
Chris "Colin Riley" Schetzle 
Chris "The Dragon" Domakinis 
Chris & Brooke Haba 
Chris Hall 

Chris K. Cook 

Chris Lupton 

Chris Oldgeorge 

Christian A.Nord 
Christophe Larralde 
Christopher Smith 
Christopher W Mercer 
Cintain 

Cirdan Fang 

Conrado Foelker 
Corenthian 

Dan L. Nielsen 

Dane Winton 

Daniel "Deaddy" Bogdanosi 
Daniel "DM" Martins 
Daniel "Illuminos" Persson 
Daniel Esquizo 

Daniel Fernández Rubio 
Daniel Lundsby 

Daniel Reis Santos 

Daniel Tyson 

Danni Feveile Bórm 

Danny James Walsh 
Dasyrch 

David B. "Capricorne" 
David Bergkvist 

David 'Doibs' Koch 

David Jannati 

David PETIOT 

David Pírez 

David Rose Fraser 

David van Nederveen Meerkerk 
Decai Virano 

Delano "Tagmar" 


DEN BITTRA MANNEN 
Dhaunae De Vir 

Dirk Vanleeuw 

Dominick Fazolari Meyer 
Dragaz 

Drigo De Eraba, The Mind 
Sculptor 

Duke Bobby 

dumdrak 

Duna 

Duncan "Uncle Dunkle" Harris 
Durro-Dhun 

Edd Glasper 

Eddie Berrios 

Eder "Lael Oliveira da Cabala 
Quimera" Barbosa 

Edouard Contesse 

Eduardo Oliveira Ribeiro de 
Souza 

Edwin Ab'Enion 

Egor Borkovskiy 

Elisabeth 

Elldaryck 

Elzo Tovani Benzaquen 
Emerson Gois 

Émili "PixelDust" Lemanski 
Emiliano Marchetti 
Emmanuel "ketzol" LANDAIS 
Emmanuelle "Claudia Vonigner" 
Nadin 

Erik Dorrschuck 

Erin Cooke 

Esmeralda - The Immortal 
Empress (Destiny) 

Eva Morrissey, Hermes bani 
Shaea 

Evil JoN 

Fabiano Silva (Kane X) 

Fabio Agripino Fernandes 
"LoboHunter" 

Felipe "Ann" Braga de Oliveira 
Felipe Shimabukuro Kai 

Felix Hartung 

Ferdinand von Schenk 
Fernando Autran 

Ferret 

Filipe e Ana Rosa Cristino 
Frank Malcher 

Fredrik "Dremacon" Oskarsson 
G J O'Neill 

G. van der Vegt 

Gabriel B P Costa 

Gaia King 

Galdor Varamir 

Gavin Burke 

Genesteal 

Gert Schepens 

Gevaert Gregory 

Gregório Tkotz 

Guardián de las Sombras Aurora 
Yangtse, Eutánatos 

Guido Gerritzen 

Guillaume "Lenny" Asset 
Guillaume Paci 

Gustavo Soares Pinto 
Hachas 


Haggai Elkayam 

Hal Storey 

Hampus Åström 

Harma Lever 

Hastein le French 

Heimi 

Henning “The Lieutenant” Hauser 
Houston Laredo Forster 
Howard Wong 

Hyades Luine 

lan Asha 

Ibai Saracho 

Ideganshaman 

Igor Coura de Mendonça 

Igor López de Munain - 
Iker Eginoa ‘BatOutOfHell’ 

In Memory of Olwen Ferrie E 
Ingo Beyer 

ipsi 

lvo de Mooij 

J. Zweers - 
Jackdaw master of shadow 

Jackson Blakeney, bani 

Bonisagus 

Jacob Hand 

Jair Vianna -X 
James Allen 

James Doherty 

James Jahn 

James Klement 

James Wax-Edwards 

Jan Heitger 

Jared Neveling 

Jaroen Kuijper 

Jason Lund 

Jassin Nasr 

Jaustin Sminker 

Jay “AkashicJunkie” Lawrence 

Jay Steven Anyong 

Jean-Baptiste Vlassoff 

Jean-Luc DERMINOT 

Jennifer Fuss 

Jens “Spacejens” Rydholm z 
Jens Thorup Jensen 

Jens Thorup Rasmussen 

Jeremy Brown 

Jeremy Forsyth 

Jez Green 

Job Nicolau Travaini 

Jody Wood 

Joe McNamara 

Johan Qvist 

Johan Staaf 

Johan Utstrand 

John Doe 

John Lambert , 
John The Bear Horler d 
Jokin Il the Barbarian bani 

Euthanatos G 
Jon McAdoo 

Jonas Hansson 
Jonathan Marshall 
Jordan “MILLANDSON” 
Millward 

Jörg Diener 

Jorge Idarraga 


Joris Van den Bergh 
Jose Luis Perez Zapata 
José Manuel Viegas 
Joshua Stone 

Josue Insua 

Juanma Palacios 
Juliano de Miranda 

Kai Schiefer 

Kaisa Vitikainen 

Kaltesh 

Karl Hagen Mann 
Kathandras 

Kazz the Voidbringer 
Ken Finlayson 

Kent Soerenrar 

Kernel 

Kevin Groeschler 

Kevin Guerrero bani Tremere 
Kevin Satra Schwarz 
Kieran Carder 

Kiith 

Kim Dong-Ryul 
Kithain85 

Kokiteno 

Konstantinos Bakas 
Lachlan Jones 

Lars Bengtsson 

Lars Berenger 

Lars Holgaard 

Lars Lauridsen 

Lauro Melo dos Santos 
Leath Sheales 

Lee ‘JC Denton’ Arthur 
Leonard Blyx 

Leonardo 

Lifestealer 

Livia von Sucro 

Lorena de Medeiros 
Loriana “Elendae” Giuliani 
Louis 

Lucas Danez 

Lucas Salim Sanches 
Luis Antonio Avalos 

Luiz Carlos Sant'Ana Junior 
Luiz Paulo Vieira 

Luiz Sócrate 

Lunus Flambeau (Sophia 
Heredia) 

Luzbhel 


Magister Scholae Burak Türkóz 


bani Janissary, bani Hermes, 
Keeper of the Sacred Sun and 
Grand Seer of the Seven Hills 
(on behalf of Anadolu Hikaye 
Anlaticilari) 

magus Bernardo Cortizo (PhD- 
to-be) 

Maicon Luiz de Souza 

Maja Zaccara 

Mandavar der Suchende 
Manel Canós Gardener of the 
Tree 

Manfred Krause 

Manuel Hora 

Mara Cardozo 

Marc Bevan 


Marc de Diego 

Marc-Andre Schick 
Marcelào Eugênio Amaral de 
Faria 

Marcelo Andere 

Marco Andre Mezzasalma 
Marcos "Vrykos" Pereira 
Marius B 

Mark ‘McGig’ Berry 

Mark S 

Markus Wagner 

Martin Christensen 
Massimiliano “Max” Lorenzin 
Mathew Bryan 

Mathias Vestergaard Thomsen 
Mathieu Guittard 

Matt C. & Sabrina R. 
Matthaeus Schumacher 
Matthew Cramsie 

Matthew Wasiak 

Matthias Pettersson 

Matthias TT Svensson o Sara 
Törnström 

Maus 

Michael “Eric Vogue” Brosens 
Michael Buchheim 

Michael Kelly 

Michael Lángaver 

Michael Murr 

Michael Robson 

Michael T Rowlands 
Michele "MKI" Beltramini 
Miguel Esteban Carrero Torres 
Mikael Bakkely 

Mikael Björk 

Monsieur Meuble 

Mr.Poke 

Murilo "Calech" Sarno 
Nadia Cerezo 

Nathan "doc" Pasieczny 
Nathan North 

Nibodhika 

Nicholas "Antinomian" 
Kassavetis 

Nicholas Watkins 

Nick Ball 

Nick Clements 

Nick Garfield 

Nick Lennon 

Nicklas Larsson 

Nicolas "Aramis" Castagnet 
Nicolás Croce 

Nicolas Schiller 

Niels Weller 

Nighson 


Nikolai Steen The Arcane Master 


Noam Yanai 

Ola Johnsson 

Oliver "Ahrimanius" Summers 
Oliver Steckmeier 

Olman o'Sanctum 

Orlando "Billy Tombstone" 
Borges Botelho 

Orpheus Saint-André 

Panu Laukkanen 

Patrick Mulder 


Patrick O'Donnell 
Pau Aragonés Illanas 
Paul “Zichity-Zach” Stephenson 
Paul Ryan 

Pawel Daruk 

Pawet Paradowski 

Pelesit 

Per Nyrud Kaas 

PERROT Claude-Arnaud 
Peter Endean 

Peter Malmo Lange 

Peter Merkel 

Petri Wessman 

Phil Burge 

Phil Masters 

Philip K. Creswell 

Philipp Hinderer 

Philipp Simon Kausch 

Pierre ‘Victor’ Brun 

Pitpipo 

Printkithbookboggan 

Prof Mordecai 

Prof. PhD. MSc. Electrical 
Engineer Erol Mazhar Aksoy, 
member of the Utopians group 
and The Society of Ether 
University Research Fellow 
(on behalf of Anadolu Hikaye 
Anlaticilari) 

Prometheus Hermeticus 

Pyros Vivere Flambonis 

Pyxis Corvus 

Quentin Besnehard 

Rafael “Kaichkull” Mastromauro 
Rafael Brasilio Grotti da Silva 
Rafael Cruz 

Rafael e Luciana Devera 
Rafael Marques de Albuquerque 
Rafael Miney 

Rafael Rodrigues 

Ralf Schienhammer 

Rasmus Lyngkjaer 

Rémi DESSY 

Rene Reinhold Schallegger 
Rex Walker of the Breakfast 
Cabal 

Rhodry Castle 

Ricardo “Sardonis” Penteado 
Richard 'Vidiian' Greene 
Ricky Veale 

Rivina "The Laughing Inferno" 
Heartwood 

Robert Bushell 

Robert C. Allen 
Roberto Hiroshi Kina Filho 
Roberto Trinkel 

Robin “Jarval” Farndon 
Rod “Lokison” Mendes 
Roger Meier 

RPG - Passas 

Salem Pulsifer 

Sarah T. Carter 

Scott Mullock 

Sean Winship 

Seth Hartley 

Shane Mclean 


Shosuro 
Silvio Herrera Gea 
Simon 

Simon Andrews 
Simon Chadwick 
Simon York 
Sireyi Valyenya 
So Happy | Could Die 
Somalucard 

Spi 

Stefan Lundsby 

Stefano Monachesi 

Steffen Schwertfeger 
Steffen Thorbjernson 

Steffie de Vaan 

Stephen Birks 

Stephen Briggs 

Stephen Joseph Ellis 
Stephen McElvaney 
Stephen Nurse 

Steve (Erekosé) Edwards 
Stuart “Pattern Spider” Adam 
Sylvain "OgGy" Tanguy 
Sylvio S Maia conde 

Tácito "Tremere" Reis 

Tahd Inskepp 

Talita "Setheus" Amaral 
Tamara Fendez 

Teemu Lehmusmies 

The First and Forsaken Lon-Lon 
The Mordak 

Theo Milliner 

Thiago Goncalves 

Thomas DELICOURT 
Thomas Maund 

Tiago Marinho 

Tiffany Korta 

Timothy Mushel 

Tito G. S. de Aguiar 

Toine 

Tom "Sagacious Paunch" 
Webster 

Tom Coleman 

Tommy Midttveit 

Torben Lindqvist 

Tor-Eilif Hargaut 

Totenrand 

Trajan Hagen Kober 
Trickster 

Tristan Lhomme 

Valerio Paladino 

Varvara Kromiko 

Vegard Kivle 

Vicious Whisper 

Vincent “Victorien LOYOLA” 
Mora 

Vincent Lhote-Hatakeyama 
Virgule “Mafalda” Gaspard 
Vitor Gabriel “Viktorius” 
Etcheverry 

Vladimir “Devereaux” Dzundza 
Whitt 

Will Inskip 

William Huntingdon 


Kickstarter Backers 68l 


4 


4 


HE 


Meee v 


— ———— ga 


William Lamming 
William Rullenraad 
Willy kaceres 

Wong Lok Yau, Yoana 
Wyld 

Yann Krehl 

Yasmijn Jagtenberg 
yes 

yugo4k 

Yzabel Ginsberg 
Zander Catta Preta 


Ataru Alyna Moroboshi of 
LoMarin's Irregulars 

Starshia- Verbana Keeper to the 
key of the Library of Alexandria 
Adam Caverly and David Ghosh 
Alexey Rybak, Oleg Krapilsky 
Alone Dillon , Emily Scott 
Andrew Bailey, James Surano 
Angelo Frost, Arthur Drake 
Anna Bradley, Berek Marcus 
Ashton & Lancer 

Austr Ball, Enadiate 

Bryan J. Dolan & Blake Mclean 
Chris & JoAnn Alexander 

Chris B, Greg M 

Christopher C. Basoco and Mikel 
Smothermon 

Clayton Thereaux, Eli Arel 
Damien Allen and Isabella 
“Sorri” Sensi 

Daniel Peterson and Melissa 
Goodyer 

Danielle Oremus and Zachariah 
Lint 

Deanna Rossi, Pat Gibson 
Dippy 

Conner McKay 

Dr Gideon Pyro, and The Shaper 
of Flesh 

Dr. Mark Kellett Darker Days 
Radio 

Drew "Schwimmwagen" Dietz, 
Shuniqua "Madlyric" Dietz 
Elizabeth Vargo, Jack Daw 
Shawn "Tezbak" Warren, 
Working Arist 

Fox Circe, metaphorge 

Francois Labelle, Ghislain Hivon 
Fyrestorm and Silicone Reboot 
Guy-Samuel F. Dussault, Daniel 
Giguere 

lain ‘Hanrahan’ McStuart, Gilles 
‘Red Hand’ Dubois 

Ignacio J. Gallegos 

J. B. Altepeter & A. C. Elliott 
Jarrod of Usher, Jareth Mercury 
Desidario Thorn 

Jason "Jadasc" Schneiderman, 
Galen & Esther Brownsmith 
Jason Van Pelt, Ho-yin Ko 
Jeffrey S. Leger and Thad Green 
Jesse James Grice Jr. and 
"Chance" Gawain Lancelot Du 
Lac Jean LaFitte 


682 


Ma$e: The Ascension 20^ Anniversary Edition 


Jonathan Weber, Michael Crary 
Joseph M. Jankowski ^ Michael 
T. Prokop 

Kainus Galbani, Capt. Leblanc 
Kelley Pennington and Nicholas 
Radcliffe 

Kelly Cashion, Alex Beigh 
Miguel Ludert, Frank Paul 
Courtell 

Mnerillenith, Gideon and Kizzy 
Puck 

Nicholas D. Dragisic, Tim 
Prisching 

Patricia Wright, William C. 
Walker III 

Roy Barea, bani Verbenae & 
Melissa "Shadow cat" Gonzalez 
Trelles, bani Shaea 

Salvador White, Daniel Rachels 
Samuel Tesla & Erica Tesla 
Scathaigh; Mystica Void-Eye 
Sigma Star, Ben Lyons 
Stephanie Fuller, Jonathan David 
Kaipainen Gibbons 

Steven Bobula, Betty J. Osthoff 
The Doctor 
[412/724/301/703/ 415] bani 
Virtual Adepts; Eric the Poet 
Timothy Gousie, Mitzi Gousie 


Twitcher Bears, Bryan O'Gillan 


Martijn "Malas the Shield" 
Haan; lvo "Gregorius the 
Sword" Goudzwaard 

Ádamo and Mariana Barth 
Alexander Kratochwill, Heike 
Vollnberg 

AXEL GOTTELAND and 
CASSANDRE 

Ben May, Panagiotis "Old Man" 
Papakos 

Charley Gustavsson, Henrik Lindén 
Damian O'Dea, Emma O'Dea 
Daniel Connors, Lucas Swanson 
Diego Sousa and Alesson 
Moura 

Eleanor Mae Kelly & Aaron 
Jacob Kelly 

Harold Bambridge Sr. and 
Harold Bambridge III 

Ivan "El Can" de Neymet; 
Federico "Mr Fancy Pants" 
Eriksen 

Jakob Kiilerich and Magister 
Thomas of the LTG Roleplaying 
Club 

Jürgen Mayer, Ingmar Juhnke 
Lars Pedersen 

Legr 

Locke Bendeckar 

Luciana Nogueira Soares, 
Carolina Voigt 

Magus Ernesto Gonzales 

de Navarre, Adept Major 
bani Quaesitor bani Ordo 
Hermeticum; Elias (Karl 


Klyvansikte) Savetun 

Martin Insaurralde, Nicolas 
Briozzo and Sebastian Costas 
Matias Veny Coca, lñaki Iglesias 
Cancio 

Matt Lyons; Kayt Armstrong 
Matthew Sanderson & Jamie 
Jordan Lee 

Mikkel Lund & Andreas “ESSO” 
Jensen 

Milosz Nawrat; Midian 

Nikolas Koumoundouros, Stathis 
Karapanos 

Paige Oakley, Kenneth Lemieux 
peter peretti, Katharina Krovat 
Rappeler Orosháza, Asoka 
Chendraikhar 

Rémi "Batronoban" Teuliére and 
David Santiago 

Saray Lorenzo Nieves/ Mikel 
Montero Matellanes; Yes. 
Sebastian “Madison” Gift, 
Simon Dietsch 

Stéphan “Dante” Alomène and 
Christophe “Nashan” Claude 
Tiemi Hashizume and Viviane L. 
Costa 

Tristan Sandras, Fondation Nemo 


Andre Sisneros, Gamescape 
North, P. H. Wise, Jessa “Demon 
Cat” Denmark, Mark Stone 

Ed Sloman, Games & Stuff, 
Bluharlequin. Belltower Minion, 
Maroon Hairworm 

I'm Board! Games & Family Fun 
Jason Seitz, Wizard Asylum, 
Mark Garbrick, Jennifer Bedell, 
Shane lvins 

Oliver "Madmenquill" Blais, 
Dominic Parent, Guillaume 
"Punch" Senechal, Christian 
"Lucius" Morin, Junior 

To Cecil Carter from his friends, 
Wyld Windancer, Shawn 
Auguston, Darwin Cooper, Brett 
Howell 

Xin Lao Gi Dao Long, the 
Dragon-brother Wanderer 

(Wu Lung/Dreamspeaker), 
Abril "Luna" Segovia, Bruja 
(Verbena), Michel "Nex" Jones 
(Adepto Virtual), Diego "Edge" 
Cota (Virtual Etherite) Omar 
Ivan Toledano Landeros. 


Brett Bozeman 

Eidan Rodriguez, Anatole Serial, 
Vania M. Luna, Reiner Vaniem 
Rakot XIV, Bicho 75 

Grymme, Doctor Scarlett, Mr 
Freak, Doctor Wylde, Lord Black 
Stone 


Justin “KakarisMaelstrom” 
Fitzgerald, Kali "Evonine" 


Fitzgerald, Zoe "TwilightPonyLove" 


Fitzgerald, Kira Fitzgerald, 
BoxCatGames.com 

Nutters McGee, Jason "Ogre" 
Gandy, Allan "Kid A" Lazenby, 
Dade "I TOLD you | was a 
mage!" Thompson, McKenzie 
"Dae" Smith 

Vortex Game Center, Alvaro 
"Sixaola" Madrigal, Eduardo 
Salazar Casasa, Sebastián 
Urbina, Thalyann and Elrick from 
Costa Rica 


Jérome Bianquis; Arthur Noseda; 


Jonathan Churin; Gatien 
Billon-Maurin; Trollune; Charles 
Trécourt; Louis Trécourt; Yannick 
Peyréde; Spirit of Chantelouve 
Petros Panagiotidis, Giorgos 
Stoupkas, Manolis Kemerlis, 
Charidimos Brintakis, Nikiforos 
Axaopoulos 


“Marcos Rivas Villa-Lobos 
Ramirez, Chief Metallurgist 

to King Charles V of Spain”, 
“Emmanuel Torres bani 

Tytalus, bani Hermes of The 
Underground Train Cabal”, 
“Gerrard Fireseed", “Leopoldo 
Monsivais Carrillo, Cult of 
Extasis", “Max Clow Reed, bani 
Ex miscellanea" 

Adrian Praetorius, Stefan Faber, 
Stefan Kletke, Franz Janson, 
Patric Gótz 

Liam Young, Zhubeen Tavakoli- 
Keshe, Andrew 'Standing-Stone' 
Smith, Richard Rae, Michael 
Lamb 

Ngel "Orokin" Stamatiadis, 
loannis "What Do You Mean?" 
Logovitis, George "The Akashic" 
Papageorge, Tassos "Theios 
Acastos" Tassopoulos, Nikiforos 
“Dr. Bedlam” Vlachos, Manolis 
“Great Worm” Skoulikas 

Oliver Schuster, Jonas 
Rosenfeldt, Marco Klomfas, 
Karen Schuster, Domaene 
Teutoburg 

Revered Chaniry of the Sacred 
Heap&Malt in Honour of our 
dear Lady Bavaria, Munich: 
Patrick O’Connor bani 
Flambeau; Mita Izumi (NOT 
Kim!); Dr. Francis Nightingale, 
Sc.D.; Merodin Ryan Flair; 
Eadee 


Balyrion 

Ben 

Brandon H 

Capt. Phil Broughton of the 
Sidereal Strike Force 
Captain Button 
Christopher "Walks A Beat" 
Greer 

Daedalus Tychus 

Dave Thommas 

David Merrifield 

Dean Rogers 

Dylan Spencer 

Ethan Zimmerman 
Gorham 

Jacob "Flock of" Segal 
James Cory Fudge Alston 
Jim Tetrick 

Kent Frazier 

Kurt DeBellis 

Lee Sims 

Malak Arioch Lanfear 
Matt "aRJay" Reynolds 
Matthew Walker 

Maya Novak 

Michael TJ. Pippin 
Notivago 

Patrick R Venable 

Peter Dean 

Raul Urbina 

Remi Letourneau 

Rob Hall 

Robert Montgomery 
Ryan Michael McBawn 
Saif Ansari 

th’ buni 

The Mouse 

Zax the Divine 

Zurotzu 


OxDEADBEA7Z 
5p3ctor 

Adam Brown 
Adam Lichter 
Alex Danley 
Alexandre Simard 
Alexi Kadanov 
Alisha Walton 
Altrus Torfellen 
Anthony E. Harbo 
Anthony J. Pirri 
Arius Hephaestus Aetnaeus, bani 
Verditius 

Arthur McMahon 
Benjamin Holt 
Benjamin Houchard 
Benoit Attinost 

Bill Patino 

Billie Loves Brian 
Brahm Dorst 
Brian Davis 
Bryan Pearson 


Charan DuFrancois 
Chase Bacetich 

Chris ‘Errant’ Harper 
Chris Landmark 

Chris Stewart 
Christian Lacroix 
Christopher Adragna 
Christopher Alan Slater 
Christopher R. Wain 
CJ Roberts 

Colin R. Jones 

Colin Urbina 

Connor Fraser 

Corvis Munin 

Corwin Barrington 
Crusher-of-Cities 
Daniel Anctil 

Daniel Deschenes 
Dave Arcs 

David “Rook” Broussard 
David Connell Olsher 
David Mortensen 
David Starner 

David Sycamore 
Donald R. Clarke 
Donovan Mays 

Dr. Alexander Bustos 
Dylan Cockell 

Eric Aubey 

Eric Castle Ill 

Erik Daguerre 

Erin Meyers 

Erin Riggsmith 

Gary "Tank" Masters, 
Sidai of the Akashayana 
Galen 

Garron Lewis 
Gordon Alexander 
Grace Evans 

He-Zin Kwon 

J. Quincy Sperber 
James Vacca 

James VanderHaeghe 
Jared "OniKage" Weber- 
Spencer 

Jared Van Meter bani 
Hermeticum 

Jason Ramboz 

Jay A Miller 

JeFF Croft 


Jeremy "Undead Scottsman 


Dunn 

Jessica & Christopher 
Jim Urquhart 

Joe Giammarco 
John Endicott 

John 'Enigma' Foster 
John Lord 

Joseph Soloway 
Josh Fohrman 
Joshua Wilson 

Justin Buckley 


Initiate 


n" 


Keith W. Davis 

Kelly J Clark 

Kevin Lawrence 

Leo Starwind 

Lucas Fitzgerald 

Luis Gomez 

Malk Coord 

Mark E Elsinger 

Martin “Grizzly” Lagace 
Mason Maxwell 

Matt Rock 

Matt Schmidt, Order of Hermes - 
House Ex Miscellania 
Matthew Mitchell 
Matthew Webb 
Matthias Lamonte bani 
Flambeau 

MaxMahem 

Michael J. Hehn bani Sons of 
Ether “ The Hehnious One” 
Mike “DaiTengu” Miller 
Mike Solomon 

Nancy Calvert-Warren 
Nate Miller 

Nick Burtner 

Nick Edwardsen 

Nick Fury 

Nikhil Daniel Majumdar 
Nixelleborus 

Noah J. Nelson 

Owen Thomas Wright 
Patrick Ley 

Paul Thorgrimson, Akashic 
Brotherhood, Old Buddhist Crab 
Porthos 

Richard Andre Dagenais 
Rob Bessey 

Robert Gilson 

Rocco 

Scary Day 

Selene O'Rourke 

Seth Johnson 

Shado 

Shane Rose 

Shiara Chow 

Sodocam 

Solly Ross 

Stephen Asbell 

Stephen Shulusky 

Steve S 

T.R. Fullhart 

T2 

Tetsuo 

The Chained Crescent 
Thomas Langenbach 
Timothy Cook 

Vincent Marrow 

Wes Gideon 

William “The Midgar Demon” 
Smith 

Wolfdawg 

X& 


yes 
Zalabar 


Alart Heihael 
Aleksi Airaksinen 

Bokshik Kim 

Christine Jones 

Fang Tzu-Ping 

Gando 

Han Shan 

Helio Rodrigues 

Jeppe Nybo 

Kim Wincen 

Lucas Bonsignore-Boisset 
Matt Wood 

Nikodemus Siivola 
Richard Drysdale 

Stefan Schasse 


AKEZ Zwol 

Alexander Morozov 
Allessandro Peres 

André Reis Sakaya 

Andy Jackson 

Anthony "Selketh" Dennetiere 
Bastien Daugas 

Belinda Kelly 

Bénédict Louis Stanislas de 
Montmorency-Laval 

Chris Santos 

Christopher 'eChryxius' Wai 
Demian 

Dr. Andine Paradox 

Dr. Dorian Graywood 

Dr. med. Elaine Barreaux 
Eric Sor 

Fabián Álvarez / (Club Mecatol 
Rex / Green Dog Studio, 
Madrid, Spain) 

Francesco Tarasconi 
Gareth T. Roberts 

Gobbos 

Graeme Foote 

Gunnar Olai Dahle Sivertsen 
Hugh O'Connor 
Johannes von Stein 

José C. Delgado R. 

Juan José López-Ayerbe 
Julio Rodrigues 

Lee Dong-youn 

Luna Lepus 

Marcia Keglevich 

Mario S Camillo 

Mark Pryce 

Martin C. Howard 
Mathias Begehgj Maller 
Matt Timm 

Matteo Cesari 

Matthew Gollschewski 
Mattia “Ebrithil” Pellin 
Michael Eringsmark 
Michael Fellows 


683 


Kickstarter Backers 


M 


v X. 


Michel Foisy 
Mike Francis 
Mikko Rautalahti 
Neil Glassford 
Noita Joikura 
Pal Wilhelmsen 


Paul “Vesta” Williams 
Paul Shawley 

Pedro Augusto Rodrigues 
PESSIOT ROMAIN 

Rhys Fisher 

Robbie Eberhardt 


Robert "Cryn" Schlesier 
Rodrigo Fontana 

Sidewinder 

Stephane "FRlinux" Dudzinski 
The Horsemen 

Thiago Fazolari Meyer 


Thomas Ollier 
Tillan 

Torben van Hees 

Trilly Chatterjee 

Ville Takanen 

William Wagner Moraes Artero 


Disciple 


Adept Major Michael Kently 
bani Merinita, Deacon of 

the Cabal of Black Roses & 
Sunblessed Heir to the Blood of 
Dreaming Feathers 

Alun Powell 

Graftina Hadna Haada 
Hyeonseung "Devil Giraffe" Lee 


Jason Place 


Kairam b. Ahmed Hamdan 
Michael V. Roberts 

Pedro Santos 

Professor Utopia 

Ryan Summers 

Victoria Ashley-Croft 


Bruno "Jamie McCallister, bani 
Verditius" Filipe 

Desmond Woolston 

Eric Smailys 

George Matzen 

Khaos Farbauti Ibn Oblivion 
Matthew Whitt 

Nik ‘Tungus Grumph' May 


Rel Zhirah 
Ryan “The Peregrine” Hefley 
Xavier Durand 


Charles Siegel and Celia Rae 
Felipe “Ditrian” Novaes 
Michael Fitzpatrick 


Adept 


Bentley W. Chism 

Cassie Collins 

Drew “Industrial Scribe” Scarr 
Emilio J. "Krusmir" Sánchez- 
Sierra 

Eryk Gustavson 

Frédéri “Volk Kommissar 
Friedrich” POCHARD 

lain MacPhee 


Lawjick 

Mike Ruch 

Robert Biskin 

Silvia Solange Mantilla 


Anton A. Adam 
Ben Birk 
DocEZ 

Dr Simon Exton 


Fox 
Henry Kay 
Henry R. Moore III 


James:Eidolon 
Joshua McKenna 


Karl "Aedh" Lerman 
Karl Manheim 
Kendrick Hough 
Lindsey R Douglas IV 


Mario Meo 

Matthew McGuire 

Michael “Xero” Ilott 

Mizuho Shiraishi 

Nicolas Szakacs 

Nikolaus Poenisch 

Parzival 

Paulo Daniel Salles Ramos 
Spike, and his Avatar Rajamal 


Q-Prime 


(O?-?)O Konta O(°-°O) 
--==5T4T1C==-- 

A. Treamayne 

Adam Doochin 

Adam Whitcomb 

Adrian Dopazo 

Adrian Marangoni 

Agent Max “Stoney” Stilwell 
Alain MORANGE 
alcethenecromancer 

Alec Humphrey 
Alexander Probst 
Alexandre Kerscher Souza 
Andefious Oldenson 
Anders Silverplats 

András Babós 'Babszem' 
Andreas Reck 

Andrés Higua. "Endymion 
d'Lume", Magi Tremere. 
Andrew Augstine DiNovo 
Andrew J Gordon 
Andrew MacLennan 
Andrew W. Jones 
Andrew Waterfall 
Andrew Wilson 

Ariel Kaiser 

Az'zametry 

Bael the Cruel 

Baughb the Bard 


684 


Ma$e: The Ascension 20^ Anniversary Edition 


Ben Baccaert 

Ben Kesner 

Benedict Shek 

Benjamin Loy 

Benn Grant 

Bernd Linke, Michael Gebhard 
Blake Deakins 

Blake Elder 

Bob Stauffer 

Boris CHOTEAU 

Brett Easterbrook 

Bryce Undy 

Bryn Celyn 

Cameron "Corax" Harrell 
Caroline Hammer 

Cedar Blake 

Charles Sherwood Morrill 
Chris Daher 

Chris Eggers 

Chris Sutton 

Christoph Meiselbach 
Christopher Gunning 
Christopher Pallante 
Cody Risberg 

Conrad Julian White 
Corinna Vigier 

Coyotekin 

D L HECTOR 

Daniel "Sir Whiteout" Guariento 


Daniel "Hears-The-Wind" 
Fishman 

Daniel Gochnauer 

Daniel Haddon 

Daniel Ley 

Daniel Niekerk 

Dantae Black 

Dave Brookshaw 

Dave Meigs 

David ‘dj’ Coleman (Time Bomb) 
David Lucardie 

David William Kaufman Il 
Dawid "Dievas" Wojcieszynski 
Débora “Tia Deb” Brellenthin 
Dee Taylor 

Derek “Pineapple Steak” Swoyer 
Derek Grimm 

Dimitrios ‘Archmage’ Xanthakis 
Diogenes “Lycaen” Silva 

Doctor Alfons Von Grawitz Ph.D. 
Dolan Ross Scherfel 

Donald M. Dillon 

Donny Mason 

Dr. Paul Hauser bani Quaesitor 
DreamingLilliane 

Drew Clowery 

Dreyus Nox 

Eduardo A. Magdalena Aguin 
Emerrin Whitefoot 


Emma McAllister 
Erasculio 

Eric Baker 

Eric Lee Thurston 

Eric Manschot 

Eric Mersmann 

Eric Vogel (Joe Edwards) 
Erik Bergesen 

Erik E. Mederos 

Ernie Sawyer 

Evan Hughes 
Evelyne Schreiner 
Father Eric Pensman 
Feian 

Filip Van Huffel 
Footnotegirl 

Frank “Anaximander” 
McCormick 

Frédéri “Volk Kommissar 
Friedrich” POCHARD 
GH Trace Webster III 
Graham Starfelt 
Greg Phillips 
Gregory Faber 
Harald Hellerud 
Heinrich Krebs 

lan Dominey 

lan Ellis 

lan Hamon 


lan MacRae 

lan Price 

In memory of John Depp 
Integra van Hellsing 


Kieran Hughes 
Kougen Nakahito (Kai) 
Kyle Henderson 

Lace 


Nelson Candanedo 
Nicholas A. Tan 

Nicholas 'Doomcarver' Lelos 
Nicholas Huntington 


Shad Scarboro 
Shawn P 
Sicill Col 
Sifu Dustin Rahn 


Ironnick Laughing Magi Nik "Miranda Forrest" May Sigurd Gunnvaldr (Dragos) erz 
Isaac “Stack Trace” Linkletter Laurent Gruchet Nikolas Faust Spyder na Talesin E 
J. W. Bennett Leo Knesgaard Heby Patrick Pocher Steven Hykes 

Jacob Gann Lin Wyeth Paul ‘Five Eyes’ Harries Steven Lau 

Jacques Barcia Loki63 Paul Marshall Syal 

James Heche Lord Shaidin of the Three-fold Perrin “Quillion Fuller” Rynning Talamond Majibon E 
James Vogel Path Piere Le Chuck Thibaut Gaillard 
Jan-Willem Kaagman Luke K. Johnson Polly Parker Thomas Scott £. 
Jared Slupsky Luke Smith Prof. Nicholas Atreides Thomas Webb - “My name is $~, 
Jared Wadsworth Manuel Cadiz Randy L Jeffries Jr Thomas, dreamer of dreams: 1 
Jason "Doc" Haddix Marc Blinn Redfujió Look on my stories, ye Mighty, ~j 
Jason ‘Prospero’ Pennel Marcos Almeida Leite Bomfim Renan Cesar Palomino and despair!” ~ 

Jay Page Marcus and Leslie Arena Richard Forster Thrice Great Guilherme Pinto ‘ 
Jaye Barnhart Mark “Merlin Mitnick” Roy Richard Libera Tim "Noisecode" Blackstone E 
Jeff Mark Hope Richard Z. Troester Tobias Schulte-Krumpen 

Jeremiah L Schwennen Mark Lazure Rob Collins Tony Elaluf 

Jeremy "Vaydyn" Cue Mark P. Redford Rob Sharp Tony Patterson £ 
Jeremy Thomas, Bani Ecstasy Mark Pavlou Robert “Grendelki” Beasley Torgeir Johansen ‘ 
Jessica Lilith Darke - Mark Smith Robert "Voudoun" Lewis Trista and Daniel Robichaud, - 
Widderslainte Adsinistrani Martin Goodson Robert B. LeMoyne A.R. Nakama and Shannon | 

Jimi Hendricks Martine Loncan Robert Flinchum ^Haz" Harrower-Nakama 1 

John "Dade" Morris Matthew "The Gentleman Roberto Pedro Antón Troy Lenze , = 
John “Why do | always get Gamer” Dawkins Roberto Salles Troy Wiersma 


covered in Ick?” Murphy 
John A W Phillips 


Matthew G Payton 
Matthew Palsson 


Rodolfo Schmauk 
Rodolphe Duhil 


vincent furstenberger 
Vladislav Lazarov 


John Doe Mehmet "Rakshasa" Ortac on Rory "Muggle" Mclntosh Whismerhill 

Johnny Bibz behalf of the Anadolu Storytellers Rory ‘TrippyHippy’ Hughes Will "scifantasy" Frank 
Jon B. Gopegi Merick the Blue aka "Dark . Rose Bailey William F Scrimsher III 
Jonathan "flymolo" Grimm Jedi70" Russell Pancoast William McBane 
Jonathon Stout Michael Brewer SaintOn Wyrdrune 

Joseph Bowman & Lindsay Michael Scholz Sam Myatt Xane the Black 
Fairbairn Miguel Reyes Samuel Hoskins Xiu Tong 

Julian Navarro Morgan Nichols Sarek Yann Abaziou 


Julie shamas and Greg Tait 
Kaoleth 
Ken-loves-Princess-Sandy 
Kevin Chauncey 


Bellona Wingvane 
Martin A. McDowell 


Morten Schei aka Dracono 
Twilightwalker 

Nate Kelly 

Nathan & April Matz 


Scott A. Peters 

Seana McGuinness 
Sebastian N. Behrndtz 
Sebastian Pusch 


Master 


Robert Stephen “Fitzgerald” 
Fulkerson 


Roxxah Teel 


Timur Hahn - Magister Mundi 


Zachary Thomas Tyler, Primordial 
Dreamspeaker Baruti/Taftani 
Kahin 

Zero Ninja 


Matthias von Eisenberg bani 
Flambeau 


Kickstarter Backers 


^ 


"Lj 


Indexes 


Purple page numbers denote important and/ or defining entries. 


For rules and Traits, see Rules Index. 


For an overview of the subjects, see the Table of Contents at the beginning of this book. 
Given the immense size of this book, only important entries have been indexed. If we tried to reference every appearance of, say, magick or mage, each 


page in the book would need a citation. 


I2ules Index 


see also Table of Contents (pp. 5-7) 


Charts are marked in ALL CAPS BOLD 
PURPLE at the top of their appropriate sections. 


Character Creation 
Pages 246-339 
see also Optional Rules: Body Control, 
Differential Background, Minimum Abilities, 
Professional Skills and Expert Knowledges, 
Resonance, Merits and Flaws, and Well-Skilled 
Craftsman 
CHARACTER CREATION CHARTS 250-253 
Affiliation 248, 254 
Character Traits and Terms 248 
Character Sheet Sample 249 
Concepts 250, 254 
Experience (Points) 253, 335-336, 642, 646 
Freebie Points 250, 253, 255, 257 
Focus: Paradigm, Practice, and Instruments 256, 
259, 339 
see also General Index (appropriate terms), and 
Rules Index: Magick Systems (Focus and the Arts) 
Prelude, the 262-265 
Sample Character Creation 260-262 
Specialties 274, 284,288 
Spheres 248, 250, 253, 328-329 
during character creation 257 
raising and learning 336-337 
Traits 266-335 
Raising and Learning Traits 336-337 
Abilities 275-300 
see also General Index: Abilities 
Talents (Primary) 275-279 
Alertness 275 
Art 275-276 
Athletics 276 
Awareness 276 
Brawl 276 
Empathy 277 
Expression 278 
Hobby Talent 277 
Intimidation 278 
Leadership 278-279 
Streetwise 279 
Subterfuge 279 
Talents (Secondary) 289-293 
Animal Kinship 289-290 
Blatancy 291-292 


Search 294-295 
Seduction 295 
Skills (Primary) 279-283 
Crafts 279-280 
Drive 280 
Firearms 280 
Martial Arts 280-281 
Meditation 281 
Melee 281-282 
Professional Skill 277 
Stealth 282 
Survival 282 
Technology 282-283 
Skills (Secondary) 295-298 
Archery 205 
Biotech 295 
Energy Weapons 296 
Hypertech 296-297 
Jetpack 297 
Riding 297 
Torture 298 
Knowledges (Primary) 283-289 
Academics 283 
Computer 283-284 
Cosmology/ Subdimensions 284 
Enigmas 284 
Esoterica 284-286 
Expert Knowledge 277 
Investigation 286 
Law 286 
Medicine 286 
Occult 286-287 
Politics 287-288 
Science 288-289 
Knowledges (Secondary) 298-300 
Area Knowledge 298 
Belief Systems 298-299 
Cryptography 299 
Demolitions 299 
Finance 299 
Lore/ RD Data 299-300 
Media 300 
Pharmacopoeia 300-301 
Archetypes (Nature and Demeanor) 248, 


250, 267-273 


see also General Index: Archetypes 
Arete 248, 250, 257, 328-330 


Dexterity 273 

Intelligence 275 

Manipulation 274 

Perception 274 

Stamina 273 

Strength 273 

Wits 275 
Backgrounds 301-328 

see also General Index: Backgrounds 
Background Ratings Over Five 301 
Pooling Backgrounds 301-302 
Technocratic Backgrounds 302-303 

Allies 303-304 

Alternate Identity 304-305 

Arcane/ Cloaking 305 

Avatar/ Genius 259, 305-306, 338 

see also General Index: Avatar 

Backup 306-307 

Blessing 307-308 

Certification 308 

Chantry/ Construct 308-309 

Contacts 309-310 

Cult 310 

Demesne 310-311 

Destiny 311-312 

Dream/ Hypercram 312 

Enhancement 312-313 

Fame 313-314 

Familiar/ Companion 314-316 

Influence 316-317 

Legend 317 

Library 318 

Mentor 318-319 

Node 319-320 

Past Lives 320 

Patron 320-321 

Rank 312 

Requisitions 321-322 

Resources 322-323 

Retainers 323 

Sanctum/ library 323-324 

Secret Weapon 325 

Spies 325 

Status 325-326 

Totem 326-328 

Wonder 328 
Essences (Dynamic, Pattern, Primordial, 


see also General Index: Arete/ Excel- Questing) 248, 250, 266-267 
see also General Index: Essence 
Health 248, 330, 334-335, 406-409 
see also Rules Index: Dramatic Systems 
(Combat, Health and Injury) 


Merits and Flaws 642-651 


Carousing 292 


Do 292-293 lence 
Flying 293 Attributes 225, 248, 252, 255, 274-275 


High Ritual 293-294 see also General Index: Attributes 


Lucid Dreaming 294 Appearance 274 
Charisma 274 


- .. 686 Mage: the Ascension 20^ Anniversary Edition 


see also General Index: Merits and Flaws 
Merits 642-646 
Acute Senses 642-643 
Berserker 644 
Dark Triad 643 
Language 643 
Stormwarden/ Quantum Voyager 643 
Ties 643-644 
Too Tough to Die 644 
True Faith 644-646 
Umbral Affinity 644 
Flaws 646-648 
Addiction 646 
Construct 647 
Cursed 646 
Deranged/ Derangements 648-650 
Echoes 646-647 
Enemy 647 
PTSD 647-648 
Stress Atavism 644 
Genetic Flaws 650-651 
Physical Flaws 650-651 
Mental and Social Flaws 651 
Quintessence and Paradox (Wheel) 248, 
250, 331-333 
Willpower 248, 250, 257, 329-331 
see also Archetypes, above 


Dramatic Systems 
Pages 398-495 
see also Optional Rules (many) 
INDEX TOPICS ARE ALPHABETICAL 
Combat 409-435, 445-457 
COMBAT CHARTS 445-457 
Armor/ Shields 447 
Attack/ Defense rolls 445 
Circumstances 446 
Cover/ Concealment 446 
Dirty Fighting 447 
Do Techniques 448 
Hand-to-Hand 448 
Hazards 454-457 
see Environmental Hazards 
Health/ Injury/ Healing 446 
Magickal Violence 445 
Martial Arts 449 
Ranged Combat 447 
Spirit Combat 445 
Targeting 446 
Weapons 450-454 
see Weapons 
Battle, Order of 410-413 
Phase One: Attack 410-411 
Attack Rolls 410-411 
Phase Two: Defense 411-412 
Blocking 411 
Countermagick 412, 417-418, 538, 
545-546 
Desperate Defense 411 
Dodging 411 
Parrying and Rebound Attacks 411 
Phase Three: Damage 412-413 
Adding Damage Up 412 
Soaking Damage 406, 412-413, 545 
Types of Damage 406-407, 412 
Armor and Shields 416, 438-439, 447, 453-454 
Combat Maneuvers 418-420 
Purple text indicates combat chart location 
Hand-to-Hand 420-422, 448 


Bite 420 

Claw 420 

Disarm 420 
Flank/ Rear 421 
Grapple 421 

Kick 421 

Punch 421 

Ready Opponent 421-422 
Sweep 422 

Tackle 422 
Thunder Punch 422 


Dirty Fighting 422-423, 426, 447 


Blinding 423 
Body Slam 423 
Curbstomp 423 
Haymaker 423 
Head Butt 423 
Jab Pistol 423 
Low Blow 423 
Pistol Whip 423 


Do 424, 426-430, 448 


see also General Index: Do 
committed training 426-427 
eight limbs of Do 427-428 
The Peaceful Way 428 
Arrow Cutting 428 

Bullet Catch 429 

Hurricane Throw 

Iron Shirt 429 

Kiaijutsu 429 

Plum Flower 429 

Soft Fist 429 

10,000 Weapons 429 
Typhoon Kick 430 
Weapon Art 430 


Martial Arts 423-427, 449 


as a focus 424 

soft/ hard techniques 424 
Counter Throw 424 

Death Strike 424-425 
Deflecting Block 425 
Dragon Tail Sweep 425 
Drunken Style 424 
Elbow/ Knee Strike 425 
Flying Kick 425 

Hard/ Soft Strike 425 
Joint Lock 425 

Kuei Lung Chuan 427 
Nerve/ Pressure Point 425 
Snake Step 425 

Snap Kick 425 

Spinning Kick 426 

Throw 426 

Thunder Kick 426 

Vital Strike 426 

Withering Grasp 426 


Ranged 418-420, 446-447 


Aiming 418 

Autofire 418 

Bows 419 

Cover 419 

Movement 419 

Range 419 

Reloading 419 
Scopes 418 

Strafing 419 
Three-Round Burst 419-420 
Thrown Weapons 420 


Two Guns 420 
Environmental Hazards 435-444, 454-457 
see also General Index: Environmental 
Hazards 
Bustin’ Stuff 413, 437, 439-440, 456-457 
Drowning/ Suffocation 440-441, 456 
Drugs/ Poisons/ Disease 441-444, 456 
Electrocution 438-439, 454 
Explosions 437-438, 455 
Falls/ Impact 439 
Fire 436, 454 
Harsh Weather/ Environment 435 
Starvation/ Thirst 435-436 
Magick and Violence 413-415 
Examples: Magickal Violence 415-416 
Fast-Casting in a Fight 415, 535-536 
Magick Enhances Violence 414-415 
Violence as a Focus 413-414, 417 
Violence Enhances Magick 414 
Magickal Duels 430-434 
Certamen 432-434 
Contests 430 
Flame/ Core Wars 431-432 
Ordeals 430 
Reality Challenge 432 
Optional Combat Rules 
see also Rules Index: Optional Rules 
General Action Rolls 141 
Cinematic Damage 412 
Weapon Length 420 
Drunken Style 424 
Dodging the Blast 438 
Bustin’ Stuff 439-440, 457 
Tactics and Circumstances 416-418 
Aborting Action 416 
Ambush 416 
Armor/ Shields 416 
Blinded 416 
Immobilized 416 
Knocked Down 416 
Magickal Tactics 417 
Multiple Opponents 417 
Rough Weather/ Terrain 417 
Spirit Combatants 417-418 
Stunned 417 
Targeting Location 418 
Weapons 450-456 
Ammunition 454 
Melee Weapons 450-451 
Military Hardware 453 
Ranged Weapons 452 
Scopes/ Sights 454 
Thrown Weapons 453 
Digital Web Systems 465-473 
see also General Index: Digital Web, Internet 
DIGITAL WEB CHARTS 472 
Access 466-467 
Constraints 467, 469 
Data Sphere (in Web) 467 
Digital Damage 470-473 
Icons 467-468 
Magick in the Web 469-470 
Physics/ Travel 468-469 
Restriction Protocols 469 
Web Traits 467 
Whiteout (Paradox) 470 
Dramatic Feats 402-405 
see also Rules Indexes: Game Systems (for 
rolls) and Character Creation (for Traits) 


Index 687 


E 


i DRAMATIC FEATS CHARTS 403-405 
Feat Descriptions 402 
b Feats of Strength 405 
Health and Injury 406-409 
see also Rules Indexes: Combat and Charac- 
ter Creation (Health Trait) 
HEALTH CHARTS 406 
Healing Damage 408-409 
Magickal Healing 409 
Recovery Time 408-409 
Patch 'Em Up 409 
Psychic Trauma 407-408 
Things Man Was Not Meant to Know 407 
Types of Injury 
Aggravated 334-335, 407, 412 
Bashing 334, 406, 412 
Lethal 334, 407, 412 
Initiative and Movement 399-401 
MOVE CHARTS 401 
Automatic Feats 400 
Doing Several Things at Once 400 
Initiative and Ratings 399-400, 410, 416 
Metric Conversations 398 
Movement 400-401 
Otherworlds 474-485 
OTHERWORLDS CHARTS 484 
Access 474-481 
Agama Sojourn 478-481 
Agama Traits 478 
Harrowing 478, 480 
Travel Beyond Underworld 480 
Astral Travel 476-478 
Astral Traits 477 
Body of Light 477, 510, 520 
Going Adrift 477-478 
Silver Cord 477 
Gauntlet 475 
Periphery 474 
Stepping Sideways 475-476 
Becoming Ephemera 475-476 
Avatar Storm Optional Rules 479-480 
Example of Umbral Travel 485 
Magick in the Otherworlds 483-485 
Difficulties 483-484 
Coincidental Magick 484 
Shining 484 
Spheres 484-485 
Travel Between Layers 481-483 
Acclimation 482-483 
Disconnection/ Disembodiment 483 
Finding Way 481 
Old Roads 481-482 
Spirit Entities 485-495 
Meeting Spirits 486 
Feats 489 
Roleplaying/ Storytelling 356-357, 495 
Spirit Types 486-488 
Greater/ Lesser Entities 487 
Traits 
Charms 489-495 
Essence 489 
Gnosis 489 
Rage 488-489 
Willpower 488 
Technology 282, 458-464 
Vehicles 280, 402, 440, 458-462 
V CHARTS 460-462 
Collisions 459 
Combat 459 


E 


e: teor >= 


Driving Skill 459 

Stunts 459 

Traits 458-459 
Inventing, Modifying, Improving 463-464 
T CHARTS 463 

Inventing 464 

Repair/ Modification 463-464 

Unconventional Enhancement 464 


Game Systems 
Pages 384-395 
see also all other Rules Index sections 
Action Types 388-391 
ACTIONS CHART 391 
Extended 389-390 
Extended and Resisted 390-391 
Multiple 388-389, 414 
Reflexive 388 
Resisted 390 
Simple 388 
Teamwork 391 
Dice Pools/ Traits 246, 385-386, 401 
Die Rolls 385-388 
Complimentary Rolls (optional) 389 
Thresholds (optional) 387, 393, 438, 503, 
536 
Difficulties 386-387, 392, 401 
DIFFICULTY/ SUCCESS CHART 387 
Failure 386, 392-393 
Botching 330, 333, 387, 389-391, 393 
Botches and Magick 393, 501-502 
Trying Again 391-392 
Golden Rule, the 384, 498 
Modifiers 386-387 
Success 386, 386, 394-395 
Automatic Success 330, 386, 394-395 
Spending Willpower 388, 395, 411 
Turns, Scenes, and Stories 384-385 
Action Turn 384, 399, 410 
Downtime 337, 384-385 


Magick Systems 
Pages 498-617 
CASTING CHARTS 502-510 
Auras 507 
Base Casting Roll 502 
Base Damage/ Duration 504 
Casting Effects 501 
Common Magickal Effects 508-510 
Body Magick 508 
Crafting Wonders 508 
Fate & Fortune 508 
Illusions 508 
Objects & Elements 509 
Perception/ Psychic 509 
Quintessence Energy 510 
Spirit Powers 508 
Time & Distance 509 
Correspondence Sphere Ranges 504 
Degrees of Success 503 
Difficulty Modifiers 503 
Dividing Success Rule (optional) 504 
Gauntlet Ratings 505 
Illusions 504-505 
Magickal Damage 504 
Magickal Feats 502 
Paradox and Quiet 506-507 
Paradox Generated 502 


688  Ma$e: the Ascension 20" Anniversary Edition 


Quintessence 507 ont 
Teleportation Locations 504 . 
Time Magick 505 
Basics (of magick rules) 500 
Casting Step by Step 528-547 
Allies/ Acting in Concert 532, 542-543 
Coincidental/ Vulgar 530-532, 533-535 
Countermagick 545-546 
Damage/ Duration 543-544 
Difficulties 535-536 
Dodging/ Resistance 544-545 
Effects/ Spheres 528-529 
Failure 546-547 
Botching 540, 547 
Focus 529-530 
Modifiers 536-537 
Mundane Skills/ Magickal Effects 532-535 ^ 
Mythic Threads 530 
Range 543 x 
Rituals 529, 538-542 
Rotes 529 
Sphere-Specific Effects 544 
Successes 537-538 x 
Using Quintessence 537 
Using Willpower 536-537 
Examples 561-565 
Focus and the Arts 565-600 


see also General Index: Focus, Paradigm, 
Practice, Instruments 


LIST OF PARADIGMS, PRACTICES, 
INSTRUMENTS 566 


Working, Changing, and Growing 565-567 
Instruments 586-600 
Common Instruments 
see List 
Personalized 587-588 
Significant 588 
Standard 587 
Symbolic Power 586 
Tools/ Time 586-587 
Unique 588 
Paradigms 567-572 
Common Paradigms 
see List - 
Creating Other Paradigms 571-572 
Focus, Belief, Punch 568 
Practices 572-586 
see also entries in General Index 
Alchemy 573 
Art of Desire/ Hypereconomics 573 
Chaos Magick 574 
Craftwork 574-576 
Crazy Wisdom 576 
Cybernetics 576-577 
Dominion 577 
Faith 577 
Gutter Magick 578 
High Ritual Magick 578 
Hypertech 579 
Maleficia 579-580 
Martial Arts 580-581 
Medicine Work 581 
Reality Hacking 581-582 
Shamanism 582 
Voudoun 583 
Weird Science 584 
Witchcraft 584-585 
Yoga 585-586 


Optional Magick Rules 538-539 
Automatic Success 539 
Dividing Successes 504, 538, 564 
Domino Effect 539 
Paradox Effect 547-553 
PARADOX CHARTS 549 
Acquiring Paradox 547 
Backlash 548-549 
Delaying 549 
Effects 548-549 
Nullifying 549 
Paradox in Mage Revised (option) 550 
Permanent Paradox 547-548 
Rolling for 548 
Shedding 549 
Types (of Backlash) 547-553 
Burn 551-552 
Disbelief 553 
Flaw 550-551 
Quiet 550 
see also below 
Realms 552-553 
Spirits 552 
Quiet 554-561 
QUIET CHARTS 556-557 
Baseline Reality 554 
Cure? 556-557 
Effects 555-557 
Manifestations 559-561 
Alteration 559 
Hobgoblins 559 
Mindscapes 557-559 
Storytelling 554-555 
Types 
Denial 557 
Madness 558 
Morbidity 558-559 
Reality Zones 611-617 
Rotes/ Adjustments 512, 601-611 
Awaken Inanimate 607 
Black Card/ Little Black Box 601 
Chain/ Whispers 608 
Dimension Bomb 605 
Golden Gunman 605 
Hands of Death 601 
Hot-Shotting 601 
Hypernarrative Influence 603 
Penny Dreadful’s Bright Penny 608 
Psychic Interface 608 
Right-Click 602 
Sanitize Evidence 603 
Secure Scene 604 
Social Programming 605-607 
Talons 609 
Vampire Lawn Chair 610 
Witch's Vengeance 610 


see also the Lexicons, pp. 23-32 

For specific rules and Traits, see specific 
entries in the Rules Indexes. 
9/11/2001 75, 77, 99, 135, 582 
Absolute, the 44-45, 224, 226, 232-233, 577 
Abilities 248, 250, 255-256, 275-300, 318, 


Spheres 511-528 
Conjunctional Effects 511 
Locking Effect 511-512 
Pattern Spheres 511 
Sphere Entries 
see General Index (by Sphere Name) 
Sphere Specialties 512 
Technocrat Spheres (optional) 512, 524-527 
Wild Talent 527-528 


Optional Rules 

Page numbers give rule entries only, not 
associated references. 

Advantages 658 

Archmastery of Spheres 68 

Avatar Storm 479-480 

Body Control 285 

Bustin’ Stuff 439-440, 457 

Cinematic Damage 412 

Complimentary Rolls 389 

Data Sphere 467 

Differential Background 302 

Do: The Peaceful Way 428 

Dodging the Blast 438 

Drunken Style 424 

General Action Rolls 141 

Magickal Options 538-539 

Merits and Flaws 642-651 

Minimum Abilities 276 

Minimum Driving Skill 459 

Patch ‘Em Up 409 

Paradox in Mage Revised 550 

Professional Skills and Expert Knowledges 277 
Raising and Buying Backgrounds with Experi- 
ence Points 336 

Resonance (as a Trait) 333 

Resonance and Synergy 560-561 
Resonance, Merits and Flaws 256 

Sanity Sinks 242 

Shedding Paradox 549 

Shifting the Zone 615-616 

Social Conditioning/ Reprogramming 605-607 
Things Man Was Not Meant to Know 407 
Thresholds 387 

Umbrood Magick 490 

Verbenae and the Old Roads 481-482 
Weapon Length 420 

Well-Skilled Craftsman 279 


Storytelling 
Pages 342-379 
Storyteller, Chronicle, and Troupe 342 
Gaming as Ritual 343 
Improvisation 342-344 
Rules and Problems 343-345 
Triggers, Limits, and Boundaries 335 
Preparation 346-349 


General Index 


336, 427-428, 532-533, 560, 573, 652, 663 
associated with practices 573-586 
associated with totems 634-636 
see also Rules Index: Character Creation 

acolyte 141, 532, 542-543, 620 


see also consor, extraordinary citizen 


Music for Mages 348 
Notes 346-347 
Building the Chronicle 349-354 
Common Ground 349-353 
Concept Q & A 353-354 
Epic and Intimate 350 
Telling Your Story 354-366 
Characters 355-357 
Conflict 359-362 
Memorable Set Piece 361 
Resolution 362-363 
Setting 357-359 
Storyteller Resources 363 
Structure 354-355 
Theme, Mood, Symbolism, Tone 363-366 
Mage-Specific Elements 366-374 
Arete and Ascension 369-371 
Avatars and Seekings 366-369 
Avatars, Rules, and Reality 367 
Storytelling Magick 371-374 
Coincidence? 371-372 
Example of Play 373 
Focus 371-373 
Simple Method/ Character Method 371 
Storytelling Paradox 
Chronicle Types 374-379 
Disparate 377 
Genres 375 
Mixed/ Crossover 378-379 
Orphan 377-378 
Technocracy 376-377 
Traditions 374-376 


Wonders 

Pages 651-663 

Rules 651-653 
Background Costs 653 
Crafting 652-653 
Paradox 651-652 
Types 652 
Use 652 

Biotech 657-661 
Cybernetics 657-660 
Biomods/ Genemods 660-661 

Mystic Wonders 653-655 
Bafflejack 653 
Bulletproof Hoodie 654 
Trushades 653 

Technocrat Hardware 655-656 
Alanson Hardsuit 656-656 
Falconi Attire 655 
VDAS 655-656 

Weird Science 661-663 
Kimoda's Thundergloves 661-662 
Madness Grenade 662 
Rebooter 662-663 


Aelder Bole, the 92, 102, 480 
Aetherial Reaches, the 92, 98-99, 103 
Affinity Sphere(s) 65-66, 147, 250-251, 257, 
339, 587 

see also two-page spreads for each group, 
and Rules Index: Character Creation 


Index 689 


agama sojourn 88, 99, 478-481, 484 

see also Rules Index: Dramatic Systems (Oth- 
erworlds) 
Ahl-i-Batin/ Batini, the 104, 122-136, 197- 
200, 202-203, 577 

at character creation 252 
Akashayana/ Akashic Brotherhood 2, 122-123, 
145, 148-149, 197, 202, 222-223, 307, 423, 
426-430, 580, 607 

at character creation 251 
Alanson Hardsuit 169, 361, 447, 476, 656-657 
alchemy 124, 206-207, 288, 593, 599 

as a practice 573 
amalgam (Technocratic) 173, 177, 179, 301- 
303, 322 
animals 289, 291, 297, 306-307, 314-316, 
402, 404 

as Background characters 306-307, 314-316 

character templates 618-620 

kinship 289, 291 

riding 297, 402, 404 

spirits/ totems 632-635 
Anthropic Principle, the 93, 168-169, 525 

see also Enlightened Anthropic Principle 
apprentice/ apprenticeship 141, 337-338 
archery 295, 429, 452 

as a Skill 295, 453 

in combat 429, 452-453 
Archetypes (Nature and Demeanor) 248, 250, 
255, 267-273, 330-331, 339 520, 561 

see also Rules Index: Character Creation (Traits) 
Archspheres, the 68, 511 
Arete/ Excellence (state of) 44-45, 59, 137, 
173-174, 663 

as a character Trait 248, 250, 254, 257, 259, 
262-265, 305-307, 328-330, 334, 338-339, 
367-371, 412, 483, 498, 500-617, 567 

as a Wonder Trait 652-654, 661-662 

casting magick roll 498, 501-502, 535 

see also Genius, and Rules Indexes: Charac- 
ter Creation (Traits) and Magick Systems 
armor 334, 411-413, 416, 418, 436, 438-439, 
453-454 

Armor and Shields chart 447 

as an instrument 588, 591 

see also Rules Index: Combat 
Art of Desire, the 62, 193, 232, 288, 299-300, 
322 

as a practice 573, 582 
Ascension (goal/ ideal/ state of) 19, 39, 
42-43, 52-53, 65, 100-101, 140, 142, 173, 
183, 187, 202, 236, 243, 335, 338-339, 356, 
466, 473, 480, 570, 645, 664 

Storytelling Ascension 369-371 
Ascension War, the 18-23, 41-43, 47-53, 59- 
60, 105, 112-113, 120, 126-243, 246, 259, 
266, 319, 379, 498 
astral travel 87-88, 94-95, 101, 103-104, 
106, 289, 311, 484, 520, 559 

see also Rules Indexes: Dramatic Systems 
(Otherworlds) and Magick Rules (Spheres) 
Astral Umbra 94-97, 311, 474-485 

see also High Umbra 
Attributes 225, 248, 252, 255, 274-275, 313, 336 

see also Rules Index: Character Creation 
(Traits) 
auras 81, 276, 316, 484, 507, 509, 519-520, 
560, 646 

chart 507 
Autocthonia 169, 178, 186, 615, 636 


690 


Avalon 125, 176, 185, 569, 590 

see also Harbingers, King Arthur, Navalon 
Avatar 43-44, 52, 60-61, 66, 86, 112, 143, 
184, 238, 254-255, 262-265, 281, 303, 305, 
338-339, 366-371, 478, 488, 503, 509, 
527, 641, 650 

as a Background Trait 250, 259, 317, 320, 
331-332, 338, 417, 520, 528, 537 

see also Genius, Essence, and Rules Index: 
Character Creation 
Avatar Storm, the 22, 50, 78, 82-83, 86, 91, 99, 
135, 156, 169, 172, 178, 195, 205, 236, 375- 
376, 399, 418, 466, 473-485, 613, 641, 643 

rule systems 479-480, 505 

see also Dimensional Anomaly 
Awakened history 60, 120-135 
Awakening/ Enlightenment 39, 46-47, 53, 
56-57, 60-61, 66, 74-75, 81, 138, 167, 173, 
176-177, 236, 254, 262-265, 305, 335, 554, 
624, 630, 668 
awakening substances 353, 443, 508, 607- 
608 
Awareness (state of being aware) 46, 81-82, 474 

as a character Trait 276, 418, 474, 645 

see also Rules Index: Character Creation 
P of Coincidence 371, 533-534, 595, 603, 
608 
Backgrounds 180, 182, 248, 250, 256, 301- 
328, 336, 560, 595, 618, 620-621, 632-634, 
647 

Background Ratings Over Five 301 

costs for Wonders 653-663 

pooling Backgrounds 301-302 

Technocratic Backgrounds 302-303 

see also Rules Index: Character Creation 
(Traits) 
barabbi 49, 170, 226-227, 233 
baseline reality 235-236, 554 

see also Derangements (Trait), Marauders, 
Quiet 
Bata'a, the 130-135, 197, 204-205, 303 

at character creation 252 
Batman (because fucking BATMAN!) 73, 78, 
282, 286, 317, 323, 598, 616 
belief (force of) 62-64, 67, 112, 122-123, 138, 
227, 264, 285, 298, 310, 329, 335, 356, 529, 
532-534, 539-540, 553, 565, 588 

see also focus, Mythic Threads, paradigm 
biomod 175, 180-181, 183, 190-191, 295-296, 
312-314, 623-624 

as Devices/ Enhancements 660-661 
biotech 190-191, 295-296, 312-314, 579 

as a Knowledge 295-296 
Black Suit/ Man (Men) in Black/ MiB 19, 119, 
172, 174, 180-181, 188-189, 193, 233, 315, 
324, 558, 614, 616, 635 

character template 627-628 
bodhisattva 43, 53, 226, 243, 370, 597 
Burning Man (festival) 73, 79, 207, 215, 318, 
615 
Burning Times, the 48, 59, 127, 129, 150, 162- 
163, 584 
Bygones 126, 240-242, 379, 553 
Cauls, the 227, 229, 231-232, 559, 630-631 
Celestial Chorus 2, 127-135, 145, 150-151, 
221, 329, 577, 646 

at character creation 251 
certámen 143 

rule systems 432-434 
Chakravanti see Euthanatos 
Changelings see faeries 


Mage: Ihe Ascension 20" Anniversary Edition 


Chantry 77-78, 86, 140-142, 308-309, 325, 
485, 531, 539, 590, 614, 663 

as a Background Trait 301-303, 308-309 

see also Construct 
character creation 
see Rules Index: Character Creation 
chi/ ch'i 149, 285, 293, 581, 591 

see also martial arts, Prime Sphere, Quintes- 
sence 
Children of Knowledge, the 2, 130, 198, 206- 
207 

at character creation 252 

see also Solificati 
Christ/ Jesus 123, 145, 150-151, 193, 220-221, 
227, 229, 231, 236, 317, 370, 531, 531, 597 
chronicle (as in Mage game) 20, 23, 260, 
263, 335, 339, 342-379 

see also Rules Index: Storytelling 
clone(s) 167, 174, 180-181, 186-191, 296, 
304-305, 315, 324, 553, 579, 590, 593, 
624, 627, 663 

see also Black Suit, construct, Progenitors, 
Victors 
coincidental magick 63-64, 122, 178, 290- 
291, 293, 324, 371-374, 413-416, 498, 
500-501, 561-562, 572, 611-617, 651, 664 

coincidental vs vulgar 530-535, 547, 572 

see also Axis of Coincidence, vulgar magick, 
witness, and Rules Index: Magick Systems 
conjunctional/ combined Spheres Effect 69, 
498, 511 
Consensus, the/ consensual reality 48, 61-63, 
71, 78, 92-93, 110, 112, 122-123, 168-170, 
178, 185, 194, 227, 235-237, 239, 242, 324, 
525-526, 531-534, 549, 554, 588, 595, 
603, 645 
consor 141, 651 

see also acolyte, extraordinary citizen 
Control 169, 72, 179, 184-185, 376 
Construct (Technocratic Realm) 77-78, 169, 
174, 177-178, 301, 303, 308-309, 324, 
656, 659 

as a Background Trait 301, 303, 308-309 

see also Chantry 
construct (artificially constructed person) 174, 
180-181, 189-191, 323, 546, 623-624, 627, 
650 

as a Flaw 647 
Convention(s) (Technocracy) 132, 172-173, 
186-195, 303, 337, 582, 623 

see also Iteration X, NWO, Progenitors, 
Syndicate, Void Engineers, Technocracy, Tech- 
nocratic Union 
ee of the White Tower, the 125-126, 
15 
cops (conflicts with) 48, 75, 106, 143, 185, 
196, 231, 352, 384, 440, 621, 656, 661 

character templates 620-622 
Correspondence Sphere, the 64-65, 68, 75, 
114, 400, 417, 444, 469, 485, 504, 524, 
544, 601, 608 

Sphere entry 512-513 
Council of Nine Mystic Traditions/ Council, the 
127, 136-165, 197, 200-202, 209, 210, 218, 
254, 432-433, 482, 585, 663 

see also Traditions 
countermagick 313, 332, 490, 624-626, 645- 
645, 647, 652 

see also Rules Index: Magick Systems 
Coyote shaman 2, 153, 326-328, 634, 667 
Crafts/ Disparates 41, 120, 127, 130, 135, 138- 
139, 171, 233, 251-252 


see also Disparate Alliance, Disparates 
crazy wisdom 153, 561, 665 

as a practice 574, 576 
Crowley, Aleister 41-42, 46, 55-56, 58, 143, 
159, 284, 617 
Cult of Ecstasy, the/ Ecstatics 71, 100, 131-135, 
152-153, 200, 209, 576, 598, 600 

at character creation 251 
cybernetics 57, 175, 180-183, 186-187, 288, 
295.296, 312-314, 416, 447, 519, 521, 551, 
589, 593, 602, 609, 623-627 

as Devices/ Enhancements 657-660 

as a practice 576-577, 582, 608, 623 
cyborg 19, 61, 167, 180-181, 186-187, 228, 
295-296, 306, 312-313, 315, 317, 366, 409, 
421-422, 440, 453, 546, 576, 600, 609, 
614, 623, 648, 657-660 

character template 623-624 

see also cybernetics, Enhancement 
Daedaleans 126-132 

see also Order of Reason 
Data Sphere, the 65-66, 189, 467, 485, 512- 
513, 582, 602, 608-609, 609 

Sphere entry 524-525 
datacrawl, the see VDAS 
Damiana Silverwitch 2, 56, 665 
Dalou-Laoshi, the 123, 126, 132 

see also Five Metal/ Elemental Dragons 
Deep Umbra/ Deep Universe, the 92-94, 103, 
114-115, 194-195, 225-226, 239, 522, 656 

see also Etherspace, Void 
Demesne 101, 294, 507 

as a Background 310-311, 492, 559 
Derangements 648-650 
Descent 100, 224, 338, 367, 570 

see also Ascension, Nephandi 
Device (technological Wonder) 175, 177, 290, 
296, 312-313, 321-322, 325, 328, 461, 464, 
476, 521, 592, 623-626, 651-653 

see also Wonder(s), and Rules Index: Won- 
ders 
Digital Web, the 87, 92-93, 102-109, 147, 
155, 175, 198, 229, 289, 315, 374, 399, 
431-432, 481, 485, 490, 492, 494, 570, 590, 
602, 609, 615, 629, 638, 659 

rules systems 465-473 

spirits (memophores) 638-639 

see also Rules Index: Dramatic Systems (Digi- 
tal Web) 
Dimensional Anomaly, the 135, 169-170, 172- 
173, 178-179, 186, 473, 525-526, 605 

see also Avatar Storm 
Dimensional Science 65-66, 71, 88, 90, 92- 
94, 187, 289, 319, 324, 417-417, 484, 505, 
512, 602, 605, 602, 605 

Sphere entry 525-526 
Disconnection/ Disembodiment 88-89, 93, 
112-113, 475, 483, 526, 643-644 
Disparate Alliance, the 2, 9, 120, 176, 196- 
223, 251-252 

see also Ahl-i-Batin, Bata'a, Children of 
Knowledge, Crafts, Disparates, Hollow Ones, 
Kopa Loei, Orphan, Ngoma, Sisters of Hyp- 
polyta, Taftani, Templars, Wu Lung 

overview of 196-223 
Disparate, Disparates, the 19, 38, 41, 45, 120, 
127, 130, 135, 138-139, 141, 196-223, 226- 
227, 377 

see also Crafts, Disparate Alliance, et al 
Do (Akashic Art of) 148-149, 281, 292-293, 
580, 607 

as a practice 415, 580 


as a Talent 292-293 

as combat techniques 424, 426-430 

see also Rules Index: Combat 
Doissetep 19, 49-52, 105, 110, 112, 122, 125, 
127, 135-137, 139-140, 142, 147, 158-159, 
227, 466, 528, 561, 615 

see also Future Fates 
Dream Realms 92, 101, 239, 243, 311, 553 

see also Demesne, Maya 
Dreamspeakers/ Kha'vadi, the 88, 127-136, 
154-155, 199, 212, 233 

at character creation 251 
drugs/ entheogens (metaphysical uses of) 88- 
89, 152-153, 206-207, 215, 258, 264, 300, 
306, 441-444, 573-574, 576, 600, 626, 646 

as an instrument 591 

5 also Rules Index: Dramatic Systems (Com- 
bat 
Dynamism 21, 44-45, 183, 235, 491-492, 
628 

see also Essence, Metaphysic Trinity 
echoes (of Resonance) 276, 333, 561, 646- 
647 

see also Merits and Flaws, Resonance, and 
Rules Index: Character Creation (Traits) 
EDE/ Extra-Dimensional Entity 89, 171, 486, 
525 

see also spirit(s), Umbrood 
Effect (magickal) 57, 62, 66-67, 257, 281, 286, 
290-291, 293, 307, 328-329, 333, 427, 498, 
508-510, 528-617, 601-602 

see also Rules Index: Magick Systems 
egregores/ thought-forms 574, 548-500 
Eidolon 45, 183-184, 266 

see also Avatar, Essence 
eight limbs of Do 292, 294, 427-428 

see also Do 
elemental spirits 315, 356, 439, 636-638, 
486, 495 578 

character templates 636-638 
Enhancement/ enhancement 169, 175, 180, 
187, 331, 447 

as a Background Trait 312-313, 324, 327, 
331, 333, 548, 623, 642, 648-651, 652 

as biotech/ Devices 657-661 

see also Rules Index: Character Creation 
(Traits) 
Enlightenment 45, 173, 175-179, 183-185, 
236 

as a character Trait 328-329, 415-416, 
498, 501, 627 

as a Devices Trait 652, 655-659 

see also Arete 
Enlightened Anthropic Principle, the 93, 185, 
526 

see also Anthropic Principle 
Enlightened Science 168-171, 174-176, 179, 
183-185, 303, 324, 328, 376, 531, 596, 
601-607 
Entropy (principle) 21, 44-45, 91, 235, 480, 
491, 614 

see also Metaphysic Trinity 
Entropy Sphere, the 65, 68-69, 407, 417-418, 
430, 478-480, 485, 491, 601, 603 

Sphere entry 514-515 
Environmental Hazards 282, 285, 359, 413- 
414, 417, 431, 435-444, 454-457 
1 "n also Rules Index: Dramatic Systems (Com- 

at 

ephemera 88, 418, 475, 488-495, 511, 518, 
521-522, 608 
Epiphany, the 44, 183-184, 368 


Essence (Avatar) 44-45, 366-367 

as a character Trait 248, 250, 254-255, 
266-267, 338 
Etherspace 93, 113, 552, 615 

see also Deep Umbra 
Euthanatos/ Euthanatoi/ Chakravanti/ Thana- 
toics, the 2, 88, 100, 112, 122-123, 127-135, 
139, 146, 156-157, 227, 478-481, 558, 586, 
600 

at character creation 251 
Everdeen, Katniss 295, 352, 419, 616 
extraordinary citizen 76, 133, 172, 175-176, 
178, 447, 462, 532-533, 623, 651 

character templates 623-624 
explosives 299, 437-438, 455 

Demolitions Trait 299 
faeries/ fae, the 40, 47, 57, 92, 101, 120, 236, 
300, 379, 442, 507-508 
Fallen, the see Nephandi 
familiar 302, 314-316, 323, 331, 356 

as a Background Trait 302, 314-316, 323, 
331, 355, 477, 479, 618 

see also Rules Index: Character Creation 
Fetish 328, 489, 508, 522, 651-652, 662 

see also Wonder(s), and Rules Indexes: Char- 
acter Creation and Wonders 
First Cabal, the 127, 130, 135 
Five Metal/ Elemental Dragons, the 126-132, 
607 

see also Dalou-Laoshi 
focus (magickal) 61-64, 147, 232-233, 256, 
259, 261, 264, 281, 283-285, 287, 307, 312, 
329, 335, 337, 339, 413-417, 427, 498, 500 

examples of 627-631 

for Marauders 256, 259, 261 

for Nephandi 242-243 

rules systems 503, 529-530, 535-536, 
565-600 

in character creation 256, 259, 261 

Storytelling 371-375 

see also the two-page spreads for each 


group, and Rules Index: Magick Systems (Focus 
and the Arts) 
Forces Sphere, the 65, 69, 413-414, 422, 456, 
485, 601-605, 607 

Sphere entry 515-516 
Fragile Path, The 34, 38, 50, 116, 380 

see also Path 
Frankenstein/ Frankensteinian 190, 243, 265, 
319, 589, 647 
Friends of Courage, the 176, 185, 362, 377, 607 
Future Fates 22 

The Ascension War 41 

A Technocratic Upgrade? 185 

Cell Phones and the Internet 106 

Chantries and Horizon Realms 78 

The Dimensional Anomaly and a "Kinder, 
Gentler Technocracy" 169 

Doissetep and The Great Betrayer 50 

Hollow Treachery? 201 

The Horizon War, Doissetep, and the Storm 
110 

In Secrecy, This Infection... 170 

Nephandic Victory...? 233 

The New Millennium 77 

The Reckoning and Sixth Age 135 

The Reckoning, the Gauntlet, and the Avatar 
Storm 82 

The Sphinx 144 

The Spirit-Nuke 99, 110, 135, 169, 

The Technocratic Paradigm 63 


Index 69l 


EU: a 


The Traditions 137 
Galatis, Antonios Rave-N 2, 389, 668 
gate/ gateway 358, 508-509, 542, 545 

see also portal 
Gauntlet, the 82-83, 86-89, 91-93, 103, 109, 
113, 123, 171, 194-195, 236, 319, 324, 418, 
474-495, 521-522, 525-526, 544, 551, 605, 
608, 613, 639, 641 

crossing rules 475 

Gauntlet Ratings 484, 505 

see also Rules Indexes: Dramatic Systems 
(Otherworlds) and Magick Systems 
genegineering 190-191, 295-296, 313, 623- 
624, 657-660 
Genius, the 43, 45, 60-61, 183-184, 266, 
305, 338-339 

as a character Trait 250, 254, 257, 259, 
262-265, 305-306 

see also Avatar, and Rules Index: Character 
Creation 
ghosts/ wraiths 47, 88, 94, 96, 99-100, 102, 
300, 418, 454, 476, 478, 480, 507-508, 
553, 641 
Ghost Realms 88, 110 
Gilgul 50, 52, 142-143, 522, 546 
Golden Rule, the (in WoD terms) 

see Rules Index: Game Systems 
Goth (it had to be in here, after all...) 208-209, 
258, 319, 558, 578, 667 
Gnosticism 39, 105, 243, 466, 569-570 
Grand Convocation, the 127, 158, 212 
Great Whiteout of 1997, the 105, 466-473 
Harbingers of Avalon, the 176, 185, 607 

see also Navalon 
Harry Potter 46, 78, 159, 318-319, 351, 353, 
534, 588-589, 594, 600 
hedge magician/ hedge wizard 40, 57, 120, 
532 
High Ritual Magick 62, 125, 159, 213, 256 

as a practice 578, 583 
High/ Astral Umbra, the 87-88, 91-92, 94, 
101, 474-485 
Hippolytoi see Sisters of Hippolyta 
HIT Mark 167, 169, 175, 180-181, 193, 259, 
356, 361-362, 421, 452-453, 546, 548, 614, 
616, 624, 657, 661-662 

character templates 624-626 
hobgoblins 51, 506, 554, 556, 559 

see also Paradox, and Rules Index: Magick 
Systems (Quiet) 
holidays (metaphysical significance of) 86, 
590-591, 614 
Hollow Earth, the 92, 103, 112 
Hollow Ones/ Hollowers, the 133, 139, 197- 
199, 201, 208-209, 377, 558, 568, 578, 
655 

at character creation 252 
hope (importance of) 19-20, 76, 246, 365, 
379, 668 
Horizon (seat of the Traditions) 110, 127, 135, 
137, 139-140, 143, 145, 147, 198, 201, 227, 
377 
Horizon(s), the 92-93, 103, 109-114, 171, 
178, 225, 228, 522, 552, 615 
Horizon Realm/ Horizon Construct 48, 78, 93, 
110-112, 129, 135, 140, 168-169, 177-179, 
194-195, 483, 546, 615, 663 
Horizon War, the 22, 110, 135, 198 
hubris 43, 59, 120, 313 
hypereconomics 192-193, 299, 322, 526, 595 

as a practice 322, 526, 573, 596 
hypernarrative 61, 503, 603 


see also Mythic Threads 
hypertech 167-195, 296-297, 312-313, 495, 
586, 606, 623-626 

as a Knowledge 296-297 

as a practice 579 

as Devices 655-663 
icons (Digital Web) 107, 109, 467-468 
| must be out of my mind 287, 387, 600, 665 
Initiate/ initiate/ initiation 46, 141, 175-176, 
319, 328 

see also the two-page spreads for each 
group 
initiative (game system) 399-400, 410, 416 

see also Rules Index: Combat 
Inner Circle, the 134-135, 168-169, 171-172, 
178-179, 180, 185, 229, 233 
instrument (magickal) 61-62, 256, 259, 264, 
281, 287, 324, 329, 335, 339, 503, 529- 
530, 565-600, 657 

common instruments 588-600 

see also focus, paradigm, practice, and Rules 
Index: Magick Systems 
Internet, the 75-77, 81, 87, 92, 103-109, 155, 
164-165, 175, 184, 197, 205, 228-229, 231, 
283, 287, 291, 315, 318, 349, 356-357, 368, 
379, 399, 431, 465-473, 575, 584, 589, 
594, 602-603, 608, 617, 638, 659 

see also Digital Web 
Iteration X/ Iterators 105-109, 132, 169, 172, 
186-187, 295, 465-473, 576, 596, 623-626, 
636, 656 

at character creation 251 
Ivory Tower, the 130-132, 172-173, 184, 188- 
189 
Jhor 88, 478, 480, 514, 558, 560-561 
^k" (that fucking pretentious) 3, 41, 57, 500, 
664 
Kha'vadi, the 146, 154-155 

see also Dreamspeakers 
King Arthur 125, 176, 200, 317 

see also Avalon, Navalon 
Kitab al-Alacir, the 122, 160-161 
Kopa Loei, the 198-199, 210-211 

at character creation 252 
Kuei Lung Chuan/ Dragon Spirit Kung Fu 223, 
427 
Left-Hand Path 100, 127, 153, 292, 574, 598 

see also Right-Hand Path 
Life Sphere, the 52, 64-65, 69, 313, 334-336, 
407-409, 416, 418, 420, 440-443, 456, 485, 
551, 601-602, 609-610, 618, 648, 658, 660 

Sphere entry 516-517 
Loa, the 204-205, 303, 486-487, 574, 583, 597 
Low/ Dark Umbra, the 88, 91, 99-100, 474- 
485, 514 

see also Underworld 
lucid dreaming 101, 294, 311 

as a Talent 294, 492 

see also Demesne 
Mad, the see Marauders 
Madzimbabwe, the 127, 130 
mage/ magus [what is a...?) 18-19, 21, 38-53, 
122-123, 233, 305, 498 
magick (what is...2) 18, 42, 56-71, 114, 135, 
139, 168, 234, 329-330, 498, 565, 587 664 
magick rules 498-617 

in the Digital Web 469-470 

in the Otherworlds 483-484 

see Rules Index: Magick Systems 
maleficia 232-233, 612 

as a practice 579-580 


692 Mage: the Ascension 20" Anniversary Edition 


Man/ Men in Black 
see Black Suit 
Marauders, the 15, 18-19, 38, 41, 45, 51, 60, 
101, 110-111, 120, 123, 130-135, 147, 171, 
194, 226, 254, 315, 367, 376-379, 407, 491, 
506-507, 555-561, 599, 616, 648, 650, 662 

as player characters 234, 239-240 

characters 628-629 

clown-shoes Marauder syndrome 234, 240 

Marauder magick 241-242 

overview of 234-243 
martial arts 62, 280-281, 292, 591, 601-602 

as combat maneuvers 423-426 

as a practice 415, 580 

as a Skill 280-281 

see also Rules Indexes: Character Creation 
and Combat 
Masses, the 45, 138, 151, 166, 169, 171,176, 
184-185, 296, 356, 432, 553, 582, 590, 
603, 613, 615-617 

character templates 620-623 

see also Sleeper(s) 
Matter Sphere, the 65, 69, 407, 440, 443, 
447, 464, 485, 603, 608-610 

Sphere entry 517-519 
Maya 92, 101, 243, 311 

see also Dreaming, Dream Realms 
Meatspace 105, 107-109, 229, 466-473 
medicine work/ medicine people 154-155, 
286, 327, 408-409, 441-443 

as a practice 581 
meditation 281, 312, 320, 369 

as an instrument 594-596, 608 

as a Skill 281, 596, 609 
meme 515, 594, 598-599, 617 
Mercurial Elite 146, 165, 466 

see also Virtual Adepts 

Merits and Flaws 242, 248, 307, 313, 317, 
327, 387, 407-409, 412, 480, 482-483, 494, 
545, 561, 642-651 

see also Rules Index: Character Creation 
Metaphysic Trinity, the 44-45, 266-277 

see also Avatar Dynamism, Entropy, Stasis 
metaplot (that damned elusive) 19, 21-22, 87, 
137, 143, 172, 178, 195, 374, 376, 474, 482- 
484, 571 

see also Future Fates 
Methodology/ Methodologies (Technocratic) 
172-173, 623 
Middle Umbra, the 88, 91-92, 94, 97-99, 
466, 474-485, 631 
microcosm and macrocosm 90, 114-115 
Mind Sphere, the 57, 65, 69-70, 277, 287, 
310-311, 330, 408, 417-418, 424, 444, 476- 
478, 485, 602-608 

Sphere entry 519-520 
Mirror Zone, the 92, 102 
Mokteshaf Al-Hour, the 124-125, 128-129 
Moon Paths 90-93, 98, 493 
Morrison, Jim 26, 317, 576, 597 
Mount Qaf 92, 102, 104, 202, 481 
mutual (Technocratic ethic) see unmutual 
mystics vs technomancers 39, 59-60, 75, 256, 
303, 587 
Mythic Age(s)/ High Mythic Age 63-64, 123-133, 
136, 266-267, 308, 374-375, 575, 582, 613 
Mythic Threads 61, 503, 530, 553, 586-588 
Navalon 176, 185, 200 

see also Avalon, Harbingers of Avalon, King 
Arthur 
neotribalist/ neotribalism 146, 258, 306, 600 


Nephandi/ Nephandus 19, 38, 40-41, 45, 
49, 58, 77, 100, 111, 114, 120, 123, 130-135, 
139, 142, 147, 169-170, 171, 179, 185, 194- 
195, 202-203, 210-211, 219-220, 236, 254, 
331, 367, 376-379, 407, 491, 507, 557-558, 
570-571, 577, 579, 594, 599, 605-607, 616, 
622, 659 

as player characters 224 

character templates 630-631 

overview of 224-233 
New Horizon Council, the 137, 144-147, 185 
newlife/ oldlife 176-177, 189 
New World Order/ NWO, the 129, 132, 150, 
ae 172, 188-189, 331, 524, 577, 599, 627, 
6 

at character creation 251 
Ngoma, the 127-135, 159, 197, 212-213, 576 

at character creation 252 
Night-Folk, the 40, 47, 57, 71, 133, 226, 231, 
240, 242, 276, 299, 330, 361, 400, 420, 
422, 442, 476, 488, 519, 531-532, 635, 662 

counterspelling 546, 610 

crossover chronicle 379 
Node 78-80, 86, 89, 92, 111-112, 147, 177, 
317, 332, 358, 482, 484, 503, 505, 510, 527, 
531, 615 

as a Background Trait 309, 317, 319-320, 
355 

see also Rules Index: Character Creation and 
Magick Systems 
Null Zone, the 86-87, 92, 101 
Old Roads, the — see Paths of the Wyck 
One, the 59, 83, 110, 114, 121, 150-151 
Oracle(s) 113, 141-142, 144, 179, 243, 616 
Order of Hermes, the/ Hermetics 2, 62, 69, 
123-135, 146, 158-159, 197, 206-207, 212, 
231, 364, 432-433, 576, 578, 598, 664 

at character creation 251 
Order of Reason, the 22, 62-63, 113, 125-132, 
173, 180, 184, 190, 192, 198, 206, 218, 220, 
308, 579, 582, 614 
Orphan(s)/ orphan(s) 2, 38, 41, 120-121, 141, 
214-215, 254, 578, 655 

at character creation 252 
Otherworlds, the 22, 71, 78, 81-83, 86-115, 
194-195, 226, 239, 259, 284, 289, 399, 470, 
602, 605, 608, 644 

overview 86-115 

rule systems 474-485 

travel through 284, 474-483 

see also Rules Index: Dramatic Systems (Oth- 
erworlds Systems) 
Panopticon (the) 144-145, 169, 175, 624 
paradigm 21, 39, 61-64, 76, 147, 184, 232, 
243, 285, 324, 329, 339, 361, 367, 372, 
432, 524, 529-530, 616-617, 651, 656, 667 

common mage paradigms 39, 93, 256, 
259, 290, 356, 568-572, and the two-page 
spreads for each group 

see also belief, focus, practice, instrument, 
and Rules Index: Magick Systems 
Paradox/ Paradox Effect, the 15, 56-59, 62- 
64, 114, 134, 171, 174, 177, 179-183, 198, 
218-219, 226-228, 234, 238-241, 312-313, 
315-316, 323, 331-333, 330, 361, 367, 485, 
498-617, 623 

as a character Trait 331-333 

Digital Web Paradox 467, 470-472 

Paradox nullification 315-316, 510, 521, 549 

permanent Paradox 312-313, 333, 506, 
547-549, 652, 657-661, 663 
rule systems 500-501, 506, 547-553 
Storytelling Paradox 373-374 


Wonders and Paradox , 651-652 

see also Rules Indexes: Character Creation 
(Traits) and Magick Systems (Paradox Effect) 
paradox of being a mage 42, 53, 56, 58-59, 
61, 64, 234-235, 243, 554 
paradox of “truth” and “reality” 22, 39, 42, 
53, 63, 86, 115, 120, 147, 197, 234-236, 243, 
245, 265, 360, 486, 554, 611 

see also Rashomon Effect 
Paradox Flaw 15, 373, 506, 548-551 
Paradox Realm 56, 63, 93, 102-103, 227- 
228, 331, 485, 506, 549, 552-551, 640 
Paradox Spirit/ Paradox Entity 51, 56, 63, 227- 
228, 373, 493-494, 506, 549, 552, 635 

characters 635, 639-641 
Path, the (mage's journey) 22, 37-53, 183- 
184, 214, 232, 235, 237-238, 243, 335-339, 
366-371, 566, 666, 668 
Paths of the Wyck, the 86-87, 92, 125, 127, 
475, 479, 481-482, 615 
Pattern (of body, element or substance) 61, 64, 
67, 70, 335, 407-409, 436-437, 479, 510, 
514-523, 537, 547-552, 551 
Pattern Spheres, the 64, 483, 411 

see also Rules Index: Magick Systems 
Pattern Spiders 89-90, 98, 481, 491, 593, 
634-636 

character template 639 
Pattern Web 89-90, 92, 98, 107, 109, 467, 
481, 491, 494, 593 
Penumbra, the 89-91, 94, 474, 552, 631, 639 
Periapt/ Matrix 508, 510, 521, 527, 652, 657 
Periphery, the 81-82, 92, 276, 474-475 
Pogrom, the 134-135, 168, 171, 197, 202, 
376, 661 
portal 86, 91, 111-112, 474, 481 

see also gate 
posthuman/ posthumanism 186-187, 465, 589 
practice (metaphysical) 61-64, 256, 261, 324, 
329, 335, 339, 367, 372, 529-530, 565-586 

common practices 573-586 

see also belief, focus, instrument, paradigm, 
and Rules Index: Magick Systems (Focus and the 
Arts) 
Precepts of Damian, the 168-173, 183 
Primal Utility Sphere 65-66, 70-71, 322, 512, 
520, 573, 582, 591, 652 

Sphere entry 526-527 
Prime Sphere 65, 70-71, 331-333, 407, 418, 
420, 440, 464, 484, 545, 549, 591, 597, 
601-603, 605, 608-609 

Sphere entry 520-521 
Primium 313, 420, 545, 625-626, 659 
Procedure 166, 168-169, 175, 177, 303, 
498, 512, 601-607 

see also Rote 
Progenitors, the 132, 172, 190-191, 233, 295, 
569, 623-624, 660-661 

at character creation 252 
Project Invictus 176, 185, 343, 377, 607 
Pure Ones, the 59, 121 
Q Division 173, 189, 296, 321-322, 325, 460, 
592 
Quiet 51, 56, 101, 234, 238-243, 311, 330- 
331, 333, 360, 369, 373-374, 444, 471, 480, 
550, 560, 565, 614, 649 

rule systems 506-507, 554-561 

see also Rules Index: Magick Systems (Quiet) 
Quintessence 61, 70-71, 79-80, 111, 114, 177, 
281, 305-306, 316-317, 319-320, 328, 331- 
333, 358, 407-409, 436, 476, 478, 507, 
591, 597, 598, 609, 615, 652, 668 


as character Trait 248, 250, 257, 305-306, 319- 
320, 331-333, 507, 510, 543, 545, 549, 557 
as a Wonder Trait 652-663 
spending/ magick roll 501, 503, 537, 546 
see also Node, Primal Utility, Prime Sphere, 
Tass, Wellspring, and Rules Indexes: Character 
Creation and Magick Systems 
Quintessence/ Paradox Wheel 248, 250, 257, 
313, 331-333, 548-550, 651-652 
see also Paradox Effect (permanent Paradox), 
and Rules Index: Character Creation (Traits) 
Rand, Ayn 68, 74, 570-571 
Rashomon Effect/ Rashomon Syndrome, the 74 
120, 486 
Reality (force of / personification of) 18, 38, 42, 
51, 59, 62-64, 79-80, 86, 122-123, 167, 227- 
228, 234, 330, 432, 577, 582, 611 
reality challenge 356, 432 
Reality Deviant/ RD 168, 177, 179, 185, 214, 
254, 299-300, 303, 318, 603, 625 
reality hacking 164-165, 288, 300, 375, 524-525 
as a practice 581-582 
reality zones 21, 63, 291, 298, 356, 371, 432, 
532, 572, 611-617 
see also Rules Index: Magick Systems (Reality 
Zones) 
Realm(s) 92-103, 474-485, 522, 539, 615 
see also Dream Realm, Horizon Realm, Para- 
dox Realm, et al 
Reckoning, the 77-78, 82, 134-135, 179, 
466, 474, 482-483, 501, 550, 571 
Resonance 57-58, 70, 80, 88, 232-233, 243, 
305, 307, 319-320, 358, 646-647, 484, 
503, 514, 519-521, 549, 535, 554, 555, 558, 
560-561, 580, 587-588, 592, 596, 598, 611 
as an optional Trait 333, 647 
manifesting echoes (Flaw) 484, 561, 646- 
647 
Storytelling 374 
Right-Hand Path 574 
see also Left-Hand Path 
ritual (magickal) 293, 310, 343, 500, 586 
rules systems 389, 503, 530, 538-542 
see also Rules Index: Magick Systems 
Rogue Council, the 135, 137, 144-145, 173, 
175, 663 
Room 101 13, 17, 176, 182, 606, 648 
rote 498-499 512, 602 
sample list 601-611 
see also Procedures, and Rules Index: Magick 
Systems (Rotes) 
Rule of Shade, the 140, 142 
see also Protocols 
Sahajiya 127-131, 146, 586 
see also Cult of Ecstasy 
Sanctum/ sanctum 76-77, 323-324, 531, 
539, 614, 663 
as a Background Trait 323-324, 327, 355, 593 
see also Rules Index: Character Creation 
sanity sinks 236, 238-239, 242, 407, 662 
schitzopherenia/ schitzopherenic 41, 234-235, 
650 
SCIENCE!!! 66, 160-161, 191, 271, 288-290, 464 
as practices 574-576, 579, 581-582, 584 
Seeking 44, 48, 51, 329, 331, 338-339, 
367-369, 407, 444, 477-479, 553, 559-561 
see also Rules Index: Storytelling (Seekings) 
Sending(s) 179, 641 
shallowing 86, 92, 474-475, 480 
shaman/ shamanism 19, 71, 88, 90, 100, 154, 
213, 306, 315-316, 324, 326-328, 576, 600, 
633-636, 655 


Index 693 


Fae CH 


as a practice 582-583 

character template 626-627 
Shade Realms 93, 99, 110, 112 
Shard Realms 93, 99, 110, 113 
Six Degrees of Separation, the 179, 181-183, 
302-303, 321-322, 659 
Specialties (for character Traits) 274, 284, 288, 
453, 461-461 
Sphinx, the 137, 143-144 
Sleeper(s) 39-40, 60, 62-64, 75, 108, 133, 
138-139, 142, 151, 227, 238, 321, 325-326, 
328, 356, 370, 432, 465-466, 476, 531- 
534, 614-617, 620-623, 656, 668 

see also Masses, unAwakened, witness 
Sleepwalker 40, 81-82, 153, 318, 565 
Sisters of Hippolyta 2, 130, 198-199, 216-217, 
307, 397-398 

at character creation 252 
Smith, Pamela Colman 38, 40 
Social Conditioning 171, 174, 176-177, 179, 
182-184, 187-189, 195, 520, 531, 544, 555, 
624 

as a Procedure 605-607 
Society (Sons) of Ether/ Etherites 66, 103, 
125, 132-135, 142, 146, 160-161, 197, 209, 
228-229, 289, 296, 313, 582, 596, 615, 636, 
659, 661 

at character creation 251 
Solificati, the 126-129, 159, 197, 206-207 

see also Children of Knowledge 
Sons of Ether see Society of Ether 
Spheres, the 61, 64-71, 112, 211, 232, 246, 
248, 253,283, 303, 307, 318, 328-329, 336- 
337, 339, | 512-527, 358, 427, 484-485, 
500, 567, 601-611, 652, 663 

at character creation 253 

descriptions of 64-71 

in the Otherworlds 484-485, 539 

rule systems 512-528 

see also affinity Sphere(s), all Sphere entries, 
Tenth Sphere, and Rules Indexes: Dramatic 
Systems and Magick Systems 
Sphere Rank levels 68, 511 
spirit(s) 71, 80, 91-92, 94, 96-98, 120, 300, 
315, 323-324, 326-328, 417-418, 454, 483, 
508 

see also Umbrood and Rules Index: Dramatic 
Systems (Spirit Entities) 
Spirit Sphere, the 65, 71, 88, 319, 417-418, 
443-444, 475, 488-495, 525, 544, 552, 
607-609 

Sphere entry 521-522 
Spirit-Nuke, the 91, 99, 110, 169 
Spy's Demise, the 108, 140 
Stasis 20-21, 44-45, 89, 168-169, 235, 491, 
639 

see also Dynamism, Entropy, Metaphysic 
Trinity 
step(ping) sideways 88, 92, 475-476, 484, 
521-522, 525 

see also Rules Indexes: Dramatic Systems 
(Otherworlds) and Magick Rules (Spheres) 
Storyteller, the (what is a...2) 22, 247, 254, 
260-261, 265, 335-336, 342, 

see also Rules Index: Storytelling 
Storyteller characters 
304, 308-309, 315, 318-321, 323, 355-357, 495 
storytelling techniques 
see Rules Index: Storytelling 
subjective reality 74, 79, 89 
Symposium (Technocratic) 177-178, 325 
Syndicate, the 128, 132, 170, 172, 192-193, 


694. 


229-230, 303, 307, A14, 526-527, 595, 
599, 660 

at character creation 252 
Pg. 57-58, 333, 358, 555, 560-561, 


see also Resonance 
Taft ni, the 69, 123, 127-135, 198-199, 218- 
219, 575 
at character creation 252 
Talisman 508, 521, 651-653, 662 
see also Wonder(s), and Rules Index: Won- 
ders 
Tapestry, the 71, 90, 92, 111, 202, 235, 332, 
588, 593 
Tarot, the 38-53, 61, 137, 215, 267, 286, 533, 
588, 590 
Tass 79, 316-317, 319-320, 332, 503, 510, 
527, 589 
techgnosis 39, 105, 466 
Technocracy/ Technocrats 18-21, 38-39, 
41, 45-46, 51, 65, 75, 77-78, 88, 83, 110, 
120-233, 266, 289, 296, 302-303, 313-314, 
318-319, 325, 329, 356, 376-377, 447, 
452-453, 462, 476-477, 484, 486, 505, 512, 
567, 575, 586, 596, 600-607, 609, 612-614, 
635-636, 653-661 

Background Trait rules 302-303, 321-322, 
325 

characters 623-626 

overview of 166-195 

see also Convention, Iteration X, New World 
Order, Progenitors, Syndicate, Void Engineers 
Technocratic Spheres 65-66, 512, 524-527 

see also Data, Dimensional Science, Primal 
Utility 
Technocratic Union, the 132-135, 166-195, 
197-201, 210, 222, 229, 251-252, 254, 308, 
321, 582, 603-607, 613, 622, 631 

see also Technocracy 
technomagick 57, 310, 312-313, 324, 484, 
531-532, 562-563, 582, 601-607, 615, 623 
technomancer 39, 57, 63-64, 90, 228-229, 
283, 290, 303, 327, 329, 476-477, 567, 
580-581, 586, 589, 591, 592, 596, 602, 609 

see also hypertech, Society of Ether, Technoc- 
racy, Void Engineers, et al 
Tellurian, the 90, 92 
Tempest, the 91-92, 99-100 
Templar Knights, the 125, 198-199, 220-221, 
229-230 

at character creation 252 
Tenth Sphere, the 65, 67, 232 
Things Man Was Not Meant to Know 331, 369, 
402, 493, 555, 607, 648, 662 

see also Rules Index: Dramatic Systems 
(Health and Injury) and Optional Rules 
Threat Null 169-170, 179, 376 
Threefold Return (law of) 80, 550 
Three Worlds, the 91-100, 105 

rules systems 474-485 

see also High Umbra/ Middle Umbra, Low 
Umbra, Otherworlds 
Time Sphere, the 65, 71, 358, 389, 399-400, 
417, 424, 444, 485, 505, 544, 607-608, 
640-641, 665 

Sphere entry 522-523 
Time Table, the (Technocratic) 130, 168, 173, 
179 
torture 233, 286, 311, 325, 330-331, 402, 
404-405, 580, 606-607, 645, 648 

as a Skill 298 
Totem (spirits) 94, 308, 326-328, 356, 600, 
633-636 


Mage: Ihe Ascension 20" Anniversary Edition 


as a Background Trait 308, 316, 317, 326- 
328, 477, 479, 618, 634-636 

characters 633-636 

see also Rules Index: Character Creation 
(Traits) 
Traditions, the 19-21, 38, 41, 45, 77, 120-233, 
251, 337, 374-376 

overview of 136-165 

see also Akashayana, Celestial Chorus, 
Council of Nine Mystic Traditions, et al 
Traits 

see Rules Index: Character Creation 
transhumanist/ transhumanism 39, 105, 215, 
258, 286, 318, 353, 466, 573, 582 
Triangle slave trade, the 128-130, 136, 154- 
155, 198, 204-205, 212-230, 583, 616 
Trinket 508, 651-652, 653-655 
Tucker, SJ/ Sooj 55, 348, 668 
Turing, Alan 104, 108, 164, 466 
Umbra/ Umbrae, the 87-115, 474-485, 525- 
526, 656, 659 

see also Otherworlds, Three Worlds, Um- 
brood, and various Zone and Umbra entries 
Umbrood 92, 94, 96-97, 399, 477, 485-495, 
602 

characters 631-641 

combat 417-418 

rules systems 417-418, 485-495 

see also Rules Index: Dramatic Systems (Spirit 
Entities) 
unAwakened/ unEnlightened 56, 61, 138, 141, 
174-176, 226, 239-242, 304, 306, 310, 318, 
323, 632 

see also acolyte, consor, extraordinary citi- 
zen, Masses, Sleepers 
Underworld, the 99-100, 110, 112, 157, 478- 
481 

see also Low Umbra 
Unity (principle of) 65, 114-115, 129, 131, 171, 
185, 197, 202-203, 585-586 
Unmutual 181-183, 303, 524 

see also mutual 
vampire(s) 40, 47, 49, 51, 57, 120, 126-127, 
135, 139, 156, 159, 168, 226, 299-300, 
324, 326, 335, 355-356, 361, 376, 379, 412, 
415-416, 438-439, 442, 454, 507-508, 553, 
598, 614, 625, 645 
Vampiric Lawn Chair (the Notorious) 519, 534, 
610-610 
Verbena/ Verbenae 19, 79, 127-135, 146, 
162-163, 190, 200, 209, 216, 481-482, 
585, 598, 667 

at character creation 251 
VDAS/ Visual Data & Analysis Spectrum 9-10, 
173, 182, 602, 623-628, 631 

as a Device 655-666 
Victoria, Queen 131-133, 160-161, 168, 188, 
577, 627 
Victors 180-181, 191 

character template 624 
Vidare 82, 91, 474, 521 

Vidare Astral 87, 89, 91, 94 

Vidare Mortem 89, 91, 99 

Vidare Spiritus 89, 91, 98 
Virtual Adepts/ VAs 2, 65-66, 104-109, 134, 
137, 142, 164-165, 197, 228, 289, 295-296, 
313, 431-432, 465-673, 582, 626-627, 638, 
659, 661, 665 

at character creation 251 
vision quests 316, 574, 576, 600 
Void, the 45, 100, 121, 194-195, 225-226, 
232-233, 407 


Void Adaptation 88-89, 483, 526 

Void Engineers, the/ Engineers 93-94, 103, 

132, 170, 172, 194-195, 228-229, 525-526, 

607, 615, 660 

at character creation 252 
Voudoun/ voodoo 61, 204-205, 286, 576 
as a practice 583 

vulgar magick 63-64, 171, 176, 238, 241, 

P 291, 293, 324, 332, , 371-374, 407-409, 
413-416, 498, 530-534, 547, 565-566, 
610-617 

vulgar with/ without witnesses 501-502, 
531-535, 547 
War in the Ruins, the 19, 50, 112 
Week of Nightmares, the 135, 616 
Wellspring(s) 79, 521, 526-527, 615 
E werewolf/ werewolves 40, 47, 57, 90, 93-94, 
98, 107, 119-120, 168, 170, 226, 228, 233, 

P 284, 290, 300, 320, 327, 335, 362, 376, 

379, 406-407, 412, 438-439, 442, 486-490, 

507-508, 525, 563, 615, 632-633, 639 


see also Absolute, Deep Umbra, Umbraspace 


Whiteout (Digital Web Paradox) 105, 466, 
470-473 
wild talent 46, 60, 214-215, 242, 527-528 

Marauder wild talent 242, 528 
Will (in a magickal sense) 20, 42, 46, 53, 56- 
59, 71, 123, 158-159, 329-331, 477, 500, 
536, 565-567, 570-571, 577-578, 588, 595, 
598, 600, 613, 617 
Willpower (Trait) 250, 257, 267-273, 316, 
408, 477-478 

loss of 329-331, 606-607 

refreshing Trait 267-273, 369 

spending Willpower 330-331, 388-389, 
395, 411, 416, 549, 556 

spending for magick 501, 536-537, 540- 
541 

see Rules Index: Character Creation, Game 
Systems, and Magick Systems 
witch/ witchcraft 18-19, 77, 86, 98, 121, 124, 
125-127, 129, 132, 136, 146, 162-163, 215, 
287, 306, 315, 324, 355, 430, 481-482, 487, 
518, 579, 591-592, 610, 614, 632 


witchcraft practice 261, 584-585 
see also Verbena 
witness (for magick) 531-535, 547, 623 
Wonder(s) 317, 328, 332, 476, 479, 512, 521, 
532, 546, 573 
as a Background Trait 317, 328, 355, 586 
rules systems 508, 510, 
World War Il 114, 134, 137, 148, 168, 190, 
208, 227, 233, 616, 661 
Wu Lung, the 123-135, 148-149, 197-199, 
222-223, 427 
at character creation 252 
Wyck, the 59, 86, 92, 162 
Yellow Emperor, the/ Huangdi 111, 122, 222 
yoga 284-286, 591 
as a practice 583 
Zalgo! He comes... 
ze/ zir 137, 258, 369-370, 563 
Zones 86-87, 92, 101-103 
see also Digital Web, Maya, Mirror Zone, et al 


Index 


Name: Nature: Affiliation: 
Player: Demeanor: Sect: 
Chronicle: Essence: Concept: 
Aftributes 
Physical Social Mental 
Strength — OOOOO Charisma OOOOO Perception OOOOO 
Dexterity .. OOOOO Manipulation OOOOO Intelligence _ OOOOO 
Stamina  QOOOO = 3=— Appearance | | OOOOO Wis | | | OOOOO 
Abilities 
Talents Skills Knowledges 
Alertness —_QO000O0 Crafts OOOOO Academics |.  OO000 
Art OOOOO Drive OOOOO Computr | |  OOOOO 
Athletics OOOOO Etiquette OOOOO Cosmology . OOOOO 
Awareness OOOOO Firearms OOOOO  Enigmas . . OOO000 
Brawl OOOO00 Martial Arts J. OOOOO  Esoterica . OOOOO 
Empathy OOOOO Meditation J OOOOO Investigation 00000 
Expression.  OQOOOO Mele . | | | oooOO law | | |  OOOOO 
Intimidation OOOOO Research _ .  OOOOO Medicine OOOOO 
Leadership == =QOOOO Stalh | OQOOO) Occult — — OoO000O 
Streetwise — OOOOO Survival OOOOO Politics OOOOO 
Subterfuge _  OOOOO Technology . OOOOO Science OOOOO 
Spheres 
Correspondence 0000 Life | |  Oo0OOOO Prime |  . QOOOO 
Entropy . -OOOOO Mater — OOOOO Spirit |. |. |  OOOOO 
Forces OOOOO Mind | .  OO0OOO Time |  —  OOOOO 
Advantages 
Backgrounds Arete Health 
bo .00000 OOOOOOOO000 Bruised -0 LI 
MEE OOOOO Hurt -1 O 
Loo OG Willpower Injured Iu 
moo 00000 2200000000 Wounded 2 0O 
— ‘00000 L1 E1 EJ EJ DJ L1 E31 EJ EJ E] Mauled 20 
pOo——— : Crippled S5 | 
, ; I itated O 
Other Traits Quintessence a 
urn 
e OOOOO o? RA 
E- OOOOO Q o 
= 00000 ES n Experience 
= OOOOO E e 
lr OOOOO 


OOOOO 


TLC A SC^IEKISIGAKI 


Awaken 
Change your world 
Believe 
And that world changes you as well. 
Ascend 
Who, then, will you, become? 


MAGE 


The magick is you. 


Wik RSARY EDITION 


BS z MAGE ASCENSION 


