"No one holds command over me. No man. No god. No Prince. 
What is a claim of age for ones who are immortal? What is a claim 
of power for ones who defy death? Call your damnable hunt. We 
shall see who I drag screaming to hell with me." 

— Gunter Dorn, Das Ungcheuer Darin 







VAMPIRE 

The Masquerade 

A Storytelling Game of 
Personal Horror 


By becoming a monster, one learns what it is to be human 


By /Hark Rein*V1agen 




Credits 


Design: Mark Rein "Hagen 

Written by: Mark Rein "Hagen, Graeme Davis, Tom 
Dowd, Lisa Stevens, Stewart Wicck 
Development: Mark Rein • Hagen, Andrew Greenberg, 
Stewart Wieck 
Editing: Robert Hatch 

Design Contributors: Lisa Stevens, Travis Williams, 
Chris McDonough, Joshua Gabriel Timbrook, 
Nicole Lindroos, John Brandt, Brenda Stiles, Tom 
Dowd, Graeme Davis, Timothy Carroll, Stephan 
Wieck, Aaron Voss 
Art Director: Richard Thomas 
Art: Tim Bradstreet, John Cobb, Felipe Echevarria, Max 
Shade Fellwalker, Doug Gregory, John Lakey, Laura Lakey, 
Larry McDougall, Robert McNeill, Ken Meyer, Jr., Richard 
Thomas, Joshua Gabriel Timbrook 

Models: Tristan M. Duarte, Max Shade Fellwalker, 
Doug Gregory, Ken Meyer, Jr., B.J. West 

Typesetting & Layout: SamChupp, William Hale,Chris 
McDonough 

Production: Richard Thomas, Josh Timbrook, Sam 
Chupp, William Hale, Chris McDonough 
Cover Design: Chris McDonough 
Cover Photograph: Mark Pace 
Playtesters: Joshua Gabriel Timbrook, Chris 
McDonough, Brenda Stiles, John Brandt, Nicole 
Lindroos, Stewart Wieck, Andrew Greenberg, Lisa 
Stevens, Ann Nappo, Seth Tepher, Stephan W ieck, 
Kelly Golden, Jeff Berry, Guy Wells, Gail Starr, 
Mark Matthews-Simmons, Christopher Lancaster, 
KC Lancaster, Stacia M. Bannan, Timothy Carroll, 
Bryan A. Case, Michael Coyne, Shane D. Harsch, 
Steven Kaye, Edwin Nealley, Laurel Schippers, 
JohnSchippers, RobertG. Schroeder, Lowell Brandt 
Stouder Jr., Richard Wu, Kin Yec, Andreas 
Mitterlechner, Stefan Kovalovsky, Ralph Schimpl 
White Wolf Game Studio: William Bridges, Sam Chupp, 
Ken Cliffe, Andrew Greenberg, William Hale, Wes 
Harris, Robert Hatch, Rene Lilly, Chris 
McDonough, Mark Rein • Hagen, Richard Thomas, 
Joshua Gabriel Timbrook, Aaron Voss, Stewart 
Wieck, Travis Williams 

A special thanks to: 

Anne Kohlhofer and Andreas Wichter for that very first 
Vampire game session. 


Attention: Reader discretion is advised. The themes 
and issues described in this game may be disturbing to some and 
distasteful to others. Though our purpose is not to offend, our use 
of the vampire as a metaphor and as a channel for storytelling may 
be misconstrued. To be clear, vampires arc not real. The extent 
to which they may be said to exist is revealed only in what they can 
teach us of the human condition and of the fragility and splendor 
which we call life. 

Dedication 

This game is dedicated to Vaclav Havel — poet, play¬ 
wright and statesman — who was its inspiration. 

“We are still under the sway of the destructive and vain belief 
that man is the pinnacle of creation, and not just a part of it, and 
that, therefore, everything is permitted.... We are incapable of 
understanding that the only genuine backbone of our actions — if 
they are to be moral — is responsibility. Responsibility to 
something higher than my family, my country, my firm, my 
success. Responsibility to the order of Being, where all our actions 
are indelibly recorded and where, and only where, they will be 
properly judged." 

Vaclav Havel, in a speech to the United States Congress 


735 Park North Blvd. 

Clarkston, CA 30021 

[white woifl USA 

Game Studio 

©1997 White Wolf Publishing AB. All rights reserved. Repro¬ 
duction without the written permission of the publisher is expressly 
forbidden, except for the purposes of reviews, and blank character 
sheets, which may be reproduced for personal use only. White Wolf, 
Vampire the Masquerade, Vampire the Dark Ages and Mage the 
Ascension are registered trademarks of White Wolf Publishing AB. 
All rights reserved. Aron, Werewolf the Apocalypse, Wraith the 
Oblivion, Changeling the Dreaming and Werewolf the Wild West 
are trademarks of White Wolf Publishing AB. All rights reserved. 
All characters, names, places and text herein are copyrighted by 
White Wolf Publishing AB. 

The mention of or reference to any company or product in these 
pages is not a challenge to the trademark or copyright concerned. 

This book uses the supernatural for settings, characters and themes. 
All mystical and supernatural elements are fiction and intended for 
entertainment purposes only. Reader discretion is advised. 



2 0 VAMPIRE: The Masquerade 

































Contents 


Preface: The Damned 
Book One: Background 

• Chapter One: Introduction 

• Chapter Two: Setting 

• Chapter Three: Storytelling 

Book Two: Becoming 

• Chapter Four Rules 

• Chapter Five: Character 

• Chapter Six: Chronicle 

Book Three: Permutations 

• Chapter Seven: Traits 

• Chapter Eight: Systems 

• Chapter (Nine: Drama 


Appendix 














Monsters, Monsters, Everywhere 


B hey crowd our imagination. They hide 
under our beds. They lurk within the 
I dark recesses of our primal unconscious. 
You can’t run, you can’t hide — it’s going to get 
you. The beast, the ravager, the Litsus Natura. 
What is it, and why do we fear it? 

What is its name? 

We have always had our Fiends. They have 
long fired the romantic imagination of priest and 
poet alike. At one time we called them Trolls; later 
they were named Demons, and then they were 
Witches who brewed evil potions. Still later, the 
Monster was said to be the hungry Wolf, the 
Bogeyman, or the Godzilla of Cold War terror. 
Finally, some called it human ignorance and intol¬ 
erance. For a time, they tried to tell us that 
monsters don’t exist at all, that everything about 
the universe was either known or would soon be 
known. 

But now we know better. We have made our 
reacquaintance with the Beast. We have learned 
its true name. 

Now we understand the expanse of eternity, its 
unimaginable infinitude, the chaos of its structure, 
and our own petty insignificance. Now we have 
admitted the magnitude of the problems we face 
and our seeming inability to affect change on the 
scale necessary to save us. 

Today we have caught a glimpse of reality, and 
have seen the truth behind the veil. We have 
come Kill circle and rediscovered the Fiend. We 
have regained our ancient heritage. We have 
found that to which we have given so many names 
— the source of our mortal terror. 

We have found the enemy... and it is us. 


4 0 VAMPULE: The 









We are searchers, forever looking for the un¬ 
comfortable truth of our human condition, 
searching within ourselves for that which is un¬ 
clean, uncertain or impure—for that which has no 
name. By looking at the monsters we create, we 
gain new insights into our “darker half." These 
fiends express what we are at the deepest and most 
inaccessible levels of our unconscious. Since time 
immemorial, they have given us a connection to 
our animal self, the fulfillment of an unadulterated 
emotional vitality, and the promise of a brutal 
justice. 

The vampire is the quintessential fiend, for the 
vampire is so much our own reflection. Vampires 
feed as we feed, by killing, and through death can 
feel the same dread, guilt and longing for escape. 
They are trapped in the same cycle of fast, feast and 
purge. They, like us, seek redemption, purity and 
peace. The vampire is the poetic expression of our 
deepest fears, and the shadow of our most primal 
urges. 

Just as the hero of legend must descend into the 
pit of Purgatory to face the tormentor, overcome 
personal weaknesses, and finally be cleansed in 
order to return home with the gift of fire, so must 
we descend into the depths of our own soul and 
return to life with the secrets we have won. That 
is the real journey of Prometheus. It is the meaning 
of the myth. Only by embarking on such a journey 
can we discover our true selves and look into the 
mirror. 

The lure of this promise of spiritual connection 
is well-nigh irresistible. But, in the end, it is a most 
disturbing undertaking. You must take heed and 
step carefully — for no journey is ever without its 
perils. Do not look into your own soul, unless you 
are willing to confront that which you find there. 

So remember : 

There are no such things as monsters.... 






1 Wcmnfo f^cr 


VrtMI/H/ll' 


jnmt j|0untw5r Mtjft 5enanf? 
wyox'tyb'tytfSibMti Ifitvcnfly hopahrttimMlltyn'cfa 


smcwlvitthcMtrxssmf nmwrus \m arty. 1 fault $a0ucu ms mm 


latstymrunArfawM. 1 cWcym smckine ofoplmtirnfa^t- 
iVm whuhso Sfytitcrtf ycurblmtkss Ufa: 


1 yihibittf prams Uttk- Ato* dpVatf Mmgfpw^um^ 
rnmnrns, M bums in m bhtitzwiir 

imtiaiiy rtm x\i> nmn bcthfimyyku c^imni/h W,ims wnvltt- 
im m Jtsrnfinto tiu'lnfxmo rfaumms mwcMitu. 7 mm: 


nm me nmnmysmggmv c mmmsn K.vm c mvlct 
im my Jtsmtwto iht'itmmo tf-mmms mShOUaUfy. 7 mm 
omri my sm\ Wdl'ZsWelixs m\ priOt-form\ Ity&mYiytiMtfr 
Utsinthc dost, writ) results nVm ymymrscff bwvsatu' 


I<wm% (5 iMpossiitkftMictKiWctmH 




navf (risftvfhcrt 


"flKjfflnw>Tr 


wnttyc•AOmmoYmm.s mt/xvattorwrnywmbm. 7 pm yjoh 
yy^yjm smoking in its vMj&tvhclp ymmArtfunrf thcwrmnt 
1 hmM mm ym by mdexfmdmg, pay flfti, tifydsormllrtU 
mownt cfm vmnwmt, 7-far, \ssmvimtfm • isotfur \jas titiU 


mm xmvumoyi wm xswin x$ j my. 

E . ovc ymx kbtu\m)nm\pu'kY\s^\^y(d. tfztzmjtim&l mxy 
/SetVuciv yen/ (r ymfmtty. 7 matym'cwm iw. 


6mpcr$imii 

HX 



The Damned 


here to begin? So much ink has been spilled 
down the centuries. 1 am constantly amazed 
by the regularity with which you mortals 
stumble across truths and half-truths—some- 
| times very profound ones — by the most 
haphaard and fallacious thinking; and then, unaware of 
what you have uncovered, proceed to expound generalities of 
entirely the wrong order. 


We are monsters to thee, yet heroes as well. We are the 
incarnations of dark metaphors and suppressed desires, yet we 
are also the nobility of fairy tales, beloved of children. Wc arc 
a baseless superstition, an artistic genre, a psychological 
condition, a yearning made flesh, an externa I ization of a 
guilt-lust-violcncc complex, and many other things beside. 





Our True Nature 


omc two and a half centuries ago, a French 
churchman named Calmet sought tocollcct 
all the information extant on the namre of 
vampires. It is not surprising, then, that his 
treatise contains many contradictions and 
areas of uncertainty. Quoting from the re¬ 
ports of Papal Commissions sent out to deal with 'plagues' of 
vampires in Austria, Hungary, Moravia, and Silesia, he 
reports that a vampire may be destroyed by being transfixed 
with a wooden stake, followed by decapitation and the 
burning of the remains. This will indeed destroy a vampire, 
just as certainly as it would destroy a mortal. Such a clever 
man, Calmet. 

Motion pictures have abbreviated this treatment some¬ 
what, creating the fallacy that the stake is sufficient. Do not 
believe such talcs. Transfixing its heart on a stake will 
immobilize a vampire, hut some further treatment is neces¬ 
sary terminus sit. Whether this be burning or sunlight, isr egaJ; 
hut trust not the stake alone. Neither should you place your 
faith in weapons of metal, as did your American friend. Such 
things injure, but the wounds heal quickly—else I should not 
be writing now. 

Sunlight, it is said, is infallible doom to my kind. Motion 
pictures show motley greasepaint vampires crumbling to dust 
at Sol's caress, or bursting into flames like those doused with 
Greek Fire. Sadly, this is true, if somewhat overstated. Sun¬ 
light hums our skin as does flame, and only the oldest and 
strongest can withstand it for long. 

Thus we must sleep during the day and act only at night- 
During the day wc are very sluggish, and find it difficult to do 
anything besides sleep. Only those of us who have not left our 
human nature very far behind are capable of taking action 
when the sun is in the sky. I myself' have not seen the light 
of day in many centuries, and have nearly forgotten the gleam 
of the sun’s golden rays. But I do not miss it. 

8 0 VAMP 


Crosses, holy water, and the other trappings of religion 
may be ignored — the Church is the first refuge of mortals 
faced by things beyond their comprehension, especially in 
former times. Ifnv Jiao, however, 1 have seen rare occasions 
where such items were capable of causing considerable dis¬ 
comfort — their wielder almost glowed with faith in the 
Divinity, and 1 can only conclude that the religious items 
served somehow to channel the power of that faith. Ignore 
the tnclcs of the cinema, however, with their crossed candle¬ 
sticks and shadows of windmills' sails. 

The reputed properties of garlic, aconite and other herbs 
arc likewise mere superstition. They repel vampires no more 
than they do mortals, for all the canting of the good wives who 
peddle them. Like the Church, the village wisewoman was 
oft required to use her 'magic' against vampires, and was just 
as successful. 

Film-makers have made other fallacious legends part of 
the common parlance. For instance, we can see our own 
reflections in the mirror, though some of us pretend other¬ 
wise in honor of the great cinematic tradition. Likewise, wc 
can appear on film. Indeed, some of my kind have appeared 
in movies, and one was even a director of no little repute. 

It is equally ludicrous to presume that a vampire would 
not he able to travel about as he would I ike. We Cainites (one 
of our race’s terms for ourselves, the origin of which i shall 
Liter discuss) may enter any house and home we please at any 
time. It is likewise preposterous to chink a vampire would not 
he able to cross running water. Indeed, water affects us n*>t 
at all. Wc no longer breathe, hence we cannot drown. While 
being trapped underwater is unpleasant and may, if pro¬ 
longed, result in some physical deterioration, no vampire has 
died of immersion alone, although some bloodlines are ru¬ 
mored to have a weakness ii s-a-vis water. Belike this is how 
many of the rumors originated, for weaknesses have arisen in 
several bloodlines and have been passed down from Sire 
Get. 


The Masquerade 
















The cinematic vampire, it seems, may take several forms 
if the human shape suits not his purpose: wolf, hat, mist — in 
some legends, cat and night-bird also. The powers of the 
Elders arc considerable, and they are seldom found in those 
of later generation. I have seen many wonders during my brief 
and unwitling involvement in their game of Jyhad, and I no 
longer discount the stories of shape-shifting. But I tell you 
this — a vampire who has plural forms will either be of a rare 

The Ghouls 


breed, the Gangrcl clan, or will be very old, very wise and very 
powerful. 1 pray that such a one will never cross your path. 

Many of us, however, have abilities which a mortal 
would consider supernatural. As predators, our senses are 
sharp, and some have developed other talents to aid in the 
hunt. One example — the ability to inspire fear, stillness, 
obedience and other emotional responses — is a useful one, 
although popular writers have embellished it somewhat in 
the interests of their stories. 



t occurs to me drat some of the confusion 
about a vampire’s supernatural powers and 
weaknesses may be due to mistaken identity. 
There exists a class of creature in between 
mortal and vampire, which the Kindred (an¬ 
other of our self-referential sobnquets, and 
the most popular) have named Ghoul. It is not the legendary 
corpse-eating ghul of the Indies, although certain individuals 
may display similar behavior. 

Mortals who drink the blood of the Kindred without first 
being drained will become Ghouls. These creatures may go 
abroad in daylight as other mortals do, but they do not suffer 
the Hunger, nor do they age as long as they feed on vampiric 
blood regularly. They may even have superhuman strength 
and reflexes. From time to rime, it is advantageous to create 
such servants, commanding their loyalty through the prom¬ 
ise of eternal life. They need not even be human — a hound 
that has drunk of one's blood becomes the most perfect and 
faithful guardian one could desire. Thus do tales of hell¬ 
hounds arise. 

The Embrace 


ortal superstitions deal at great length with 
the means by which a vampire may come 
into existence. These range from the pre¬ 
dictably religious to the utterly bizarre, and 
can make an entertaining evening’s reading 
if one is so inclined. Other than entertain¬ 
ment, however, they serve little purpose. 

The first and most common of these myths is the legend 
that anyone bitten by a vampire will himself become a 
vampire. Thus, each time a vampire feeds, it creates another 
of its kind. One wonders how it is that any mortals are left in 
the world. Furthermore, a corpse may become a vampire if it 
was a suicide, an oathbreaker, a member of a tainted blood¬ 
line, or de tout an evil person. Again, the globe would be 
peopled with nothing but vampires — and 1 tell you this. 1 
have not seen this army of undcad. 

Indeed, to iny understanding, there are not many of us 
upon this globe. To my knowledge, there is only one means 
through which a mortalmay become a vampire. Shame tills 


While Ghoul* display some of the strengths of the 
vampire, they retain most of the weaknesses of the mortal. 
Impalement will slay Ghouls as effectively as mortals, and a 
lead bullet will kill as surely as a silver one. They may even 
develop a fear of rel igious trappings, or gar! ic, or what you will 
—a purely neurotic phenomenon, based an the fact that they 
believe these things can harm them. The existence of Ghouls 
in animal form inay partially explain the widespread belief in 
shape-changing vampires. 

Some Ghouls may well believe themselves full-fledged 
vampires, having been deceived to that end by their creators. 
They may even act according to their mistaken ideas — to 
the point of drinking blood — for they seldom understand the 
ways of the Kindred any better than mortals. Most are 
deranged to some extent by the experiences they have 
suffered — witness, jum Beispid, your late husband's em¬ 
ployer — and many are deliberately misinformed by their 
masters, the better to serve them. 


me again when I recall that 1 intended this fate for you, and 
1 rejoice that Providence denied me. Truly do 1 repent the 
eternity of sorrow which so nearly was your destiny. 

There is a grain of truth in the legend de gustando. To 
become a vampire, one must lose all one’s mortal blood—but 
diat is only part of the horror. Moitxf exsanguituui moreui veri, 
if nothing further is done; the fang will kill as everlastingly as 
the blade or the bullet. 

As mortality stands on the bnnk of extinction, as the 
flesh slowly dies, the vampire assailant may choose to spare 
the victim from death or deny Heaven's grace, for all is one 
his rebus. By replacing the stolen mortal blood with a little of’ 
the vampire’s own. a Progeny is created. But a single drop of 
blood upon the lips of the dying arouses him sufficiently to 
drink from the wrist of his Sire. 

How can I express the horror of the Embrace? The fear 
and confusion .’The revulsion and terror ? Tire pain ? Even the 
passing of centuries has nor dulled the memory. 

Prelude 0 9 











Understand that I am no coward. As a soldier, 1 endured 
the privations of the camp, the perils of battle, the savagery 
of the victor, of which I plead guilty to my share, for such was 
the Zeitsmode. But even those things 1 witnessed as a prisoner 
of the Turks could not have prepared me for the experience 
of being hurled into this cursed half-life. 

I was, de gratia poiestates descripus. in a most peaceful state 
of mind as my blood was stolen. As deaths go— and I have 
seen many kinds — this was surely the least distressing. It was 
as though my experience was a strange and somewhat unset¬ 
tling dream. Far off in the warm, soft darkness of my failing 
mind, 1 became aware of a light; 1 knew that this was where 
1 must go, and 1 knew that, once I arrived there, all would be 
well with me. I began to drift toward it. 

Abruptly the welcoming light was extinguished. My face 
felt an impact like a musket-ball, and as I tried to scream, tny 
mouth filled with liquid fire. The vitriol seared my throat and 
stomach; consciousness returned as chough it would rend me 
limb from limb. A thousand fishhooks tore my flesh in every 
direction. 

1 prayed for death — anything to stop the pain — but I 
could not even lapse from consciousness. Nec Turcos, nec 
/nquaesitoresevercommanded such torment. Magnify a thou¬ 
sandfold the sting of vinegar cm a cut finger, and flood the 
feeling through every limh and every vein. Add to this the 
gnawing, starving ache of five days' forced march without 


food or water. Deny sleep, swooning or any other surcease 
from the all-consuming dolor. But no. My meager 
wordsmithing can convey nothing of it. 

1 knew only that I must drink, and as 1 did so the pain 
abated a little. My eyes cleared, and 1 saw what it was that 1 
drank. 

My first reaction was denial. This could not possibly be 
happening. Even in the fifteenth century, men of education 
and breeding scoffed at the superstitions of the peasant. As a 
child, my nurses had frightened me to sleep with stories of the 
terrible vrolok, hut I had outgrown such tales long before. This 
was a nightmare, an hallucination of some kind. I tried to 
focus on thoughts of meat, fruit, wine — but to no avail. 
Blood was all. Blood was reality. All else was discarded. 

I can only be thankful that I was in a remote place. Had 
I been Embraced in a city, with people all around, there is no 
telling what havoc might have ensued. The Hunger blotted 
out reason entirely. Had my own son appeared before me 
then, he would have died to feed the Hunger, for I was utterly 
enslaved to it. No opium fiend in a Limehouse or Shanghai 
den was ever so helplessly, so wretchedly dependent. 

I cry for tnercy. The memory — and the recollection of 
what followed — distresses me, and I shall not continue the 
narrative. Instead, I shall address another, hut related, topic. 


Anatomia Vampirica 


hough ourextemal appearance remains much 
like that of the living, there are those among 
us who insist that the Change transforms its 
subject into another species — Homo Sapi¬ 
ens Sanguineus, Homo Sapientissimus, and 
Homo Vam/micus have all been advanced as 
names for this new race, following the Swedish classification. 

Be that os it may, it seems heyonJ dispute that the body 
undergoes as much of a change as the psyche. As will become 
apparent, much of what follows is — and can only be — 
conjecture, unsupported by dissection. 

Tire gross physical changes are a matter of common 
knowledge, so much so that we have allowed them to remain 
in popular fiction. The canine teeth are indeed long and 
pointed, the better to draw blood. However, they are only 
fully extended at the time of the kill, being at other times 
withdrawn into their sockets by the contraction of a flexible 
tissue at their base. Both speech and secrecy would be most 
difficult otherwise. Some lack the means to withdraw their 
teeth, hut they are easily discovered and are a dying clan. 


To feed, wc merely need to bite, retract the teeth from 
the wound, and begin to drink. If we lick the wound after we 
drink, then no trace of out feeding will remain. Indeed, ifwc 
lick any wound which we have caused with ourclaws or fangs, 
we can heal it completely. 

Our own skin, as with the cinematic vampire, is invari¬ 
ably pale. Partly, it seems, this stems from our aversion to 
sunlight, hut it is also due to our arrested state of death. 
Dartiber noch spater. 

Our Hunger is a drive for sustenance, of that there can 
be no doubt. From this, and from bitter experiences with the 
foods F most enjoyed in my breathing days, it appears that the 
inward parts of the vampire have lost their facility for 
digestion. One seldom sees a stout vampire, and nearly all 
remark on a newfound slenderness after the Change. Being 
no longer required, the organs presumably wither. 

The vampire’s body remains as it was at the time of 
death. Hair and nails continue to grow for a few days, as drey 
do on a fresh cadaver, hut that is all. If 1 wish my hair or nails 

1 



10 0 VAMI^£E: The Masquerade 




I 









to be shorter, 1 must cut them each evening after 1 rise. It is 
my conjecture that the body of the vampire is actually dead, 
and is only arrested from the natural process of decay by the 
power of the Change. The skin becomes a little tighter over 
the bones, much as it does in the newly dead. 

The lungs of a vampire no longer breathe — though 
many have learned to feign breathing while among the living 

— for the fresh blood of the prey provides the small amount 
of oxygen needed to sustain the dead tissues in their stasis. 
Only a young or foolish vampire takes blood from the jugular 
vein, where it is near the end of its journey and full of 
impurities; the blood of the carotid artery is clean and 
wholesome, and much to be preferred. 

Just as the lungs no longer breathe, so the heart no longer 
beats. The blood of prey somehow suffuses through the body 
by a process of osmosis, rather than flowing along veins and 
arteries. This can be seen in the fact that when a vampire 
weeps — which indeed we do, and more often than a mortal 
might suppose — the tears themselves are of blood. Cut a 
vampire's throat, and you will find the vessels empty. The 
closure and atrophy of those blood vessels nearest the sk in is 
another reason for the pallid complexion which marks the 
vampire, although a rosy hue is noticeable after feeding. 

The blood of the prey, coupled with the blood of the Sire, 
does appear to have some remarkable properties. We are able 
to heal ourselves of most wounds wirh remarkable quickness. 
We $t ill feel pain, and a reflex sends blood to the afflicted area 

— just as in life, blood will suffrise bruised tissue and colour 
it purple. The one exception to this rule is the stake so 
beloved of writers and film-makers. This will induce a kind of 
paralysis or trance, although it will not kill in its own right. 
Quite why this is so is unknown to me, for the heart no longer 
beats and so is not necessary to pump the flow of blood. I have 

The Hunger 


o live as a vampire is to live with horror. 
Always squatting on one’s shoulder like a 
warlock’s fiend is the knowledge of the Hun¬ 
ger. And always, always, does it approach— 
sometimes slowly and surreptitiously, some¬ 
times with great haste, but always ravenously. 
The Hunger can never fully be satiated. 

Hunger, wc call it, but tire term is woefully inadequate. 
Mortals know hunger, even starvation, but this is as nothing. 
The Hunger replaces almost every need, every drive known 
to the living— food, drink, reproduction, ambition, security 
— and it is more compelling than all of them combined. 


heard various mystical explanations of this phenomem >n, but 
must confess myself at a loss to explain it rationally. 

The body no longer makes and replenishes its own 
blood, and relics entirely on prey for fresh blood and the 
nutrients which Science has found blood tocarry. Something 
in the blood of the Sire, passed down through rhe Change, 
tans the spark of Life and arrests decay, but regular infusions 
of fresh blood are needed lest decay begin again. And when 
a vampire is destroyed, that decay is fantastically swift, as 
though Time were recalling the debt of decades or centuries. 
Nothing remains but dust, which is why anatomical study is 
impossible and so much must be guessed. 

We are able to heal our wounds using this blood upon 
which wc teed. We are able to use it to regenerate whole 
limbs and organs, given time and need. Regeneration always 
restores us to the physical state wc possessed when we died, 
including hair length, face shape, body weight—everything. 
When the body is injured, it will reform itself in the same 
mold again and again. We are already dead, and so cannot die 
except through the forces of life — the eternal sun and the 
primordial flame. 

One last question remains in re corporis — a somewhat 
prurient one, which 1 shall answer with as much delicacy as 
I may. Through the popular entertainments, the vampire h; 
become established as a highly potent figure of romance — 
and betimes of more than romance. While the act of love is 
physically possible for a vampire of either sex, the associated 
impulses, drives and responses have died along with the flesh 
—which, incidentally, is cold to the touch rather than warm. 
By effort of will we may go through the motions, forcing blood 
to the relevant areas in the same way as healing a wound, hut 
that is all. The ecstasy of the Kiss replaces all such needs 
within us. Blood is ihe only object of (Mir desire. 


More than a drive, it is a drug, one to which wc are bom 
with a hopeless addiction. In the taking of blood lies not only 
our survival, but also a pleasure beyond description. The 
Hunger is a physical, mental and spiritual ecstasy which 
throws all the pleasures of mortal life into shadow. 

To be a vampire is to be trapped by the Hunger. The 
Beast may only be kept subdued by the greatest effort of will; 
to deny the Hunger enrages the Beast, until nothing may 
keep it in check. Thus we must commit monstrous acts tostop 
ourselves from becoming monsters — that is the RidJle. 
Monsters u* are, lest monsters we become. 









The Beast 


he Beast rages constantly for release, and 
only the strongest will may hold it hack. 
Sometimes it break its bonds, and nins riot¬ 
ous until it is recaptured. The strain of 
self-control, and the shameful memories of 
failed control, are hard enough to bear. Worse still is the 
knowledge, constant as the Hunger, that these things will 
surely happen again. Over the decades and centimes, this 
awareness gnaws at the mind like a rat at a ship's cable. 

To be a vampire is to live on the edge of madness. 
Obsessive devotion to some self-appointed task can help 
keep despair from the mind, and if the task is one of great 
goodness, it is possible to reason that the end justifies the 
means. Some deliberately cultivate addictions, such as gam¬ 
bling or collecting art. Others shut themselves away and 
confine their hunting to a small, sparsely-populated area, 
telling themselves that they arc protecting the rest of the 


world. These things can perhaps delay the onset of madness, 
but they can also provide it with its first foothold. 

Ultimately, hard as we may strive against it. madness 
awaits us. The flame of Humanity ebbs and sputters until 
finally it is extinguished. Then the Beast is victorious, and 
monsters wc become in truth. The Beast resides within the 
heart, and directs us towards evil, but when it overtakes the 
halls of the soul, then shall we be evil. 

Some speak of Golcinula, the vampire’s Salvation. Both 
mortal and Kindred lore deny us Heaven’s grace, but in 
Golconda we look for surcease from the Riddle. It is a stasis, 
where an individual may balance the Man and the Beast 
against each other so that striving is no longer needful. The 
descent into madness is halted, and although the individual 
is no longer recognizable as human in his thoughts and dccvls, 
what remains of I luinamtas is safe. In almost five centuries, 1 
have met a meager few Kindred who have reached this 
blessed state, but all desire it as mortals desire Heaven. 


The Burdens of Immortality 



e are, as the most cursory student of folklore 
knows, ageless and immortal. In this case, 
lore and tradition have the right of it. Once 
made, a vampire lives until actively de¬ 
stroyed, or until the Beast wins over the 
Ian, or until, after countless millennia, the Blood is ex¬ 
hausted. 

Down the centuries, mortals have hungered for the 
socrer of unmortality, thinking it would give them great 
power. From the priests of heathen times through the alche¬ 
mists of my own breathing days and down to the physicians 
of the present, mortals have expended more wealth and effort 
in the war against aging and death than in the cause of any 
religion or trade. 

Many newly nude Kindred—myself included —rejoice 
in the thought of immortality when they first overcome the 
shock of the Change and begin to reconcile themselves to 
their new situation. Yet it is a barbed gift, and another door 
by which madness may enter in. 

Consider, for example, having to watch your loved ones 
—even your children and grandchildren —grow old and die, 
while you remain strong and vigorous. There is a necessity to 
live completely outside mortal society, or at least to move on 
every decade or so, lest it be noticed that you do not age. The 
tide of history flow* over you like a stream, leaving you 
unchanged. 

The longer one lives as a vampire, the grearcr the sense 
of Jctnchmcnt from mortal affairs. It can he an advantage at 

12 0 VAM PIRE : The Masquerade 


first, helping to deaden the guilt of killing and the pain ot 
losing one’s mortal family to rcmorselessTime. But as detach¬ 
ment grows, Humanitas wanes, and the Beast grows stronger. 
The most terrible of mortal serial killers often are detached 
from their kind, atroriwtes irarujuillitergefUiruLe. It is the same 
face on a different coin, as the Turks would say. 

Even if one can fight off this dehumanizing 
verse hiedemkeit, Time lends madness other weapons. For 
without detachment, guilt and remorse may work unchecked, 
eating at the feelings like acid eating metal. Mortal soldiers 
return from foreign wars wounded by the violence they have 
seen and Jonc, yet they have only to live with their memories 
for a few brief decades. A vampire's guilt is eternal, and time 
can sap the strongest will. Another hare of the Riddle: wc may 
lose our Humanity to avoid losing our minds, yet what is 
madness but lost Humanity? Sooner or later, grtns the Beast, 
you shall be mine. 

A further paradox — we grow stronger as we grow 
weaker. The older a vampire, the more powerful — the more 
cunning to have lived so long, the better versed and practiced 
in certain arts and powers, the better able to withstand those 
things that are anathema to us. And, perhaps, the stronger < •( 
will, not to have become a monster. Yet the weaker, for the 
Beast tries the bars of its prison ceaselessly, and in time they 
must yield. The oldest shut themselves away from the rest of 
their kind, fearing the day when they shall become monsters 
and distracting themselves with paranoid games of cat’s-paw 
using younger Kindred as playing-pieccs. 




I 














Vita Sub Tenebras 


All was tranquil in Caine's domain until a great flood 
destroyed the city. Caine saw this as divine punishment for 
returning to the world of mortals, and resumed his wander¬ 
ings, leaving his Progeny to their own devices. Though he 
forbade them to create more, they ignored his imperative as 
each of his Progeny desired a Brood of its own. 

No more is hear J of our ancestor, although from time to 
rime, a vampire calling himself Caine will appear in some pan 
of the world or another. Occasionally, he is revealed as an 
impostor, but more often he vanishes as suddenly as he 
appeared. Some believe that Caine still lives, while others — 
myself included — think it more likely to be some subterfuge 
of the Elders. It is said that Caine is rent with sorrow for 
having unleashed such misery and suffering upon the world. 

Once free of Caine’s restrictions, the Second and Third 
Generations created a great multitude of Progeny. They 
ruled together briefly, but all was not calm between them. 
Eventually, the youngest Generations rose and slew their 
Sires, drinking their blood. This Fourth Generation built 
another great city (some sources hint that it might have been 
Babylon, while others suggest that it rests somewhere be¬ 
neath the sands of Egypt) which we know only as the Second 
City. 

The rule of these new vampires was not untroubled, for 
certain Kindred of the Third Generation still lived. Indeed, 
some say they were secretly behind the slayings of their 
Elders. It was decreed that they alone reserved the right to 
beget Progeny, and that any of the Fourth Generation who 
disobeyed them were to be hunted down and killed along 
with their Sires. Though the Fourth Generation lived in 
public, the Third Generation, whom wc know today as the 
Antediluvians, lived in secret and revealed to no one the 
location of their havens. For nearly two millennia (some say 
23 centuries), the Fourth Generation mlcd the city, while 
the Third Generation ruled them. Eventually, the culture 
grew decadent and the city died. In a great uprising, the 
people rose up and killed all the Kindred they could find. 


here arc other reasons for our nocturnal life well as a mortal docs at noonday. Stcundus, the hours of 
besides the need to avoid the sun s rays. It is darkness are less populous, and promise fewer interruptions, 
so much easier to stalk and hum in the hours Feeding is a vulnerable tune; the Beast is near the surface, and 
of darkness. Imprimis, the prey is usually may stand at hay rather than leave a kill. This has been the 

■ - - ___J by fatigue and betimes drink — undoing of more than one Neonate. 

and can see little in the poor light. The hunter, on the other 
hand, is normally fresh and fully rested, and can often see as 

The Origins of the Kindred 


ike mortals, wc have our own history and 
lore, by which we seek to explain our exist¬ 
ence and understand our place in the world. 
Just as the veracity of your legends is lost in 
the shrouds of history, so is the truth of our 
lore uncertain. However, over the years 1 have unearthed a 
number of different sources, anJ through painstaking study, 
1 believe l have arrived at some semblance of fact and truth. 

Most of our lore is contained within an ancient text 
known as the Book of Nod. Neither any of my acquaintances 
■ jtor I has ever seen or heard of a complete copy, although 
fragments have- been unearthed over the centuries, mulcts 
Imguis, multis causis. There is much confusion and contradic- 
tion. and some versions appear to (rave been deliberately 
falsified. 

Over the centuries, I have been fortunate to peruse 
fragments in Greek, Turkish, Aramaic, Latin and Hebraica 
Qwbalisticu, as well as translations from Old Kingdom hiero¬ 
glyphics and Assyrian cuneiform. Inconsistencies arc rife, 
but the main body of the tale stares that my kind is descended 
from Caine, whom some call The Third Mortal. 

Outcast from mortal society for the killing of his brother, 
Ctine was cursed wirh eternal life and a craving for Mood. 
Wc. his children, arc the heirs to that curse, condemned ro 
repeat his crime endlessly. 

Caine wandered in the wilderness until his name was all 
hut forgotten. He returned to the world of mortals and was 
able to establish himself as the ruler of a city, by the name of 
Enoch, Umcch; Enkii or what you wilL Many Kindred call it 
the First City. Here, Caine created three Progeny — those 
whom we call the Second Generation. They in turn begot the 
ThirJ Generation, who are numbered at nine, twenty-seven, 
one hundred or none at all, according to the source one reads. 
Caine forbade the creation of any further Kindred, perhaps 
having gained some understanding of what he had unleashed 
) upon the world. ThercisnowordofanyKindrcdestablishing 
* Caine's ntlc elsewhere, and if they all remained in the First 
City, their increasing numbers must have strained the mortal 
population. 












When the Second City fell, its rulers tied. Scattered far 
and wide, they were too numerous and too widespread for the 
hidden Elders of the Third Generation to threaten them, and 
thus was begot the Fifth Generation. The Kindred grew in 
numbers and settled in all parts of the world. 

Mortal history records a time, beginning over two thou¬ 
sand years ago, of burgeoning empires locked in combat with 
one another — the time of the Persians, the Greeks and the 
Tartars. Thus did the Fifth Generation establish its own 
order. Meanwhile, the Antediluvians lay hidden and pursued 
theirown mad schemes. This age of wars may even have been 
of their making, the beginning of their great Jyhad. Whatever 
the tnith, almost none remain to speak of it. I inyselfhave met 
only one of the Fifth Generation, and at the time 1 did not 
know it. 

It is said by some that near the end of this period, the 
Antediluvians emerged from their hiding places and sucked 
the blood of all my kind, each leaving but one new Progeny 
of their line. This legend has it that this was the close of the 
Second Cycle, that the Antediluvians’ lust for blood was so 
great that they needed all of my race as their Vessels. 


Those who believe in the Cycle legends predict an . 
Armageddon in the near future. They say that the 
Antediluvians are asleep now, but someday they will awaken 
and then they will feeJ. The Third Cycle is coming to a close, 
and none but the ThirJ Generation will remain alive at its 
conclusion. The tme believers say that each Cycle lasts 2 300 
years, and soon, very soon, the time approaches. They call it 
Gehenna, and some prepare for it fervently. As a man of 
science, these beliefs seem extreme to me, but they cannot he 
entirely discounted. 

Wltatcvcr the truth of the matter, I know that the Elders 
of the Fifth and older Generations exist in complete seclu¬ 
sion. Those of the Inconnu fear one another that much. To 
have lived this long, they must be cunning and powerful, and 
rhey may he expected to cover their tracks well. This leaves 
my own Sixth Generation and its descendants as the bulk of 
the visible Kindred. I have heard claims of a Thirteenth or 
Fourteenth Generation, but prefer to dismiss them. Such 
creatures must be very weak and close to mortality, for it is 
said that the Blood thins as it is passed from one generation 
to the next. 


The Masquerade 


n 1435, there was founded an organization, 
a cause, an obsession, a war. Call it what you 
will; history knows it as the Inquisition. 
Besides burning harmless old women and 
excommunicating French field mice for eat¬ 
ing fanners' wheat, this Inquisition did betimes achieve its 
aim, and cleansed the world of no few true witches, warlocks 
and monsters. Many such monsters were Kindred, and the 
diligent Inquisitors traced whole bloodlines and put all to the 
flame. 

For the first time, our kind stood in real danger of 
extinction. Superstitious belief coupled with scientific thor¬ 
oughness placed in mortal hands the wherewithal to rid the 
world of monsters forever 1 1 was a terrifying time — as insane 
to us as the Holocaust which mortals visited on one another 
earlier in this century. Those Kindred who survived bear the 
menial scars of the Inquisition to this day, and many live a life 
of paranoid seclusion, dealing with the breathing world as 
hale as possible. 

Before this time, wc had lived more or less openly, 
relying on our power and position to preserve us. Though we 
did not announce our presence, wc did not struggle to hide it 
either. We had grown proud in our power, and the fall which 
followed was terrible indeed. 

14 0 VAMP1RE: The Masquerade 


The survivors quickly learned the wisdom of stealth and 
secrecy, and networks sprang up as they do among mortals in 
times of crisis, conveying information and individuals sub 
rusa for the safety of all. This was the birth of what may be 
called a Vampiric society. 

The name Camarilla arose for this organization, reflect¬ 
ing the small, secret rooms used for meeting and concealment. 1 1 
Groups made contact with one another, united for the first y 
time by this adversity. 

The first global convocation took place in I486. Many ; 
chose to absent themselves, but this meeting gave itself the 
power to speak for all Kindred existing or yet to be maJc, and 
to pass laws governing all. The founders of the Camanila 
made themselves its lawmakers. The first such law, and the 
most sacred, is that of the Masquerade. It is this law which 1^ 
willingly violate by laying these pages before you. 

The horrors of the preceding decades had taught us the 
need for secrecy and shown us that, after all, we were 
vulnerable. It was vital, therefore, that the breathing world 
be convinced it had killed the last of us, or, better yet, that we 
had never existed at all. We must match organization with 
organization and cause with cause if we hoped to survive. 

The Masquerade had two faces, each with a number 
contingencies and lesser objectives. Imprimis simplicissrmusc^. 
reasonable secrecy and care was required of all Kindred. J 







M>-r- 



Adjustments continued over the decades — a war here, 
a discovery there to keep breathing minds focused away from 
us. We have had a hand in some of the most significant events 
in history. Do not, however, think that all your history is our 
work, for marionettes you are not and have never been. Marx 
was of your kind, and no vampire could have formulated his 
thoughts. Briet decades later, monstrous deeds were per¬ 
formed in Europe, but none of my kind were involved. Those 
monsters were entirely your own. 

Not long ago, mortal minds turned once more to the 
mystical — though the greatest mystery to me is the appeal 
of the music which was horn in those days—and superstition 
briefly waxed ascendant. The knowledge of certain chemical 
suhstances was made available, and many inquisitive minds 
were distracted or forever silenced. Throughout this last 
century, steps have been taken to preserve the image of the 
vampire in popular entertainments, for thus it may be seen 
more clearly as a fiction. The Masquerade is unraveling, as 
the mysricismofthe mortals increases. The Camarilla snuggles 
to turnback the tide —the evidence of that is all around you. 


do a hundred other things which would force the knowledge 
of our existence upon the mortal world. 

The Elders, and many other Kindred, do not take kindly 
to this attitude, and in some places a virtual state of war exists 
between them. Some see this as a sign of the end of the 
current Cycle, and speak of our imminent extinction. 

These anarchs do not believe thar they are being told the 
truth by the Elders, and they know that they are not being 
told all about their situation. The Elders do not trust the 
anarchs, fearing that they seek to slay them. 




The World of the Undead 


Most Kindred seek Princedom, for it is the only means by 
which to create a Brood of one’s own. Princes do not often 
allow others to create Progeny, and even if they do, they are 
allowed to create only one. A Prince may create as many 
Progeny as he wishes and their loyalty adds to his strength. 

It would be fatuous to list and describe every Clan, 
Pnnee and Fief in the world. Suffice it to say that every mortal 
city of any size supports a vampire population, and these 
populations are organized in a number of different ways. 
Some rule collectively, others autocratically, but all rule and 
all resent intrusion. Like organized criminals and law en» 
forcemeat agencies, they have structured their Domain to 

Prelude 0 15 


Childer 


omical as it may seem, there is a generation 
| gap among vampires just as there is in mortal 
I society. The younger vampires — primarily 
I those Embraced in the latter half of this 
> century and those of the most recent genera¬ 
tions — include an element which chafes at the restrictions 
of Kindred society and laws. Like rebellious adolescents, 
these “anarchs," as they call themselves, demand their free¬ 
dom and ignore the effects on the rest of their kind. They 
would create their own Broods without restraint, deny the 
authority of Princes, break the laws of the Masquerade, and 


Nothing must betray our continued existence, and any indi¬ 
vidual who broke this secrecy would be outcast and hunted 
down as a danger to all. 

Sec undns, active steps must be token to change the 
character of mortal society, and direct minds away from 
superstitious thoughts. Many of the Kindred had turned to 
scholarship to beguile the lonely decades, and certain matters 
were made available to the T aggdngpr in the fields of alchemy, 
literature, art, geography, cosmology und so weuer. Many 
mortals were already turning their steps in this direction, so 
the task was not unduly arduous. Names spring to mind such 
as Bacon, Dee, Galileo, Copernicus, Ariosto, Michelangelo, 
da Vinci, Cellini, and Columbus. It wasa brave Age we made. 

With so many fresh discoveries clamouring for atten¬ 
tion, the mortals lost their single-mindedness in chasing 
monsters. A little later— principally due to an alliance of 
French Methuselahs — material and political philosophies 
were influenced. Science had bred Reason, and Reason 
denied monsters. Over the following centuries, we were able 
to crush superstition almost completely. No one of any 
education seriously believed we had ever existed. 


n one level, the world of the vampire is the 
world of mortals. A vampire moves in rhe 
world of mortals much as a nobleman moves 
| in the forest of hearts while hunting. Just as 
| the noble has his castles and courts, how¬ 
ever, so the vampire has a world of his own, where he may 
consort with his own kind. 

Some vampires shun the society of their Kindred, but 
such society exists, paralleling mortal society in both func¬ 
tion and form. Just as there are mortal nilers and mortal 
societies in the world’s great cities, so too there are vampire 
Clans and Princes. 












their lik ing and suppress anyth ing which threatens to disturb 
their peace. 

Accordingly, a vampire who enters a new city is required 
by hOftichktit to make himself known to its rulers and satisfy 
them that their rule is not threatened or challenged. To fail 
in this courtesy is to invite war.No witch-hunterever pursues 
his prey so diligently as a Clan or Prince seeks out a stranger 
noureau arrivi. 

Most mlcrs, I have said, are content to keep the peace 
in their Fief and pursue their own arcane ends. But there are 
exceptions. One is the league of Clans which calls ilself the 
Sabbat, or the Black Hand. Their Fief extends across the 
eastern half of North America, and they arc everything that 
mortals expect of monstrous vampires. Reveling in the vio¬ 
lent. the perverse and the bestial, they are shunned by their 
own kind, and woe betide the incautious vampire whom they 
find in their territory. 

Above the Clans stands the Camarilla. All vampires are 
aware of this league, and all are invited to join. To take an 
analogy ex mundn mantis — if a Fief is a regional or national 
government, then the Camarilla is the League ofNations. To 
my inind, it is equally effective, but some set great store by its 
infrequent convocations. Certainly the Elders of the Council 
are not to be underestimated as individual powers—most are 
very old and all arc very powerful. Primarily it enforces the 
ancient Traditions, most important among them the Mas¬ 


querade, so soon enough 1 may have cause to test its resolve 
and strength. 

The Clans all have their various alliances and opposi¬ 
tions, which shift as often and widely as those of the small 
countries of the mortal world. I have mentioned the proto¬ 
cols which must be observed when entering a Fief as an 
outsider. These obligations and structures are no more than 
protocols, and may he broken from time to time; but there is 
a stronger bond — stronger even than the ties of blood 
kinship — whose aucioriuis is absolute. It is the mystic tie wc 
call the Oath, or the Blood Bond. 

1 have touched upon the power of Blood to create new 
Kindred and Ghouls. Its effect on Kindred is no less powerful. 
It is said to be the sweetest blood in the world, but it creates 
a potent bond between donor and drinker. A vampire who 
drinks another vampire's blood on three separate occasions 
becomes trapped in a blood kinship as strong as that between 
Sire and Get; in fact, many Sires force this bond upon their 
unknowing Get at the time of creation, the better to com¬ 
mand their loyalty. Among the Kindred, the Oath is a most 
potent bond; to take the Oath is to give over one’s min J and 
heart to another, and a willing Oath is never undertaken 
1 ightly. If all else fails and you have no other means of defence 
against a vampire, use my name — the chance is slender, hut 
if your attneker happens to he Blood Bound to me, then you 
shall be safe. 


Diablerie 


y now, if my labours have been equal to my 
intent, it will be apparent to you that the 
society of the Kindred is as diverse as that of 
the living. Wc have our princes and paupers, 
our dreamers and men of action, our heroes 
and criminals, our idealists and our perverts. The matter I am 
about to disclose is little more than speculation, but increas¬ 
ingly 1 am inclined to believe the rumours. 

I have said how the blood of the Sire empowers the blood 
of the prey, so that the body is sustained in its unlife. 
According to rumour, the Mood of the Sire loses this power 
with the passing of centuries and millennia, and an excep¬ 
tionally aged vampire must needs drink the blood of Kindred 
to survive. Although the decay of a mortal cadaver is spared 
us, time still takes a toll, and the Blood is not absolutely 
immortal. A young vampire of an early generation is able to 
subsist on the blood of animals, but as the centuries pass — 
or as the blood thins with transmission — first animal and 
then mortal blood loses its ability to sustain. 

The Antediluvians are said to prey on the Kindred as we 
do on mortals, and there is no end to the stories of their 

16 0 VAMI^^E: The Masquerade 


depravity. Increasingly, though, rumours spread of younger 
Kindred doing likewise. The reason for this is unclear. Per¬ 
haps the youngest generations bear so little of the Blood that 
it serves them only for a few centuries, or perhaps they seek 
the powers of the Antediluvians by imitating their ways. 1 
have long wondered if this is the cause of the war among my 
kind, the Jyhad which has lasted so king. The Antediluvians 
hide, for they fear that they will be killed by those seeking 
t heir blixid and thus their power. The Elders fear the anarchs, 
for they fear that they shall be eaten by them as well. The 
anarchs fear all those who are older than they, for they know 
that they are prev to a most deadly predator. The conflict 
between my kind is a cannibalistic and horrific war indeed. 

I have already ment toned the Oath, wh ich is undertaken 
by dnnking the blood of another vampire (usually one's Sire 
or Prince). It is known that taking the blood of one's own Get 
camesnosuch bond, and itseems also that the Antediluvians 
—and those others who habitually prey on their own kind— 
are able to do so without creating any kind of bond or 
obligation. This fact, more than anything, makes the practice 
of Diablerie (as it has come to be known) a shocking 
perverted thing to the KinJred, and any vampire who is a 





known Diabolist may be killed out of hand by any who find 
him. The Diabolist must hunt with care, for he stalks the most 
dangerous game in the world. Doubtless some find a great 
exhilaration in this existence. 


Last Plea 


y discourse is at an end; my treachery com¬ 
plete. By now, 1 hope you will understand in 
some measure what impelled me to those 
acts I shall always rue and why 1 felt it 
necessary now to place this document before 
you. 1 cannot ask for your forgiveness — my crimes are too 
great. But if there he pity in your heart, pray for me. 

You now know more about my kind than any mortal 
living—aye, even more than your friend the professor when 
he sought to destroy me. The use to which you put this 
knowledge I leave to your own conscience. 

I have changed a great deal since we last met. For many 
years thereafter, 1 sought within myself for something inex¬ 
pressible. Now, I believe i have found it, or am about to. If 
Golcondn be truly within my reach, I may endure, for in the 
depths of introspection which prompted my writing, I have 
found a desire for quietus at any price. That was a partial 
reason for iny discourse. 1 know full well that the knowledge 
1 have imparted could lead to the destruction of myself and 


The Elders, needless to say, deny these rumours abso¬ 
lutely. To admit to such things would incite a revolution as 
terrible as the rising of the Fourth Generation. Yet there is 
evidence, which the diligent can find though the 
Antediluvians cover their tracks ever so carefully. 


my kind. The will to live — if life this he — is too strong in 
any vampire to allow for a more direct suicide. 

Whatever you decide, I wish you and yours well. I have 
followed the career of your son Quincy with great interest, 
and the lives of his children also. I rejoice that Fate stayed my 
beastly hand and ensured the welfare of your fine family. 
What a great comfort they must be to you. 

In parting, may 1 presume to render my condolences on 
the regrettable death of your husband, of which I read in the 
Times of London. Your love for him is only too well-known 
to me. If the prayers of such a creature may be of any comfort, 
know that you have mine. 

You shall hear no more from me unless you wish it. 1 say 
again, my service is yours to command. 1 can be reached 
through the personal columns of any major European news¬ 
paper merely mention my name, and your own, and my 
retainers shall pass on your message to me. 

Adieu. 

■Your most devoted and penitent servant, 


ux 


Now, reader, I have told my dream to thee; 

See if thou amst interpret it to me 
Or to thyself, or neighbor. But take heed 
Of misinterpreting; far that, instead 
Of doing good, will but thyself abuse 
By misinterpreting evil issues. 

—John Bunyan, The Pilgrim's Progress 


Prelude 0 17 











Book 









































T ose eyes. Like the pits of damnation. Like orbs of black steel. I 

stare into them and l am lost. My mind screams for release. Fear — 
panic — flight! But my body does not respond. I cannot move. 

His caress lingers on my face for a heartbeat and then his fingers drift 
around my neck. His eyes, so gentle — they offer me no mercy. 

Why can’t I scream? 

Like a wolf he pounces. His fangs rake across my throat and pierce my skin. 
A bla 2 e of heat: rapture. He licks at my essence as it pours from my gullet, then 
begins to suck. 1 ding to him like a drowning sailor, like a lover. My rock. My 
lust. 

My senses spin into the night, reaching our for solid ground. I clutch at the 
lapel of his cloak. If there be a Heaven, 1 pray I go there soon. If there be a 
Hell, 1 know I am there now. 

I feel my life slipping away. My eyes are blurring; I let out one last moan. 
Shutting out the world of darkness and pain, I rise up, leaving my twisting and 
heaving body. The last sand falls through the hourglass. It is calm here; I am at 
peace. 

This he death, the unmaking... 

Heat! Pain! Confusion! I smell bitterness. The cold fragrance wrenches 
my soul from its rest. He holds his wrist toward me. Oozing life, its red gleam 
beckons to me. I know but one thing: I must drink to live. 

Oh Lord pity me'. 

Like an animal, I lunge. Greedily I suck at his skin. The hot liquor 
caresses my mouth. I welcome its warmth. Nerves given up for dead return to 
painful vitality. I try to scream. The life flow continues unabated, filling me. 
The pain becomes ecstasy. Such exquisite, living agony. We become one. 

What have I become? 

With a cry, 1 grasp wildly for the source of life. It is gone. 1 collapse to the 
floor. The crash of broken glass resounds somewhere nearby. I am alone. 

With the gift of life still heavy in my stomach, 1 sink into the realm of 
nightmares. 






































Therefore with the same necessity with which the stone falls 
to earth, the hungry wolf buries its fangs m the flesh of its prey 
without the possibility of the knowledge that it itself is the destroyed 


as well as the destroyer. 

V ampire is a game of make-believe, of pretend, of 
storytelling. Although Vampire is a game, it is 
more about storytelling than it is about winning. 
If you’ve never done this kind of thing before, you may be 
confused by the whole premise of a storytelling game. Once 
you catch on to the basic concepts, however, you'll find that 
it isn’t all that strange, and is, in fact, eerily familiar. 

You, along with some of your friends, arc going to tell 
stories of madness and lust. Tales of things that go bump in 
the night. T ales of peril, paranoia, and sinister, shadowy evil. 
Tales from the darkest recesses of our unconscious minds. 
And at the heart of these stories are vampires. 

These stories will capture your imagination far more 
readily than any play or movie; likewise, they are of a darker 
nature than the children’s fairy tales you might remember 
(although those too were rather grim if you think back). This 
is because you are inside the story and not just watching it. 
You are creating it as you go along, and the outcome is always 
uncertain. 

This game provides a way to experience a horror of an all 
too immediate nature, for you experience the terror from the 
other side of the mirror. The horror of Vampire is the legacy 
of being half a beast, trapped in a world of no absolutes, where 
morality is chosen, not ordained. The horror of Vampire is 
the evil within, and the all-consuming lust for warm blood. 


— Schopenhauer 

Perhaps the greatest danger of playing Vampire is that of 
seeing yourself in the mirror. To play this game you must face 
the madness within you, that which you strive to master and 
overcome, but cannot bear to face. 

Unless you are willing to face the reflection of your ou>n 
imperfections then go no further. Madness as well as wisdom 
rewards those who dare to gaze into eternity. 

Storytelling 

Long ago, before movies, TV, radio and books, people 
used to tell each other stories: talcs of the hunt, legends of the 
gods and the great heroes, or gossip about the neighbors. 
They would tell these stories aloud, as part of an oral tradition 
of storytelling, a tradition which, tragically, has been cast 
aside. 

We no longer tell stories — we listen to them. We sit 
passively and wait to be picked up and carried to the world 
they describe, to the unique perception of reality they em¬ 
brace. We have become slaves to our TVs, permitting an 
oligarchy of artists to describe to us our lives, our culture and 
our reality. Through the stories constantly being broadcast, 
our imaginations arc being manipulated for better and, all too 
often, for worse. 


1 I 





















Mvsrsi 


However, there is another way. Storytelling on a per¬ 
sonal level is becoming a part of our culture once again. That 
is what this game is all about: not stories told to you, but 
stories you will tell yourself. Vampire is about bringing 
stories home and making the ancient myths and legends a 
more substantial part of your life. 

Storytelling allows us to understand ourselves by giving 
us a tool with which to explain our triumphs and defeats. By 
looking at our culture, our family and ourselves in new 
contexts, we can understand things we never realized before. 
It is entertaining because it is so revealing, and exhilarating 
because it is so true. Storytelling plays such an enormous role 
in our culture that it can't be accidental. Stories are somehow 
basic to our psychology. Our obsession with them has a 
purpose to it: of that there is no doubt. Storytelling is integral 
to our nature, and has an influence which cannot be denied. 


Roleplaying 


Vampire is not only a storytelling game, but a roleplaying 
game as well. You not only tell stories, but actually act 
through them by taking on the roles of the central characters. 
It’s a lot like acting, only you make up the lines. 


To understand roleplaying, you only have to go back to 
your childhood and those wonderful afternoons spent play¬ 
ing Cops 'n' Robbers, Cowboys and Indians, and Dress-up. 
What you were doing was roleplaying, a sort of spontaneous 
and natural acting that completely occupied your imagina¬ 
tion. This play-acting helped you learn about life and what 
it meant to be a grown-up. It was an essential part of 
childhood, but just because you have grown up doesn’t mean 
you have to stop. 

In Vampire, unlike pretend, there are a few rules to help 
you roleplay. They are used mainly to avoid arguments — 
“Bang! Bang! You're dead!” “No I'm not!” — and to add a 
deeper sense of realism to the story. Rules direct and guide 
the progress of the story, and help define the capacities and 
weaknesses of the characters. The essential rules for V ampire 
are described in Chapter Four. 

It is best to play Vampire with only a few players — five 
at the very most. It is far too personal a game to make it very 
enjoyable with a large group. Much of its mystery and flavor 
is lost when players must compete for attention. Indeed, we 
have found Vampire works best with a Storyteller and a 
troupe of only three players. 


VAMPIRE: The Masquerade 































The Storyteller 

Childhood is the place where nobody dies. 
Nobody that matters, that is. 

— Edna St. Vincent Millay 


Vampire is structured a little differently than the games 
you might he used to. In the first place, there is no board or 
cards. Second, one player needs to be the Storyteller — the 
person who creates and guides the stories. 

Being the Storyteller is something like being the Banker 
in Monopoly™, except it is even more important. The 
Storyteller describes what happens as a result of what the 
players say and do, and must decide if the characters succeed 
or fail, suffer or prosper, live or die. It is a very demanding 
task, but is also most rewarding, for the Storyteller is a weaver 
of dreams. 

The Storyteller's primary duty is to make sure the other 
players have a good time. The way to do that is to tell a good 
talc. Unlike traditional Storytellers, however, she doesn't 
simply tell the story; instead, she must create the skeleton of 
a story and then let the players flesh it out by living the roles 
of its leading characters. It is a careful balance between 
narration and adjudication, between story and game. Some¬ 
times she must set the scene or describe what occurs (such as 
when the characters are asleep), but mostly she must decide 
what occurs in reaction to the words and actions of the 
characters—as realistically, impartially and creatively as she 
possibly can. 

As the Storyteller, you are in charge of interpreting and 
enforcing the rules, yet you are also an entertainer — you 
must struggle to balance your two roles. Most of this book was 
written to help you do just that. It won’t make being a 
Storyteller easy, because it never will be, but it will make you 
better at it. 

The role of the Storyteller is explained in much more 
detail in Chapter Three. 


The Players 


Most of the people who play this game will not be 
Storytellers, but rather players, who assume the roles of the 
central characters in the story. Being a player does not 
require as much responsibility as being a Storyteller, but just 
as much effort and concentration. 

As a player in a Vampire chronicle, you will take on the 
persona and role of a vampire, whom you invent and then 
roleplay over the course of a story. The life of your character 
is in your hands, for it is you who decides what the character 
says and does. You decide what risks to accept or decline. 
Everything you say and do when you play your character has 
an effect on the world. 

You must be both an actor and a player. As an actor, you 
speak for your character and act out whatever you wish your 


character to do or say. Whatever you say, your charac ter says, 
unless you are specifically asking a question of the Storyteller 
or are describing your actions. By announcing and describing 
to the other players what you are doing, you become a part of 
the ongoing story. 

As a player, you try to do things which allow your 
character to succeed, so as to “win the game." This strategic 
element of the game is essential, for it is what so often creates 
the thrill and excitement of a dramatic moment. 

Often after describing the actions “you” want to take, 
you will need to make dice rolls to see if you succeed in doing 
what you have illustrated with words. Your Character Traits, 
descriptions of your strengths and weaknesses, dictate how 
well you can do certain things. Actions are a basic element 
of Vampire, for they describe how characters change the 
world and affect the course of the story. 

Characters arc central to a story, for they create and 
direct the plot; without characters you can't have a story. As 
the story flows, the characters direct and energize the progress 
of the plot, not the decisions of the Storyteller. 

To some extent, you are a Storyteller as well as a player, 
and should feel free to add ideas and elements to the story, 
though the Storyteller may accept or reject them as she sees 
fit. In the end, it is the story, not your character, which is the 
most important. The character is a tool for telling a good 
story, not the other way around. 

Characters 

There are many different elements which make up what 
we like to think of as the “self": too many, in fact, to truly 
separate or identify. In truth, we really don’t know who or 
what we are. We know only that we contain multitudes — 
that we are both human and beast, angel and demon. We 
wear many masks. It is from this essential diversity of self that 
our desire and ability to pretend to be someone else originate. 

We must recreate ourselves every morning and compose 
our identity from a number of different sources — from what 
our friends think of us, what our parents or children expect of 
us, and how we think our experiences should affect us — all 
in conjunction with the habits developed over a lifetime. 
Each day we balance all of our disparate selves and unite them 
into one working, talking, thinking whole. We pretend to be 
whole, and in the act of make-believe, we create the reality. 

This is why it is impossible to fully leave yourself behind 
when you roleplay. Part of your character will certainly be 
different from yourself — in fact, quite frequently you will 
play someone with traits entirely different from your own — 
but always, in some essential way, that character will reflect 
some aspect of yourself. 

Characters arc the literary versions of a real person — 
they are not real, but they do capture some aspect of reality. 
Only when you enter the world that is woven by the story can 
your characters become complete. They are real only with 
you as the animating force—the soul if you wish. Never treat 































P*your characters as projections of yourself (even if that’s all 
> they are). Treat them as unique individuals, as works of art, 
or as fragile expressions of your poetic sensitivity. You must 
treasure the characters that you create. 

Vampire characters are easy to create. It takes only a few 
minutes to work out all the traits and your character’s basic 
personality, to get down all the numbers. However it will 
take some effort to make this collection of numbers into a 
living, breathing character. You must reach deep inside 
yourself to find enough that is real and true to produce a 
complete character. The Frankenstein monster was easily 
assembled from available body parts. It was the breath of life 
that proved difficult. 

Character creation is discussed in greater detail in later 
chapters. 

Broods 

It is assumed that all of the characters will be allies, and 
that during the game they will operate as a group. This is not 
to say that they will always get along, but they will watch each 
other’s backs and will share a few common ambitions. Such 
groups of vampires arc not uncommon, and there are names 
for such gangs. Though the term “brood” once only meant 
the progeny of a single sire, it has also come to mean any group 
of young vampires who have banded together for mutual 
protection. The ciders call broods "coteries," but this archaic 
term is no longer as commonly used as it once was. Whatever 
the name, it is this group that each and every character will 
come to depend upon. It is the brood that unites the 
characters and enables the players to work together through¬ 
out the story. 

Winner and 
Losers 

The dynamic principle of fantasy is play. 

— C.G. Jung 

There is no single “winner" of Vampire, since the object 
is not to defeat the other players. To win at all, you need to 
cooperate with the other players. Because this is a storytelling 
game, there is no way for one person to claim victory. In fact, 
Vampire is a game in which you are likely to lose, for it is 
difficult to do anything to slow your character’s inexorable 
slide into madness. The whole idea is to hang on as long as 
possible and eke out the most drama from the ongoing 
tragedy. 


The only true measure of success in Vampire is survival. 
However, if the character has some overwhelming motiva¬ 
tion, such as a need for vengeance, accomplishing it is also a 
measure of success. Additionally, stories have conclusions 
that either benefit or harm the characters. If the characters 
learn that a presumed serial killer is really a vampire and 
manage to halt her rampage, then they “win." If they never 
even find out who was behind the murders (much less 
manage to stop her), then they lose, though they may not 
know it until too late. 

In order to achieve even a partial victory, the characters 
must usually become friends. They look out for one another 
and have a modicum of mist in each other. The world of 
darkness is so dangerous that trustworthy allies are essential. 
It is an evolutionary adaptation. 


Playing Aids 


For the most part, Vampire was designed to be played 
around a table. Though it does not require a board, there are 
a number of props which require a table to use properly. You 
will need dice, pencils and paper, and photocopies of the 
character sheets. The dice required are 10-sided, which you 
can procure in any game store. The Storyteller may also want 
to have paper on hand in order to sketch out a setting (so as 
to more easily describe it to the players), as well as a few other 
props to show the players what the characters are seeing 
(photographs, matches, scarves — anything to make the 
experience more vivid). 

Live-Action 

Vampire was designed to include Live-Action 
roleplaying. Instructions and hints arc given on how to run 
parts of the game using Live-Action roleplaying, where 
players physically play out the actions of their characters as 
an actor would (though without weapons or combat of any 
sort). These periodic episodes will be played when the 
characters are at a “home base” or in situations where inter- 
character roleplaying is at a premium. 

Essentially, instead of sitting down and telling everyone 
what your character says and does, you stand up and act it out, 
actually saying what your character says and doing (for the 
most part) what your character does. Advice is given to the 
Storyteller on how to stage and guide these episodes, with 
particular emphasis on how to introduce plot elements that 
provoke roleplaying between the players (distrust, debate, 
intrigue and acrimony). 


24 0 VAMPIRE: The Masquerade 
































The Meaning of 
the Myth 

I forget how to move 
When my mouth is this dry 
And my eyes are bursting hearts 
In a bloodstained sky 
Oh, it was sweet and wild. 

— The Cure, “Homesick” 

To understand Vampire, you must be able to savor its 
mood. It is stark and brooding, but with an underlying 
sensuality. It is an exotic and sonorous nightmare, in which 
reason does not always play a role. It is a neo-gothic vision 
of romance laid atop today's hyper-kinetic MTV world. 

This romance is evoked by the pathos of it all. In 
Vampire, characters are almost certainly doomed from the 
moment they are Embraced. Though they are powerful 
beyond imagination, they are also cursed. No matter what 
they do, they remain monsters, with a horrible, unquench¬ 
able thirst. The stories in Vampire are unique because they 
all have this element of tragedy. The traditional tragedy of 
the theater, the tragedy of Aeschylus and Shakespeare, 
involves a hero coming to a great and horrible demise, as he 
was fated to from the very beginning. Because of who and 
what the hero is, because of the very virtues of the hero, the 
tragedy is inevitable from the very first act — and the 
audience knows it. The characters in Vampire are almost 
certainly doomed from the first moment they drink from 
their first victim — and the players should know it. 

Paradoxically, these characters, who are the paragons of 
tragic evil, have the potential to become heroes of uncom¬ 
mon valor. They are evil, not because of who they are but 
because of what they are. As drinkers of blood, they possess 
the taint of evil. They are tragic because they care about their 
evil but can ultimately do nothing about it. The characters 
in Vampire are expected to be heroes—they must care about 
what they have become and about what they may soon be. 

Justice is only served if the good overcomes the evil — 
the monsters must lose. Thus, for the vampire characters to 
find some way to “win,” they must somehow become heroic. 
They must defeat the monster within by exerting self-re¬ 
straint, nurturing the impulses of human virtue, and display ing 
genuine courage. Sometimes the tragedy of Final Death is a 
vampire’s only hope of heroic escape. 

There is a slim possibility that the characters may find a 
way to escape the curse and become mortal once again. Not 
all characters will seek this, but for a majority it will be their 
overwhelming motivation, their all-consuming drive, espe¬ 
cially as the steady loss of Humanity takes its toll. 


/ // 


































Other vampires will seek Golconda, the plateau of 
control that some of the Kindred manage to reach, where 
their basic drives and instincts do not control them so 
strongly. This is even more difficult to attain than the escape 
from the curse of undeath, but it is sought after at least as 
much. 

The characters spend much of their time combating evil, 
but instead of fighting diabolists or evil scientists or monsters, 
they are combating that which is inside of themselves, the 
bestial impulses which make them evil. These conflicts in 
Vampire are ultimately internal; they are about you. 

Fledglings 

I was early to finish, I was late to start 

I must be an adult — I'm a minor at heart. 

— Minor Threat, “Minor Threat” 


The Beast is strong within you. Though you will regret 
what you are and the things you must do, you cannot deny 
them or excise them from your soul. But resist you must, lest 
you slip away into complete degeneration and chaos. 

It is difficult to be good when so many of your urges drive 
you toward sin, but if you falter, you will lose your humanity 
all the more quickly. You will become overwhelmed by the 
Beast within if you do not constantly strive to maintain some 
veneer of culture and c i vil izat ion. You must master the Beast, 
lest the Beast master you. Evil tends to provide its own 
reward. 

You arc a fledgling, only recently released by your sire. 
You must struggle to survive, and begin to understand the 
strange world into which you have been thrust — most likely 
against your will. In the end, you may persevere, but only a 
lucky few are able to escape the curse and return to their 
human life. You seek Golconda in order to find stability and 
power as a vampire, but most never realize that it even exists. 

The Becoming 

Stood by the gate at the foot of the garden 

Watching them pass like clouds in the sky 

Try to cry out in the heat of the moment 

Possessed by a fury that bums from inside. 

— Joy Division, “The Eternal” 

The moment a human becomes a vampire is never 
forgotten, for the transformation is usually painful and trau¬ 
matic. A vampire is created when an existing vampire drains 
all the blood from a mortal, killing him. However, just before 
final and absolute death sets in, the sire pierces open her own 
skin and releases a small amount of blood into the victim’s 
mouth. This rouses him somewhat, and he begins to drink 
from the sire’s open wound. All it takes for the transforma¬ 
tion to occur is the absence of one’s own blood and the tiniest 
bit of vampiric blood. 


26 0 VAMPIRE: The Masquerade 






























0 <1 II 11 II § H 0 0 0 0 0 <1 

through a constant exertion of willpower, and even then 
frenzy might overcome him if fresh blood comes within 
smelling distance. Vampires need to feed regularly, usually 


The character takes on the lineage of his sire and is 
therefore of the same clan. The clan membership affects 
which powers the character can have at the beginning of the 
game; it also delineates a special weakness of the character. 
Often characters of the same clan will be allies and will strive 
to support one another, though this is not always the case. 

For the next few months, years, or decades, the newly 
created childe remains with his sire. He may be taught 
nothing or everything, nurtured or abused, restricted or 
granted full freedom. But until he is released by his sire and 
presented to the prince of the city, he is not accepted in 
vampire society. 



The Hunger 


Vampires must feed; this fact is the lowest common 
denominator of their existence. Hunger is not merely a need, 
it is an all-consuming passion. The thirst for blood is a primal 
instinct for survival, for only through blood may the vampire 
survive. The blood need not be human, and even if it is 
mortal vitae, the death of the vessel is not required; however, 
the bloodlust often causes older vampires to lose their re¬ 
straint when they begin to feed, and thus drain all life from 
their victims. Vampire teeth leave only a small wound, and 
even this disappears if the vampire licks the wound. 

Because the sire never returns to the childe all of the 
blood which she withdrew, the young vampire is soon con¬ 
sumed by a ravenous hunger for blood. As the childe has no 
experience with this overwhelming urge, it is as total as it is 
immediate. The fledgling cannot fight the urge except 


once or twice a week. 

Nature of the Beast 

1 tell myself I will not go 

Even as I drive there. 

— Big Black, “Bad Houses" 

What does it mean to be a vampire? Kindred are not, 
despite their appearance, human — they have an alien 
nature and differ from mortals in many fundamental ways. 
One may start with the picture of a human, but it is a lethal 
mistake to think vampires are like us. 

Yet they are similar enough to us that they can be 
compared and contrasted to humanity. By comparing vam¬ 
pires to humans, it is possible to discover what their capabilities 
and limitations are. 

It is important to keep in mind that, because a vampire's 
basic needs differ so completely, other desires vary as well. 
Food other than blood is no longer necessary — but unfortu¬ 
nately, one can’t just purchase blood in the local grocery store 
either. Mortal power is likewise an empty pleasure. While 
power-mongering is a favored hobby, particularly among the 
Ventrue clan, it can never truly hold a Kindred’s interest for 
long. Vampires are predators, and they seek to prove them¬ 
selves as hunters, not as rulers. 









































*V 


V 


And the Lord said unto him, “Therefore whosoever slayeth 
Cain, vengeance shall be taken on him sevenfold." And the Lord 
set a mark upon Cain, lest any finding him should kill him 
— Bible, Genesis 4: 15 


T he world of Vampire is not our world — at least 
not quite. It is a Gothic-Punk vision of our 
world, a place of extremes— monolithic, majes¬ 
tic and altogether twisted. The government is corrupt, the 
culture is bankmpt, and the decadent mortals revel in the 
flames of the final days. It is a world where the forces of evil 
and entropy are even more powerful than they are in our 
world. It is a world of darkness. 

Externally, not much differs from our world — CDs arc 
in, vinyl is out, the ozone layer is being depleted, and the same 
soap operas are being broadcast. The same faces are on 
Mount Rushtnore and the Lady still stands proudly in New 
York Harbor. In this world, however, vampires exist, and 
they have directed and influenced the course of human affairs 
for some time. Indeed the differences between the Gothic- 
Punk world and our own are largely the doing of the vampires. 

This chapter describes the setting of Vampire in detail: 
the culture and society of both the mortal masses and the 
vampire lords who prey upon them. 

Gothic-Punk 

Gothic-Punk is a way of describing the setting in brief. 
It is a metaphor for our own world, a warning of what we 
might become and a shadow of the sickness that infects us 


now. It is a world with problems like our own, but where 
vampires are to blame for much of the misery. 

The Gothic aspect describes the ambiance and institu¬ 
tions of mortal society. The Church is stronger because 
people always turn to the Church in times of crisis, and 
enough people have been touched by the Kindred to make a 
difference. The institutions which they control tend to be 
even more conservative and resistant to change than those of 
our world. Architecture has a menacing gothic flavor to it; 
in fact, some skyscrapers in this world might be girded with 
gargoyles. 

The Punk describes the way people live—the gangs rule 
the streets and organized crime dominates the underworld 
(and is in turn dominated by the Kindred). Rock, punk and 
rap are even more of an escape and release, and rebellion is 
codified in styles of dress and speech. All in all, the world is 
more corrupt, more decadent and less humane than any 
suburbanite would like to believe. 

In the end, you will decide what the Gothic-Punk world 
is like. The differences are so numerous, yet so subtle, that 
they arc impossible to describe fully in this book. It is your job 
to convey the mood of the Gothic-Punk world in the stories 
you tell. You can do this through your descriptions, the 
characters you play and the stories that you tell. Everything 
and anything can add to the flavor that is Gothic-Punk. 

_ ^ 


Chapter Two: Setting 0 29 






























71 


r 



isV vs X-‘‘ 





( 

—-— 


■ 




Streets of Blood 

But first, on earth as vampire sent, 

Thy corpse shall from its tomb be rent; 

Then ghastly haunt thy native place, 

And suck the blood of all thy race. 

— Lord Byron 

What is it like to live in a world of perpetual night? To 
dance under the blood-red moon? To lust for the blood of 
living, intelligent prey? 

City life is as quicksilver as the Cainite itself. Long 
periods of peace can explode without warning into spasms of 
great strife and turmoil. The vampire is an animal of twisted 
emotion and instinct. One Kindred’s obsessions and perver¬ 
sions can suddenly bring her into conflict with another. 
Though the Kindred can live with one another in peace for 
years, eventually the mice ends and the cannibalistic war 
begins anew. The Jyhad never truly ends — it only casts a 
smaller shadow for a time. 

Normally, a balance is reached among the Kindred of a 
city, whether by formal or tacit agreement. Efforts are made 
to minimize conflict, though strife is often unavoidable. 
When conflict does occur, it is almost always hidden beneath 
the veil of the Masquerade, and rarely noticed by the mortals 
of the city. Thus may a war be waged without the elders 
fearing the return of the Inquisition. 

Some Kindred take no part in the society of the Damned, 
and maintain no connection with others of their kind. They 
are known as the Clanless, or the Caitiff. Cities are extremely 
large places and it is not difficult to isolate oneself from one’s 
peers; indeed, it is said that the only Kindred who ever meet 
are the ones who wish to meet. However, sometimes even the 
most solitary vampires can be thrust into the politics of the 
day — in times of need, the Caitiff are mercilessly rooted out 
and questioned. The J ust icars, enforcers of K indred law, have 
been known to use solitary vampires as scapegoats for the 
crimes of others. 

Creatures of the City 

By agreement, though some say by nature, the vampire 
is a creature of the city. The wilds of the countryside are left 
to the werewolves and their ilk. This suits most Kindred. 
Why roam far and wide in search of sustenance when a few 
square blocks of even the smallest city provide more than 
enough vessels? 

Younger Kindred sometimes feel the need to roam, but 
that desire usually fades as they age. Older Cainites are more 
likely to have become comfortable in one location and made 
their haven at that spot. Those who do choose to wander the 
countryside will almost invariably come into contact with 
the Lupines, and the hatred between werewolves and Kin¬ 
dred runs deep. 


30 0 VAMPIRE: The Masquerade 



































li (1 <1 ft <1 <1 0 11 <1 0 <1 0 0 0 


Thus the city has become a gilded prison for the Kindred. 
Though the cities are the center of civilization, and in this 
day and age often cover enormous expanses of terrain, they 
are still cells from which the Kindred are unable to escape. 
They are trapped in both body and spirit. Imprisonment only 
increases the tension between the vampires, and eventually 
caged animals always turn on one another. 


Overpopulation 


Let's have a war — uw need the space 

Let’s have a war — clean up this place. 

— Fear, "Let’s Have a War” 

Vampires are a unique species of animal just as humans 
arc. They must obey the laws of evolution as well as the 
dictates of their environment. They have a place in the food 
chain; indeed, one could even speculate that they fill an 
ecological niche. There are definite limits to how many of 
their kind can be supported in a given area. When they cross 
over the limit, natural phenomena reduce the vampiric 
population back within its limits, just as with any other 
predators. 

Kindred are unique among the creatures of the world in 
that they are not held in check by any other spec ies. They are 
their own prey and predators, and control their numbers 
through intense competition. The elders remember only too 
well that if their numbers grow too great they will attract the 
attention of the mortals. Although individual vampires are 
many times more powerful than their mortal prey, the sheer 
numbers of a humanity aware of their presence would quickly 
overwhelm them. 

Only so many hunters can be supported by one herd. In 
years past only one Kindred lived within each city and each 
could claim it as her own domain. When cities were small, 
being a race of loners was an effective survival tactic. How¬ 
ever, as cities have grown, so has the population of hunters. 
Now it is no longer rare for many to live within the same 
domain. 

A large city, such as San Francisco or Hamburg, nor¬ 
mally supports a vampire population of anywhere from 15 to 
30 undead. Larger cities like New York or greater London 
hold a proportionately larger population, and less reside in 
smaller cities. 

As a rule of thumb, assume that there is one vampire for 
every 100,000 mortals. Thus, the greater Chicago metropoli¬ 
tan area, a region of seven million mortals, can reasonably 
support nearly 70 vampires. Often a prince will artificially 
regulate how many Kindred reside within the city, thus 
ensuring the sanctity of the Masquerade. 

The cities could certainly hold more Kindred, but there 
are legitimate fears of discovery. The Masquerade is the 
preeminent concern of the elders—better that some anarchs 
die than all be extinguished in another Inquisition. Every 
care is taken to insure that the existence of vampires is kept 


secret from the mortal population. Strict controls are kept 
over the creation of neonates, for a surplus of vampires 
increases the probability of discovery dramatically. The popu¬ 
lation is also restricted by the simple fact that few potential 
vampires survive their Becoming; many are driven mad by it 
and put down by their sires. 

Despite this, however, there are currently far too many 
Kindred for the mortal population to support; the ranks of the 
anarchs have swelled to unprecedented proportions. Gradu¬ 
ally the time of the "grazing” approaches— the time fearfully 
whispered of in Kindred legend as Gehenna. 



Normality 


He don't give a hoot of warning 

Wrapped in a black cat coat. 

He don't go in the light of the morning, 

He's split, the time the cock’rel crows. 

— The Rolling Stones, “Midnight Rambler" 

Most vampires desperately struggle to develop a sem¬ 
blance of normality in their lives and in so doing, escape the 
sordid truth of their existences. They create an artificial 
world around themselves, one that is bound to slip away with 
the passing years, but is pleasurable for the here and now. 
Some scholars among the Kindred postulate that a vampire 
needs this facade of life to retain his sanity. Falling into the 
“vampire-schtick” of the cinema and literature inevitably 
results in despair and eventual mental disintegration, but for 
the duration of the play-pretend solace can be garnered. 

It has been put forth by those with learning that much 
of the mortal psyche survives the Becoming. That psyche, 
however, becomes overburdened by the supernatural drives, 
desires, and obsessions of the Beast. A certain amount of self- 
deception is necessary to retain one’s sanity. 

Social 

Distinctions 

People try to put us down 

Just because we get around. 

Things they do look awful cold 

I hope I die before I get old. 

Talkin' ‘bout my generation. 

— The Who, “My Generation" 

There are a number of different social castes among the 
Kindred. For the most part, Cainites arc distinguished by a 
combination of age and generation (how many steps one is 
removed from Caine, the first vampire, in terms of ancestry). 
Although there is a degree of social mobility, the elders only 
trust those who have proven themselves, and the best way to 
prove oneself is to survive a few hundred years. The elders 


Chapter Two: Setting 0 
































hold the power, so the elders determine who is accorded 
respect and status. Of course it is always possible to engage 
in diablerie and thereby lower one's generation, but such 
kinslayers are seldom welcomed among the elders. 

The highest status is that accorded to the Antediluvians 
— Cainites of the third generation. The lowest is that 
accorded to the childer and the Clanless, who are generally 
of the 13th or later generations and have only recently been 
Embraced. 

• Caitiff: Even though many Caitiff are Clanless but 
otherwise “normal" vampires, others have become so degen¬ 
erate that they feed only off the weak and the dying. Some 
Caitiff live apart from vampire society on purpose, but many 
have been cast out. Some Caitiff were once a part of Kindred 
society, but have lost so much Humanity that they are unable 
to maintain relations with any other creatures. They know 
only survival, and live from night to night in search of food. 
Eventually they will die, but it may take many years. 

• Childe: Vampires of this class have not yet been 
introduced to the prince, nor have they been released by their 
sires. They are not considered to be full members of vampire 
society and are thus shown no respect. They arc, in short, 
treated as children. The term is sometimes used out of 
contempt. Kindred who have committed especially stupid 
acts may be called and considered childer. 


argued whether this change is mystical, biological, or is in fact 
a social change brought about through changing needs and 
desires. Certainly, by the time a vampire reaches this age, a 
boredom and melancholy sets in, as well as an increased 
paranoia. Those who are weak, take risks, or unconsciously 
desire suicide do not survive to this age — only the very 
strongest attain the station of Methuselah. 

As a means of self-preservation, Methuselahs retreat 
from the world and those younger than them. The constant 
struggle of facing the young reckless ones, who seek power 
through the blood of their elders, grows numbing. Eventually 
one of the anarchs will get lucky and dispatch the ancient. 
Thus the only option is to retreat fully from society, and go 
into torpor. Some Methuselahs remain involved in power 
struggles and the Jyhad of the Kindred, but do so from 
complete anonymity. 

• Antediluvian: These are most ancient vampires, and 
they are likely the most powerful creatures in the world. For 
the most part they are considered to be the grandchilder of 
Caine, and are of the third generation. When they do 
involve themselves in the affairs of Kindred, they seldom 
leave things untarnished by their touch. The mere word of an 
Antediluvian is enough to provoke enormous strife and 
conflict among the Kindred. Their eternal struggle, the 
Jyhad, affects all the Kindred. 


• Neonate: These vampires have been recently re¬ 
leased and presented to the prince, though they have not yet 
made their mark in their society. The neonate is the caste of 
youngest vampires who have been released by their sires. If 
they behave themselves and do not join the anarchs, they 
eventually will become ancilla:, usually after 50 to 100 years. 

• Anarch: The anarchs have status because they are 
noticed and respected for what little power they have achieved. 
They are recognized for their energy, drive, and consistency. 
Though they are the enemies of the elders and especially the 
prince, they are still respected, if not openly, for by rebelling 
they have given themselves an identity. 

• Ancilla: These Kindred are still young, but have 
proven themselves to the elders. The ancilla: are the up-and- 
coming Cainites, the ones who play by the rules (mostly) in 
order to achieve greater power. This is the rank between 
neonate and elder, where the vampire is given increasing 
respect and power. Most have existed for one or two centu¬ 
ries in their vampiric form. 

• Elder: When vampires reach a certain age, there are 
few above them who still hold power in vampire society. The 
elders are the Kindred who are in control and who seek to 
dominate all the others. The elders are normally between 
200 and 1000 years old, but like all things undead, this can 
vary immensely. In Europe, a vampire has to be much older 
and more powerful to be considered an elder than she does in 
the New World. 

• Methuselah: When a vampire reaches a particular 
age, somewhere between 1000 and 2000 immortal years, a 
profound change invariably overtakes him. It has long been 


The Prince 

Tire modem age (the last millennium by Kindred reck¬ 
oning) has produced a new social order among the undead. 
At one time Cainites lived alone or with their broods; each 
was lord of its own city, and it is from that era that the 
Traditions came. Some gave themselves titles and honors, 
but this practice was unimportant as there were none but 
mortals to impress. 

But when cities grew into metropolises, and there were 
enough vessels to support many Kindred, vampire society 
began to change. The age of the princes began. 

The term prince, though sometimes used with con¬ 
tempt, is used to refer to the elder who holds domain over a 
specific metropolitan area. In formal terms, a prince holds 
the power of domain; he or she makes the laws and is 
responsible for keeping order. In practical terms, the prince 
is merely the one who is dominant and best able to keep the 
anarchs in their place. In the beginning, the strongest 
vampire in each city simply claimed domain. Over time, 
however, traditions have grown around the making and 
keeping of that claim. The Camarilla has codified and 
enforced these traditions. 

After the Inquisition, the importance of the Masquerade 
was imprinted in the minds of the elders, and they increas¬ 
ingly distrusted the younger vampires, whom they called 
anarchs. The revolt of the sect known as the Sabbat was the 
source of much of their distrust, for they feared that it could 
happen again. The neonates created during the 18th century 
were the children of a modem age, and alien to the mindset 


32 0 VAMPIRE: The Masquerade 

































of the elders. After an incident in London in 1743 where the 
Masquerade was broken by an anarch, the Camarilla decided 
to formally acknowledge what had already been fact for many 
centuries — the power of the prince. 

The term “prince” is simply that: a term. It is not a 
titular holding, nor a hereditary position of any kind. In fact, 
many Kindred object to the use of the term “prince” for those 
very reasons. It is simply the name and the assumption of 
rights that a powerful vampire might achieve. Not all cities 
even have princes; indeed, some are ruled by councils, while 
others are not ruled at all. The modem usage of “prince” is 
a reference to the age when each Kindred was the secret ruler 
over the city in which she lived, a practice most common in 
medieval Italy. In some places, titles such as Duke, Baron or 
Count (in their culturally correct forms) are used. 

The prince does not truly reign over a city; rather, the 
position is akin to that of an overseer. Above all else, the 
prince is the final arbiter of disputes between the Kindred in 
her city and is responsible for ensuring that the Masquerade 
is preserved. The elders generally interpret this to mean that 
the prince must suppress and persecute the anarchs. 

The Kindred in the city owe the prince no oath of fealty 
and must obey only as much as their cowardice demands. 
When the rule of a prince is questioned or thwarted, the 
prince must use force to maintain control. If he does not have 
enough power, then his rule is at an end. There are some 
princes who do not understand the informality of their 


position; they believe themselves kings and their reigns 
involve much protocol and regal ritual. They hold court, and 
demand that all Cainites within their domain attend them 
while they pass judgment on those brought before them. The 
arrogance of these princes is often more than can be toler¬ 
ated, but it is understandable — who but the insane or the 
truly egotistical would want such a dangerous position? 

Many Kindred ignore the prince, just as they ignore all 
others of their own kind. The powerful beings who together 
comprise the Inconnu, and many of the elders, are not 
impressed by such idle pronouncements of power. They see 
the title as representative of the arrogance of one still young 
enough to lust for power. The prince is not an authority to 
whom they would bow. When they visit a city, it is to them 
that the prince would bow, if the prince is wise. 


Taking Charge 

The prince is traditionally the eldest of a city's Kindred, 
though this is no longer universal. The method of “corona¬ 
tion" varies from city to city and prince to prince. It is 
normally a violent usurpation of power, for only those with 
power and ambition are able to hold their claims unchal¬ 
lenged. Typically the support of the elders of the city is 
required. The most powerful of these elders are known as the 
primogen, and they often form a council of advisors to the 
prince. The prince needs their sanction in order to rule. 


Chapter Two: Setting 0 33 


































Anyone can make the claim of princedom, but only 
when none opposes the would-be prince may she hold 
domain over the city. If there is a challenge, the contenders 
must battle one another until sovereignty is determined. 

This warfare is not as simple as a duel, or even any sort 
of direct combat. It is, like all conflicts between vampires, a 
part of the great Jyhad in that it is a progression of games and 
maneuvers, tricks and threats, violence and bloodshed. The 
various elders, broods and coteries ally themselves to one side 
or the other — either out of strong personal beliefs, promises 
of great reward, or threats of retaliation. Frequently, mortal 
institutions that arc under the control of the vampire, such 
as the police, banks or the media, may be employed in the 
war. Almost always, the process ends with the death of one 
combatant or the other. It is rare that the winner is magnani¬ 
mous, and even if she were, the far-sighted primogen would 
not allow it. 

Coups are difficult due to the fact that the prince is 
personally very powerful and nearly always creates a brood to 
protect him. Another consideration for a would-be insurgent 
is that taking on the prince usually means taking on the elders 
of the city. The elders, when united, have enough power to 
defeat all comers. 

An attempt to usurp the princedom means a period of 
great instability, as the warfare can spill over into the mortal 
realm and threaten the Masquerade. Fear of this stays many 
elders from changing sides or dividing their support among 
two or more contenders. 

Most elders support the prince because they do not wish 
to risk turmoil. They have grown protective of their long 
lives, and do all that they can to provide themselves with a 
stable environment. They are extremely conservative in all 
that they do, for they seek only to survive, not to promote 
change. 

With the support of the primogen, it is nearly impossible 
to successfully challenge a prince, for these elders will direct 
their influence, followers and even personal powers to ben¬ 
efit the prince. Though many try to challenge the prince, 
most are destroyed before they even begin. 

Thus, is it possible to rule the Damned. Princes have 
been known to voluntarily abdicate their position, though 
this rarely occurs. 

Advantages of Princedom 

El President smokes cigars 

Anyone he does not like 

He shoots or puts behind bars. 

— Circle Jerks, “Coup D’Etat" 

Many vampires seek the position of prince simply for the 
glory. There are, however, a number of advantages to the 
title which might not be readily apparent. 

• Right to progeny: The prince is the only vampire who 
is able to freely create progeny. No others have this freedom 




























unless the prince grants it to them. The prince thus 
maintains a powerful control over other vampires, for most, 
at some point, wish to create a childe. 

• Protection of the elders: The primogen will generally 
support the prince as long as she maintains the Masquerade 
and suppresses the wilder stirrings of the anarchs. 

• Political power within the Camarilla: The prince 
has greatly increased status and is listened to by most elders. 

• Mastery over those who enter one’s domain: It is the 
prince's traditional right to exert controls over all Kindred 
who enter his area of influence, and newcomers must report 
to the prince when they first arrive in the area. If they do 
not, it is considered within the prince’s rights to punish 
them. 

• Freedom to feed: The prince is also able to limit (for 
the good of the city) the feeding of others. In the name of 
protecting the Masquerade, she may place restrictions on 
some or all of the Kindred who live within the city. Usually 
this affects where and from whom they may feed. If they 
disobey, she may accuse them of violating the Masquerade 
and punish them accordingly. 

• Power over one's enemies: The prince has the 
authority to call a Blood Hunt, and thus possesses the power 
of life and death over those who cross him. He is not allowed 
to kill at will, but if the prince determines that any have 
broken the Traditions, he may punish them accordingly. 
This is subject to much abuse, and thus provides a great deal 
of power. 


Intrigue 


The power-politics around the prince can be quite 
dynamic, especially when more than one elder is present 
and attempting to sway the decisions of the prince. Each 
may attempt to threaten, cajole and even trick the prince 
into doing things a certain way, all the while feigning 
disinterest in the whole sickly affair of politics. The elders 
do not dare push things to the point where the prince is 
overthrown, but they will play the game very close to the 
edge. The Jyhad exists on more than one level, and many 
different generations play this game. 

By dwelling within a city overseen by a prince, a 
vampire must accept certain obligations. The city provides 
a certain security that all within benefit from, and to 
maintain that security, certain rules of behavior must be 
followed. In one form or another, most of these rules are 
nearly universal. They are known as the Six Traditions, and 
they are the oldest laws known to the Kindred — it is the 
prince who enforces them. Kindred relocating from San 
Francisco to Moscow can rightfully assume that these Tra¬ 
ditions apply. Ignorance is no defense. 

The anarchs rebel against all the strictures of the elders, 
their hated enemies, which are represented by the prince’s 
power. These fledglings believe that there is little to fear in 
the modem world, and that the old superstitions and Tra¬ 


ditions should be thrown away. Some believe that the Mas¬ 
querade is but an embodiment of the terror of Kindred grown 
too old and too fearful. The prince must constantly work to 
keep the anarchs in line, and prevent them from creating any 
disruption in the Masquerade. Sometimes threats are not 
enough. 

Most anarchs do not believe that Gehenna is a threat, and 
many doubt that the original vampire was Caine. They simply 
do not believe these legends, and treat them as they do the 
stories of a Garden of Eden or a Tower of Babel. They suspect 
that the elders use such stories to put fear into ancillae and 
thereby control them all the better. Among the anarchs, it is 
considered bad form to admit to any faith in such myths. They 
chafe against the restrictions placed by the elders, and have 
not yet learned the wisdom of age. The fledglings are largely 
powerless within vampire society, so it is no great surprise that 
they rebel. 

The modem age has wrought much change in the soul of 
humanity, and it is from these humans that the new vampires 
are created. With the increasingly rapid changes in modem 
culture, many Kindred expect a wave of increasingly rebellious 
anarchs. Some within the Camarilla have called for a halt to 
the creation of all new vampires, but it is unlikely that any sort 
of ban could ever be enforced. Most elders simply trust that 
natural factors will take their course and that the most radical 
of the anarchs will be wiped out before they can give the 
vampire community away. 

Primogen 

Most princes are “advised" by a group of elders who are 
collectively known as the primogen. Collectively, these elders 
can be considered to be the most powerful Kindred in the city; 
individually, they either are not quite as powerful as the 
prince, or do not care to endanger or bore themselves with the 
duties of such. 

The primogen is extremely influential, and serves as an 
important check on the dictatorial powers of the prince. At 
the same time, its members usually have their own agendas, 
and it is not uncommon for their bickering and infighting to 
cause as much trouble as any prince’s high-handed command- 


Elysium 

A prince often declares certain portions of his domain to 
be free from the taint of violence. Such locations are known 
as the Elysium, and they tend to be the places where the elders 
of the city spend most of their time. Much intrigue and debate 
occurs at these locations, and it is in the Elysium that the 
business of the city takes place. Though on rare occasions the 
sanctity of the Elysium is violated, usually the “Pax Vampirica" 
is upheld. 

Normally certain buildings are designated to be a part of 
the Elysium, most commonly places devoted to the fine arts or 
places which are in some way artistically or intellectually 
stimulating. Thus the Elysium tends to be such places as the 1 

^ ^ 


































36 0 VAMPIRE: The Masquerade 











































opera, theaters, art museums and art galleries. Sometimes the 
havens of certain Cainites or even nightclubs are so desig¬ 
nated, however. 

The rules for Elysium are typically qu ite simple. First and 
foremost, no violence is permitted on the premises against 
Kindred, kine or physical objects. On pain of Final Death no 
art is to be destroyed (thus making the Toreador among the 
strongest supporters of the custom of Elysium). Elysium is 
considered neutral ground, with no conflicts between Kin¬ 
dred allowed upon its premises. Thus, while intrigue and 
verbal sparring can be quite fierce, rarely does the conflict 
escalate to violence. Finally, most consider it very bad 
manners to attract attention entering or leaving Elysium. 
Some areas are closed at night, and thus special arrangements 
have been made for Kindred to leave and enter. 

The Traditions 


Now this is the Law of the Jungle — 
as old and as true as the sky; 

And the Wolf that shall keep it may prosper, 
but the Wolf that shall break it must die. 

— Rudyard Kipling, "The Law of the Jungle” 

The Six Traditions form the age-old code of laws of the 
Kindred, passed down from the early days following the kin¬ 
slaying that begat the second cycle. The Traditions are not 
formal, written laws, but they are nevertheless known by all 
Kindred. There are many variations, but though the words 
may vary, the intent endures. 

It has become something of a ritual for them to be recited 
by a sire to his progeny just before presentation to the prince. 
Though the fledgling may know of the Traditions already, 
the words are still spoken. It is a vital element of the 
Becoming. 

Some Kindred maintain that these codes were originally 
conceived by Caine himself when he sired the second genera¬ 
tion of Kindred. Thus, it is possible that these words are those 
of the ancient one himself, as he spoke them to his own 
progeny. However, it is far more likely that the Traditions 
were created by the Antediluvians in their attempt to restrict 
their own progeny. The tradition of the Masquerade is likely 
to have existed for some time, though in much more diluted 
form. It was not until the Inquisition that it was reaffirmed 
and its wording and intent strengthened. 

Many of the laws below are couched in fairly formal 
terms. These arc the words and phrases of the elders, and not 
necessarily how they would be expressed by the anarchs. 
Many younger Kindred see the Traditions in an entirely 
different light. 

The opposite page shows the most common wording of 
the Traditions known. 














































The Tradition of The Masquerade 

The First Tradition is the heart of what lias become 
known as the Masquerade. Age-old law demands that the 
knowledge of the existence of true vampires be kept from 
mortal man. To reveal such to them would place the Kindred 
in dire jeopardy. 

Violation of this tradition is the most serious offense a 
vampire can commit. The strengths and resources of human¬ 
ity in the modem age arc such that were human and Kindred 
to war, the survival of the Kindred would be in question. In 
more superstitious times, this tradition was less revered. 

To violate this tradition is to risk one’s own destruction 
and the destruction of all the Kindred. 

The Tradition of Domain 

This tradition has faded in importance as the population 
of the cities has risen so dramatically. Individual vampires no 
longer claim domain, but leave the rights of such to the 
prince. 

Now, only the most powerful vampires in a city can 
claim domain over it. They do so according to the tradition, 
and pretend that all others live there only at the pleasure of 
the prince. Princes claim they possess the cities, and in most 

l____ 


ways, they do. This tradition is used by them to support their 
claims. This tradition is what gives a vampire the right to 
claim princedom. 

There is a prevalent misconception among anarchs that 
princes give different portions of their domain to favored 
associates as “mrf.” Though a prince only allows certain 
trusted Kindred to watch over portions of the city, this has 
only increased the cry for the rights of domain. Increasing 
numbers of Kindred are claiming “turf' within the city and 
treating it as their own private hunting grounds. Broods or 
even solitary Kindred stake claim to certain prime areas of the 
city (such as slum areas) and attempt to prevent other 
Kindred from feeding there. Though the city is vast enough 
that such claims have little value, they seem to have a special 
worth to these downtrodden anarchs. Few if any princes 
actually grant territory, but that is not enough to prevent the 
anarchs from taking it for themselves. 

Some of the younger Kindred have made attempts to 
revive the tradition of domain, seeing in it a similarity to 
some of the mechanics of organized crime. Small gangs will 
often attempt to establish turf within a city, often in opposi¬ 
tion to the other Kindred of the city. This often becomes a 
difficult situation, with the fear of strife looming over 



































11 11 <1 11 11 0 0 11 0 11 11 11 11 0 


everyone's heads. Because of this, gang problems within a city 
can easily endanger the Masquerade. If the gang supports the 
prince, its members may be tolerated, or they may have the 
power to resist all attempts to dislodge them. Elders do not 
like to confront gangs of anarchs. Though the elders possess 
superior power, there is still too much risk of death. 

Tlte anarchs primarily fight among themselves over turf, 
and usually do not attempt to prevent elders from feeding on 
their turf. Their activities arc frowned upon by the prince, 
but as long as they do not threaten the Masquerade and do not 
get out of control, the anarchs arc allowed to continue their 
battles. Indeed, many princes view it as a means of using the 
anarchs to suppress themselves, and will seek to provoke 
intemicine conflict. 

In cities where the prince docs not have a firm grasp on 
power, certain elders may claim domain on an area within the 
city. Their power may be respected by other primogen, and 
they may be tolerated by the prince if they in turn support the 
prince. The establishment of one or more domains within a 
city can create powerful political dynamics, as those domains, 
intentionally or not, create rival power bases. In fact, 
occasionally a prince is only the first among a group of equals, 
the chairman of a committee of elders who each stake their 
own claim to a domain within the city. 

Regardless of whether he has claimed domain or not, 
each Kindred is to some degree responsible for the area 
around his haven or the area which he frequents. Although 
the Kindred rarely involve themselves in mortal concerns, 
the affairs of the supernatural are another story. Kindred are 
expected to report details of strange events that occur in the 
vicinity of their territory to the prince. 

The Tradition of The Progeny 

Throughout most of vampiric history, the “elder” of this 
tradition was one's sire, though a looser interpretation has 
evolved in recent times. Many princes have stipulated that 
they are the elder referred to in this tradition and refuse all 
who dwell within their domain the right of creation without 
permission. They insist on their approval before any mortal 
is Embraced and often kill those who disobey. Most Kindred 
obey, but more out of fear than respect. In situations where 
a neonate has already been created, the prince may claim the 
individual as her own, may declare said neonate and her sire 
outcast, or may even put them both to death. The Camarilla 
officially supports the right of a prince to restrict the creation 
of new vampires, understanding that it is the only way to 
control the population of anarchs. 

Those of the Old World, the Europeans, are even stricter 
on this point than the upstart Americans. One’s own sire 
must be consulted, and if a prince has claimed domain over 
the area where one has one's haven, permission must be 
sought from her as well. No amount of tolerance is given to 
those who do not do so. 


The Tradition of The Accounting 

One who sires a childe assumes responsibility for that 
childc’s existence. If the childe is unable to endure the 
burden of its new existence, it is the sire's responsibility to 
take care of the matter. If the childe attempts to betray the 
Kindred and threaten the Masquerade, it is up to the sire to 
prevent him. While still a childe, under the direct care of 
one’s sire, a vampire has no rights. 

If a childe takes actions which threaten the security of 
other Kindred, they hold the sire responsible. The sire must 
carefully weigh the maturity of the childe he has spawned. He 
does not want to remain responsible for the childe forever 
(though extremely long childehoods are not unknown), but 
at the same time he does not want to release the childe before 
it is ready. 

Long ago, release involved introducing the childe to 
one's own sire, but that has since changed; now, the sire 
introduces the childe to the prince in whose domain sire and 
childe dwell. Until that time, the prince is under no obliga¬ 
tion, unless he chooses otherwise, to recognize the childe as 
one of the Blood. Unless the sire protects the childe, any may 
kill or feed from it. 

Following the release, the childc-no-more is allowed to 
dwell in the city with full rights. This introduction process is 
similar to that of the Tradition of Hospitality mentioned 
below. If the prince does not accept the childe, it must leave 
and find some other city in which to live. 

The release is a great rite of passage, for the sire no longer 
retains any responsibility for the childe. It is the activity of 
the childe-no-more that determines if he is accepted as a full 
member of the community and considered a neonate. If he 
continues to be rash and foolish, he remains a childe in the 
eyes of all. If he shows the wisdom his new existence de¬ 
mands, others will accord him the respect given to an “adult.” 

The Tradition of Hospitality 

Though vampires are loath to travel (the risks are 
tremendous), they occasionally do. Ancient custom dictates 
that when entering a new domain, a city claimed by an elder, 
the newcomers must present themselves to the elder. This 
was so even before there were princes, in a time where there 
was only one Kindred in each city. It was simply a tradition 
of politeness; one knocks before entering. 

The procedure varies in formality from location to 
location, and even from prince to prince. Some require 
formal presentation and the recital of one’s lineage, such as 
it is known. Others arc happy if simple contact is made with 
an underling. Those who do not bother to present them¬ 
selves had better have the power to withstand the prince's 
anger. 

The pnnee has the right to refuse acceptance in his 
domain to any he chooses. This rarely occurs, except when 
the newcomer has a poor reputation or many enemies. Even 
those who do not present themselves at all, but are later 



Chapter Two: Setting 






























n 


discovered are not often chased from the city. They are 
roughly presented to the prince, shown their place, and 
released into the streets once again. 

Over time, this tradition has become a primary means for 
the prince to maintain power, for it gives her the right to 
question all who enter her domain. She may not have the 
power to expel the more formidable interlopers, but her right 
to examine all is unquestioned. 

Some Kindred bristle at the thought of having to ‘present’ 
themselves for acceptance. Many are too proud and have a 
strong independent streak. The anarchs have too little re¬ 
spect for the traditions, while the Methuselahs have too little 
respect for the princes. The Methuselahs see themselves as 
demigods towering above mortal and Kindred alike and 
needing to bow to none. To them, abasing oneself before 
another is unthinkable. They existed long before the princes 
ruled, and can see beyond the prince, knowing who pulls the 
strings. 

Many Kindred never present themselves, choosing in¬ 
stead to live in darkest obscurity. They hide in the cold, quiet 
places and rarely venture forth. They are tolerated as long as 
they remain unobtrusive. The Nosferatu are the best at this, 
for their powers augment such activities. These reclusive 
Kindred are known as the autarkis, for they refuse to become 
a part of vampire society. 

The Tradition of Destruction 

This tradition has caused more controversy than any 
other, and reinterpretations are continually being discussed. 
It seems to imply that the right of destruction is limited to 
one’s own bloodline. Only the sire has the right to destroy his 
progeny. 

However, the shift in meaning of the word "elder" has 
resulted in most princes claiming this right over all those who 
dwell within their domains. They claim that only they have 
the power of life and death, and for the most part this 
interpretation has been supported by the Camarilla. The 
veracity of this claim is the source of much of the conflict 
between many of the older and younger vampires. 

Most princes strictly enforce their monopoly on the 
tradition of extinguishment. All others are forbidden to 
destroy other Kindred. If a vampire is ever caught in such an 
act of “murder,” then no punishment may be considered too 
severe. Often the perpetrator of such a deed will be destroyed 
herself. The prince will usually investigate the deaths of 
those who have been destroyed in order to find the killer. Of 
course, the higher the status of the destroyed vampire, the 
more thorough the search for his murderer will be. 

Only in times of great strife do younger vampires dare 
slay each other, though the elders are said to do so all the 
time. A would-be kinslayer had best step carefully. 

Most often, the prince enforces his right of destruction 
by calling a Blood Hunt, which is discussed below. Only if a 
prince openly calls a Blood Hunt is he allowed to slay one of 
the Kindred. 


Lextalionis 


Hurled headlong flaming from ch’ ethereal sky 

With hideous ruin and combustion down 

To bottomless perdition, there to dwell 

In adamantine chains and penal fire. 

— John Milton, Paradise Lost 

The Traditions do not stand alone, for there is and 
always has been a system of punishment for those who 
transgress them. The system is simple: a vampire who breaks 
the rules is slain. Those who violate the Traditions and 
thereby anger the elders are hunted down and extinguished 
by all those who hear the call. This credo of “just retribution" 
is known formally as the Lextalionis, and more commonly as 
the Blood Hunt. 

Tradition demands that the Lextalionis can only be 
called by the eldest Cainite in a city. In modern times, this 
individual is considered to be the prince. Other elders or even 
ancillae could call for a Hunt, but most Kindred would not 
respond, for they risk the wrath of the prince in so doing. 
Normally, a prince will only call a Hunt over a breach of one 
of the Six Traditions. If a prince calls a Hunt purely for his 
own purposes, few will aid him in the Hunt, and the prince 
will lose considerable status. 

Assisting one upon whom the Hunt has been called is a 
serious insult to the prince. Betraying the offender is often the 
only recourse to having the Lextalionis called upon oneself 
as well. Sometimes a prince will be insulted if a particular 
Cainite does not participate in the Hunt. If the prince is 
powerful enough, and the crime great enough, he may have 
the authority to insist that all Kindred who live within the 
city participate. 

Before the imagery becomes too ingrained, it should be 
pointed out that the Blood Hunt is not truly a formal hunt. 
The vampires do not gather in a convenient park with their 
packs of frothing hellhounds, and then set off across the city 
once the prince blows a horn. It is both more informal and 
more serious than that. The hunters spread out over the city 
and scour the streets for the individual whom they pursue, 
calling in others once they track him down. In true Kindred 
tradition, it is a secretive and stealthy hunt. Mortals rarely 
realize anything is amiss; they usually notice only that it is a 
strange night, full of bizarre happenings. If the police are 
controlled by the prince or one of her minions, they will 
either be pulled back from the streets or mustered to assist in 
the search (without truly realizing for whom it is they search). 

The Hunt can be viewed as a violent form of excommu¬ 
nication. Sometimes the subject is not killed, but is merely 
maimed and then released outside the perimeter of the city. 
The Kindred against whom the Hunt is called becomes 
persona non grata. Any who find the offender have the right, 
in the Prince’s name, to conduct summary justice upon the 


k pniiLL 

f the Ki 



40 © VAMPIRE: The Masquerade 





































outcast. They may also partake of the offender’s blood. This 
is why the youngest Kindred are often the most avid pursuers 
in the Hunt. 

The Lextalionis is not called lightly. Most Kindred can 
count on one hand the number of Blood Hunts they have 
heard of, let alone participated in. The Camarilla reserves 
the right to an informal tribunal of sorts, most often after the 
fact. Evidence is presented to the Conclave for and against 
the offender, and the prince’s decision is either ratified or 
dismissed. The prince who has his decision reversed suffers 
no formal punishment, but often loses considerable status. 

Sometimes the offender survives the hunt (perhaps 
under the protection of an enemy of the prince) and may 
actually plead his case. Often, the threat of the Conclave, and 
the beginning of its proceedings, are enough to dissuade a 
prince from calling a Hunt. Tradition dictates, however, that 
once a Blood Hunt has been called, it cannot be stopped. 

An outcast may attempt to flee the city she is in and find 
refuge elsewhere. Many princes will offer this alternative to 
the offender instead of calling the Hunt. Though the outcast 
may flee, the Hunt remains permanently in effect in that city, 
regardless of who ascends to power in the future. 

The Hunt is usually the business of the Kindred of that 
city alone, and word of it rarely travels far. In some cases, 
however, the crimes of the outcast are so heinous that 
emissaries are sent to the princes of other cities so that a Hunt 
may be called there as well. The most famous example of this 
was the outcry in the aftermath of the Whitechapel, England 
slayings during the latter half of the 19th century. A Hunt 
was called against the offender throughout Europe and much 
of North America. The culprit, however (the self-pro¬ 
claimed Lord Fianna), remains at large. 

Sects 

See, over there red don't go — 

Some places, red's all they know. 

— Ice-T, "Midnight” 

Over the past few centuries groups known as sects have 
appeared among Kindred society. Many ancients deride the 
existence and concept of sects as “... modem foolishness. The 
blood is all that matters," but still the power and influence of 
these organizations grow. Well over half of the Kindred in 
existence belong to one sect or another; the rest either 
maintain their independence or are attached exclusively to 
their bloodlines. The largest and most dominant sect is the 
Camarilla, though the smaller Sabbat contends with it on 
every front. Though the Inconnu claim they are not a sect, 
they appear to have some sort of organization and stay well 
clear of the other sects. 











































































The primary function of the Inner Circle is to appoint 
the Justicars, the judges of the sect. One Justicar is chosen 
from each of the seven clans. They act of their own accord, 
but are required to take the decisions of the Inner Circle 
under consideration. By decree of the Inner Circle, Justicars 
hold the power to deal with members of the Camarilla who 
transgress the Traditions. The seven Justicars hold the true 
power in the Camarilla. 

The appointment of a justicar is a long, drawn-out 
political battle, for while the major bloodlines would each 
like to select the representative of their choice, it is difficult 
to obtain the majority needed. The losers in the intrigue end 
up with a Justicar of young years or weak powers who will be 
ignored for 13 years. Thus, those finally appointed tend to be 
compromise candidates or chosen from the lower rungs of a 
line. Sometimes, even obscure Kindred are chosen by elders 
who believe they will be easy to manipulate once appointed. 


It is at first difficult to grasp the relationship of the 
Conclave and the Justicar. The Conclave is forbidden by 
tradition to pass any judgment directly upon any member of 
the Camarilla. This tradition limits the possibility of any 
abuse of power. The Conclave’s only avenue of control lies in 
these judges, whom they appoint to pass sentence for them. 

Justicars have the only true authority, which they hold 
over all the Camarilla, and indeed all Kindred, except those 
who sit on the Inner Circle. They have the ultimate decision¬ 
making and adjudication power over matters involving 
violation of the Six Traditions. No member of the Camarilla 
is considered above them in this area. If one of the Blood is 
found to have violated the Traditions, it is a Justicar who 
decides the punishment. There are no guidelines concerning 
the punishment; it is left to the discretion of each Justicar. 
Their decisions are often harsh. They are supposed to hold a 
Conclave each time they wish to pass judgment, but over the 
years the Justicars have assumed more and more power and no 
longer feel the need to do so. Justicars can call a Conclave at 
any time, either to confirm a ruling or to make a momentous 
decision a Justicar does not care to make himself. 

The decision or action of a Justicar can only be chal¬ 
lenged by another justicar. If a major point of contention 
arises between Just icars, a Conclave is held where the Justicars 
come together and resolve the dispute. The resolution usu¬ 
ally comes in the form of a vote, but sometimes, depending on 
the dispute, personal challenges can arise. 

Many elders resent the authority of the Justicars, and 
some among them are very outspoken in their opposition. 
Most accept it, however, for fear of opposing the Justicars, 
who are frequently of considerable age. 


Justicars 


Got a black uniform and a silver badge 

We’re playing cops for real, we're playing cops for pay. 

— Dead Kennedys, “Police Truck” 



































Justicars often have coteries of other vampires who do 
their bidding; these Kindred are known as Archons. These 
are often the brood of the Justicar and are always willingly 
Blood Bound to them. They enforce the Justicars’ will and 
report breaches of the Traditions. The Archons are the eyes 
and ears of the Justicars. 

The Sabbat 

Known to many as the Black Hand, the Sabbat is 
rumored to have evolved from a medieval death cult. Little 
of its nature has changed since then. It is the largest sect next 
to the Camarilla, and is aggressively attempting to increase 
its domain. 

The Black Hand rules through fear, hatred, anger and 
physical violence. In North America, it holds undisputed 
control over Detroit, Toronto, Montreal, New York, Phila¬ 
delphia, Pittsburgh, and Portland, and is close to gaining 
supremacy in Boston and Baltimore. Until recently, Miami 
was also under Sabbat control, but recent events have caused 
a swing in the power balance there. 

The Sabbat is organized in units known as “packs” wh ich 
are strongly loyal to one another, feeding and traveling as one 
group. Indeed, in the Camarilla, it has become a derogatory 
term to call a coterie a “pack.” 

Members of the Sabbat come from many different blood¬ 
lines, though two clans dominate the organization: the 
Lasombra and Tzimisces. Though it may be possible to join 
the Sabbat, almost all members are created. The Black Hand 
requires strict devotion and adherence to the will of the 
group. 

The Sabbat initiation procedure is designed to destroy 
any of the vestigial will in a new vampire. Initiates are slain, 
slowly and painfully, and then given the Blood. This blood 
doesn’t come from one member of the Sabbat, but from as 
many as are present at the initiation, combined into a 
chalice. Once the Initiate has been given the Blood, he is 
buried alive, and must crawl out in order to live. Those who 
do not spend eternity buried under the earth. The process of 
digging oneself from a grave tears the Initiate's humanity 
from him and opens him to the subjugation and brainwashing 
of the Sabbat. 

Once the Initiate breaks free, he is Blood Bound to the 
pack that Embraced him. In a strange ritual, which occurs 
over two more nights, the Initiate is given more blood. 

The Black Hand is concerned solely with power in all its 
forms. It is actively engaged in diablerie and has a fanatical 
opposition to life and its trappings. The Sabbat views mortals 
as lesser beasts to be dominated and used as the need requires. 
The Sabbat worships at the places of the dead — cemeteries, 
tombs and charnel houses. The members of the Sabbat 
understand themselves to be undead, and behave accord¬ 
ingly. Any who oppose them are burnt; indeed, the Sabbat 
packs seem to have a fascination with fire, though they are no 
more immune to it than any other Kindred. 
































The members of the Sabbat revel in being vampires and 
living out their instincts. They find other Kindred contempt¬ 
ible because they try so hard to retain their humanity. For the 
Sabbat, this is the greatest blasphemy. 

The Sabbat often sends packs into cities held by the 
Camarilla, either to scout out the opposition or to hunt for 
those who have fled from the covens. Camarilla politics are 
invariably complicated by the presence of Sabbat Kindred. 

The Sabbat is said to engage in a strange sort of diablerie, 
wherein its members ritually butcher the elders of their kind 
so that stronger, more aggressive and younger Kindred may 
take their place. However, like so much else spoken of among 
Kindred outside the Sabbat, this is unconfirmed. The princes 
of the major cities worldwide would give much to gain hard 
facts about the workings of the Sabbat. All of them fear the 
danger of its steady growth. 

In the end, nothing certain can be said of the Sabbat. 
Indeed, all that the Camarilla believes about it could be false, 
rumors spread by Antediluvians who wish the two sects to 
fight. It is unlikely, but all too possible. 


The Inconnu 


“lnconnu" is the term used to describe those vampires 
who have distanced themselves from the others of their kind. 
It is not so much a sect as it is a classification. The Inconnu 
are old, powerful, and as such have little need, and less desire, 
for the company of their brethren. They tend to live in the 
wild among the animals and sleep within the earth when the 
sun is in the sky. (It is unknown how they manage to live in 
peace with the shape-changers who rule the wild areas.) 
Certain Inconnu still live within the cities, and may even be 
interested in the Jyhad, but by the rules of their sect may not 
become involved in it. Some have attended Camarilla Con¬ 
clave meetings, creating great awe in the other Kindred. The 
Inconnu, like all Kindred, are always invited. 

Most of the Inconnu have grown so old that they may 
sleep for months or years before awakening. They are 1 ike the 
Antediluvians in that they are no longer completely of this 
world, but have grown apart from it. Most of them are several 
millennia old and are the most powerful vampires most 
Kindred will ever encounter. 

Many of the Inconnu are members of the fourth and fifth 
generations who were at one point or another involved in the 
Jyhad. They have won their places in the hierarchy of 
Kindred by dint of age or through the devouring of their own 
elders. They have gone into hiding out of fear for their 
existence and out of distaste for the modem world. They 
believe that only by removing themselves from the world can 
they escape the Jyhad. Despite the best efforts of the sect, 
some of its members still become involved in the Jyhad. As 
a whole, the Inconnu punish all of their order who continue 
to take part in the Jyhad or meddle in the affairs of lesser 
Kindred. This is their only law. 


A sizable minority of the Inconnu have actually achieved 's 
Golconda. This may explain their distaste of the Jyhad and ) 
their rational approach to many problems among the Kin¬ 
dred. 

The Inconnu will allow no Kindred to harm or injure any 
of its members, no matter what those members have done. 

All rights to punishment are reserved solely for themselves, 
but it is very difficult to contact them to petition for such. In 
the end, the Inconnu are a most enigmatic and mysterious 
sect. Their organization and priorities are unknown, if 
indeed it can even be said that they have such. 

Bloodlines 

In die blood is light, in the light is life 

For the love of life, for the love of life. 

— Swans, “Love of Life" 

Many modem philosophers argue that the present age 
has caused an apathy and disinterest ties of faith, nation, and 
blood. Certainly for the Kindred, the concerns of faith and 
nation are as dead as ever, but none care more dearly for the 
ties of blood. 

While those of the Blood seem to be loners by nature and 
necessity, the need of society and structure seems to tug at 
them as strongly as it does mortals. This is most evident in the 
importance of lineage to the Kindred. Much of the respect 
one is due is based on the identity of one’s sire, and the sire’s 
sire, and so on. Even the most moronic of Kindred is entitled 
to some respect if his lineage is of regard. 

At one time each vampire could name her sire, and her 
sire’s sire, and so on all the way back to Caine. The impor¬ 
tance of bloodlines has diminished of late, as Kindred became 
more and more removed from Caine. Their connections to 
the elders of import are lessened by the many generations 
between them. The relative peace offered by the Camarilla 
has made them soft and self-satisfied, and they have lost 
respect for the elders. As might be expected, this is deeply 
resented by the conservative elders. Most Kindred created in 
this century know little of their lineage and seem to care even 
less. 

Even so, within the world of the vampire the bloodright 
of one’s clan is still of crucial consequence. Most vampires 
can trace their general lineage, if not the precise bloodline, 
back to an Antediluvian of the third generation. While the 
founder of the bloodline may no longer exist, or at least have 
dropped from sight, all of his progeny still hold many traits in 
common. Each clan possesses certain gifts and curses associ¬ 
ated with it that others do not share; more importantly, 
members of the same clan hold similar values and virtues. 

Represented within the Camarilla are seven major clans, 
though Kindred of any bloodline are welcome. There are 
allegedly 13 distinct clans, as well as innumerable minor 
bloodlines. Two of the clans are said to be of the Sabbat, < 
while the remaining four clans owe allegiance to neither sect. 


































46 0 VAMPIRE: The Masquerade 


There are likely many more unknown bloodlines, espe¬ 
cially when one considers the mysterious eastern Kindred, 
who undoubtedly have their own unique divisions. 


Brujah 


The Brujah can trace their roots back to ancient Babylon, 
and the clay tablet libraries of the first scholars. They were 
the lovers and guardians of knowledge, and the founder of 
their line was the inventor of written language. However, in 
their quest for freedom, they slew their founder and were 
banished from the First City. Today the Brujah are scorned 
as riffraff who have lost their heritage and are without pride. 
For over a millennium they have been the rebels among the 
Kindred, forever questioning and testing the Traditions. 

The clan is very poorly organized; its members meet only 
irregularly, and share little in common besides their love of 
rebellion. They are among the only supporters of the anarchs, 
and aiding them is one of the only matters upon which they 
ever agree. They are often underestimated, as much by 
themselves as anyone. 


Gangrel 


Clan Gangrel is said to be the only clan whose founder 
is still involved in and concerned with the welfare of her 
progeny. Her concern for them is matched only by her 
concern for her mortal descendants — the Gypsies. Though 
many Antediluvians use their progeny as pawns in the Jyhad, 


the Gangrel pride themselves on their freedom from such 
manipulation. There is a close bond between the clan and 
the Gypsies. In recent years, as Gehenna approaches, their 
interaction has been considerable. 

Malkavian 

The history of the Malkavian clan is completely shrouded 
in the past. The Malkavians themselves have many tales 
about their origin, but even they do not believe most of them. 
A favored legend among the Kindred is that the founder of 
the house was cursed by Caine, and his descendants have 
lived with the madness since. The Malkavians have always 
existed on the periphery of the vampire culture, watching, 
but never truly involving themselves in it. Long ago, before 
the curse and the madness, their founder was said to be the 
greatest among the third generation. Now it is his machina¬ 
tions that keep the weakest of those involved in the Jyhad 
“alive." 

INosferatu 

It is the unfortunate plight of the members of this clan 
to display the Beast within their hearts upon their counte¬ 
nances. Though their founder was known for his rabid 
predilections and monstrous impulses, the Nosferatu of today 
are known for being cool-headed. Though they tend to 
choose only the most depraved individuals as progeny, some- 



































how the members of this clan seem to retain their sanity 
better than most vampires. 

The founder is said to have been a man of regal visage 
who incurred the wrath of Caine for his barbaric activities 
and was thereby cursed with the face of a hag. The savagery 
of his soul is reflected upon his face and that of all his progeny. 

Of course, many clans have legends in which an all- 
powerful Caine curses their founder just asGod cursed Caine. 
It is not likely that all of these stories are true, but some, such 
as this, might be. Presently, the Nosferatu clan is estranged 
from their founder, and do not serve him — at least to their 
knowledge. 


Toreador 


Throughout history, the Toreador have been involved 
in the arts. This tradition is said to have begun with the first 
progeny of the founder, a pair of beautiful and artistically 
gifted twins. Their sire was a leader of the cabal of third 
generation vampires who slew their own sires. Though 
ruthless, he was very doting upon his progeny, proffering 
them far more independence than any other fourth genera¬ 
tion vampires were given. They used their freedom to nurture 
the full panorama of the arts, and their sire protected them 
through war and famine. To this day, the Toreador claim that 
they are watched over by Arikel, their founder. Though the 
Toreador are not as formally organized as some other clans, 
they are furiously loyal to one another and to the art they 
claim to serve. 

Tremere 

The Tremcre are unique and no other clan has a history 
as rich, yet as short, as theirs. Long ago, there were others of 
their line who were not warlocks, nor did the clan have 
mastery over the discipline ofThaumaturgy. Less than 1,000 
years ago, a metamorphosis occurred. Deep in the Romanian 
mountains, in the district known as Transylvania, a group of 
magi from an ancient order were Embraced by a foolish clan 
leader. Combining their new powers with their ancient lore, 
the magi were quickly able to assume control of the clan. 
They Embraced many others from their arcane order, and 
drank the blood of all the ciders of their clan. It is even hinted 
that the most powerful among them managed to hunt down 
and slay the founder of the line. The Tremere have adopted 
the most rigid hierarchical system among all the clans, and 
this has allowed them to achieve great power within Kindred 
society. The other clans distrust the Tremere, both out of fear 
and a sense that something is not quite right with them. The 
political center of the Tremere clan is in Vienna. 


Ventrue 


god-like founder, the Ventrue have achieved a remarkable 
independence from the Antediluvians. They do not know 
how much truth is contained in this legend, but it is nonethe¬ 
less one of the basic tenets of their clan, no matter how much 
other Kindred scoff at it. 

Much of the respect accorded to the Venttue is due to 
the independence they arc perceived to have from the 
Antediluvians. It is out of pride for this respect they are given 
that they conceal their persecution of the Brujah clan. More 
princes and Justicars come from the Ventrue clan than from 
any other; they are clearly the leaders of the Camarilla. The 
Ventrue have regular clan meetings in various parts of the 
world, including a Grand Council in London every seven 
years. 


The Ventnie suspect their founder has been slain by one 
of the Brujah clan. Though this is a blow to their pride, it has 
given them some distance and protection from the chaos and 
strife of the Jyhad. Without the intrigues and demands of a 


Caitiff 

Some Kindred do not have a clan at all, but are of bastard 
blood. This is sometimes because they were abandoned by 
their sire, or were Embraced by an outcast vampire. A 
combination of a thinness of blood and a lack of social 
training has made them Clanless. This is a fairly recent 
phenomenon, and thus they arc disdained by many of the 
other Kindred. Though many Caitiff are considered to be 
pariahs or anarchs, not all of them are outcasts. Some are 
accepted among the Damned, but none have yet reached an 
age where they have achieved any real power. Indeed, it 
seems as though the greatest explosion of the Clanless has 
occurred in the last 50 years. 

Other Clans 

There arc many clans besides the ones described above. 
These clans do not claim membership in the Camarilla, 
though individual members of such lines may do so. Some 
clans arc members of the Sabbat, while others are truly 
independent of any sect. 

These independent clans include the feared Assamite 
assassins, the loathsome Followers of Set, the mercenary 
Giovanni family and the rakish Ravnos. 

Witch Hunters 

Sundown 

You'd better take care 

When 1 find you've been creeping 

‘Round my back stair. 

— Gordon Lightfoot, “Sundown" 

It is an ancient truism among the Kindred that they are 
their own greatest foes. Certainly no other beings are so 
adept at killing, and nothing is as capable of such hate as 
another of their own kind. However this is no longer as true 
as it once was. With the advent of modem technology, old 
superstitions and fears have fallen away. Humanity no longer 
fears the dark; it no longer realizes that it should. 


Chapter Two; Setting 0 47 
































The Kindred have many enemies among the mortal 
kind. They are generally referred to as witch hunters, though 
not all of them wish to do the Kindred harm. The name is 
simply a legacy of a darker time. 

The Government 

How much do the world governments suspect? How 
much do they know? It is hard to say. Many governments 
have agencies or departments devoted to the investigation of 
paranormal occurrences, but many, especially within the 
military, seem to be devoted to extra-sensory phenomena, 
like ESP, clairvoyance and telekinesis. In general, it seems 
clear that the Masquerade has been successful and that they 
know quite little. 

In the United States, interest in Kindred activity can be 
traced to two agencies: the Federal Bureau of Investigation 
and the National Security Agency. 

The FBI is believed to contain several individuals who 
may suspect the truth. It is believed that some of the inves¬ 
tigations into paranormal phenomena in the '50s and '60s 
may have turned up some Kindred-related information. Origi¬ 
nally formed to counter the impact of suspected “Communist 
Thought Control” research, this department, commonly 
referred to as Special Affairs (though its members rarely 
identify themselves as such) is involved in ongoing investi¬ 
gations. However, it has dwindled significantly in power and 
membership over the years. Proof of suspected activities is 
demanded by the FBI before action can be taken, and proof 
is what has thus far eluded it. Circumstantial evidence no 
doubt abounds, but that last, necessary piece of tangible 
evidence has escaped the agency. So far. 

Some believe the NSA keeps an active file on vampire- 
related events, but treats it as a subclassification of mass 
murders. It has certainly not made the connections that 
would reveal the whole picture. The NSA is a giant fact¬ 
sifting agency. Concerned with national security from an 
internal perspective, police and news reports that contain 
“interesting or anomalous" facts are routinely flagged. Inves¬ 
tigation only occurs after the computer, or a reviewer, notices 
undue occurrences that may be related. Should those con¬ 
nections be made, the resources that could be brought to bear 
are truly frightening. In recent years, much of the attention 
of the Camarilla has been focused on this agency, and word 
has been spread that no one should engage in activities that 
would be flagged by these computers. As of yet, no vampire 
has been able to infiltrate retainers into the agency. 

Recently, the Center for Disease Control, based in 
Atlanta, has become deeply concerned over the increasing 
incidents of AIDS being transmitted without apparent inti¬ 
macies of any sort. The CDC has begun to worry that the 
virus no longer requires sexual contact to be spread. Before 
news begins to spread, it has begun an enormous investiga- 


VAMPIRE: The Masquerade 






























Britain has such an organization, but it is very difficult to 
trace. There is some suspicion that this organization is 
actually of a quasi-mystical nature, possibly with ties to 
similar organizations which date back hundreds of years. 
British Kindred have reported instances of unnerving accu¬ 
racy in the investigations of Scotland Yard following 
unfortunate Kindred-related occurrences. Some even sus¬ 
pect that the authorities there have knowingly brought about 
the deaths of at least two deranged vampires within the last 
75 years. There are rumors that this group is actually 
controlled by a Methuselah who uses it to eliminate enemies. 

The old KGB was reportedly familiar with some aspects 
of Kindred society, and had even begun to use neonates in 
some of their operations. Though the USSR is now no more, 
the KGB still operates largely unchecked, most especially the 
cell based out of Gomovski Gulag, located in Siberia. It is 
generally thought, however, that the KGB is the pawn, not 
the manipulator. Though little information is available, it is 
widely believed that the Soviet state was the domain of a 
group of Kindred who were the controllers and instigators of 
communism, and that some colossal mishap has recently 
changed the power structure of the area. 

The Inquisition 

It is generally acknowledged that the Roman Catholic 
Church learned of the Kindred during the years of the 
Inquisition. Instituted in 1229, the Inquisition concerned 
itself with the suppression of various heresies spreading 
through Europe. Partially in response to the rise of the 
Catharist heresy in the south of France and northern Italy, 
Pope Innocent IV approved the use of torture in 1252. 

There are tales that the Catharist beliefs were supported 
by many Kindred in the south of France, and that some of 
them fell into the hands of the Inquisition when their 
brethren were forced to confess their heresy. If this is so, it 
could explain much concerning the rapid escalation in the 
tyrannical practices of certain leaders of the Inquisition. 
Perhaps they had seen proof, with their own eyes, of evil 
incarnate in the world. 

Whatever the truth of those events during the 13th 
century, all indications are that certain factions within the 
Church remains aware of, and concerned about, the exist¬ 
ence of vampires. Indeed, the Inquisition continues still, 
albeit in a different form and with a different name. 

Today the Inquisition is an organization of scholars and 
researchers of the occult, as well as a clearing house for many 
of the greatest vampire hunters. While originally only an 
investigative committee for heresy, it became a ruthless 
organization devoted to the elimination and torture of unde¬ 
sirables, a tradition which it has not entirely renounced. 
Though the Inquisition is no longer supported or sanctioned 
by the Church, most of its members are from the Catholic 
Church. Though they have taken a new name, “The Society 
of Leopold," and say they arc only interested in research, they 


are preeminent among the witch hunters. They are well 4 
aware of the best ways to immobilize and kill vampires, and 
keep most of the oldest records. 

However, they still do not know very much about the 
Kindred of today. Mainly they study old records and engage 
in endless speculations, and at times they embark on hunts 
and hold trials. They rarely kill their suspects, at least not 
right away, but hold elaborate trials first. Their eventual aim 
is to rid the world of the supernatural. 

The Inner Circle of the Camarilla has decreed that they 
are to be avoided and left alone at all costs — better to give 
them nothing to study rather than give the whole world 
something to focus its attention upon. A collection of 
crackpots is much easier to deal with than a band of martyrs. 
The Inquisition has retained much of its old reputation and 
is widely despised and feared. None but the most naive 
believe that they have truly “reformed,” especially those 
vampires who lived through the first period of persecution. 
Many anarchs take every chance they can to torment, lure 
and embarrass members of the Inquisition, despite the de¬ 
crees made by the Inner Circle. 

However, the members of the Society of Leopold possess 
several protections against vampires. They are learning to 
use various holy objects to weave protections against vampiric 
powers. Additionally, they can call upon the aid of many 
different groups when they seek “witches.” 

Among the most influential members of the Society are 
the Dominicans, who can trace their involvement back to 
the first Inquisition, which they partially oversaw. Many 
Kindred fear continued Dominican involvement, forgetting 
the circumstances and climate that contnbuted to the Inqui¬ 
sition. They also forget the fact that St. Thomas Aquinas, the 
renowned philosopher and theologian, was a Dominican 
during that period. The exact interest and concerns of the 
Dominicans remain unclear today. 

There are also reports of a radical splinter group within 
the Society of Jesus, the Jesuits, who are in the midst of a 
controversy with the Holy Office. Rumors persist that this 
may have some connection to the destruction of some 
Kindred in Algeria about five years ago. A former Jesuit 
brother by the name of Sullivan Dane is believed to have 
been responsible. Dane may have been able to use the 
Algerian incident as proof to some of his former Jesuit 
brothers that the Kindred threat was real, not imagined by 
him. He and some of his brethren are reputedly at odds with 
their superiors and the Holy Office over the matter. 

The Arcanum 

The formation of the Arcanum can be traced to the 
mystical “War Of The Roses” centered around Paris in the 
late 1800s (a conflict unrelated to the English Baronial wars). 

A war of words, as well as (if their words are to be believed) 
mystic forces, arose between two orders of Rosicrucians. Tire 
struggle between the orders became such a public scandal 
(and entertainment, hence the Parisian newspapers' “War 


Chapter Two: Setting 0 49 


































1-^^— I I I I' 


Of The Roses” brand) that many of both groups’ most 
brilliant scholars and practitioners left their respective or¬ 
ders. After constructing a great charter, these dissidents 
came together to form the Arcanum. The order persists to 
this day. 

Though the Arcanum has been in existence for less than 
300 years, its history drifts back even further. The core of the 
Arcanum consists of a group that has branded itself the 
“White Monks.” It is believed that these so-called White 
Monks were somehow involved in the Inquisition, and 
learned of the Kindred then. However, they maintain no 
formal connections with the Inquisition, and do not engage 
in witch hunts. The Arcanum studies, but does not destroy. 

The Arcanum has three known Foundation houses — 
one in Boston, one in Paris, and the third in Vienna. Its 
members, recruited from the cream of intellectual society, are 
concerned more with theory than practice. They seem solely 
devoted to the gathering and studying of occult-related 
information, and are focused primarily on the past rather 
than the modem world. There are some members who have 
shown a degree of interest in the here and now, but it is 
believed that these members, and the Arcanum itself, think 
the Kindred long dead. They seem to be more interested in 
phenomena of a less tangible nature: magic, miracles, 
hauntings and such. 

The existence of the Arcanum does cause the Kindred 
some concern, since evidence of Kindred activity can and 
often does appear as signs of more nebulous supernatural 
activity. A miscalculation could lead the Arcanum right to 
their doorstep. 

A general edict has been proclaimed by the Inner Circle 
of the Camarilla, and is backed by the Justicar from Clan 
Brujah, that the members of the Arcanum are not to be 
interfered with by the Kindred. Their activity should be 
monitored, if encountered, and reported, but no action is to 
be taken against them. The concern among the Kindred is 
that any confrontation could prove disastrous by providing 
the proof that the group has been waiting for. 

The Lupines 

Werewolves, or Lupines, are the mortal enemies of 
vampires, and have been since the dawn of time. They tend 
to live in tightly knit tribes connected by family ties, and can 
be somewhat rustic in outlook and brusque in manner. The 
tribes are highly secretive and insular, despising outsiders. 
Any vampire who intrudes on their land is hunted down and 
summarily executed. Lupines are ferocious fighters and it is 
almost impossible to sway them from their aims. It is most 
dangerous to gain their enmity. Only the Gangrel have any 
contact with the Lupines, and even they do not often reveal 
their true nature to their werewolf “acquaintances.” On most 




































nights of the full moon, whole tribes of Lupines go on mad 
rampages, and all those caught in their path, mortal or 
otherwise, are slain. 

The Magi 

These practitioners of arcane lore are not to be trifled 
with. These are magicians of great power, and most of them 
follow the traditions of the ancient Order of Hermes. Though 
they are not active enemies of the Kindred, they will elimi¬ 
nate any who get in their way. However, it is said that they 
despise members of the Tremere clan, and brand them as 
traitors. They maintain a Masquerade as vigorously as do the 
Kindred. This alone serves to minimize conflicts. 

Ghouls 

Many Kindred create ghouls. This is accomplished by 
giving mortals or animals a drink of Kindred blood without 
first draining all their blood. Ghouls make excellent retain¬ 
ers, for after they drink the blood of their master three times, 


they are Blood Bound to the vampire. Ghouls also gain a V S 
number of special powers due to the blood. J 

Kindred create such creatures regularly, as a means of 
creating loyal servants who are able to protect them during 
the day. Permission is required from the prince in order to 
create a ghoul, or so the Council of the Camarilla has ruled, 
for it technically breaks the restrictions of the Masquerade. 
Ghouls are generally told very little and are too fearful of their 
masters to relay much information. 

A ghoul can become Blood Bound to her creator just as 
a vampire can. Thus, after three feedings, the ghoul is 
inexorably Bound to her master. However, if the ghoul 
spends more than a year without receiving blood from her 
master, she ceases to be Blood Bound. If she spends more than 
a month without being fed vampire blood she becomes fully 
mortal once again. Once the point of her natural lifespan has 
passed, the ghoul must always have vampire blood in her; 
otherwise she will die very quickly — within a few days, or in 
a few rare instances, a few hours. 


































52 0 VAMPIRE: The Masquerade 


































Remember, if characters engage in the practice of 
diablerie, the slaying and drinking the blood of Kindred of 
earlier generations, they may raise their effective genera¬ 
tions. For example, if an eighth generation vampire slays and 
drinks the remaining vitae of a seventh generation vampire, 
her effective generation will now be seventh, not eighth (See 
Chapter Eight for more details). 


The Generations chart in Chapter Seven describes the 
special powers of vampires of different generations. These 
differences are quite major, and give the Kindred of earlier 
generations considerably more raw power than the charac- 





Fourth and Fifth Generations 

These vampires are known as the Methuselahs, for they are nearly as powerful and 
secretive as the Antediluvians. Those of the fourth and fifth generations are most often the 
pawns of choice in the Jyhad, as they may have political power among the other Kindred. As 
a result, their numbers have dwindled significantly with the actions of the Antediluvians. Few 
of this generation remain active, and many have become Inconnu out of fear of the Jyhad and 
diablerie. The Inner Circle of the Camarilla is said to be composed of members of the fourth 
generation. There are even rumors that the true purpose of the Camarilla is to blunt the efforts 
of the third generation to manipulate the younger generations. 

Though the blood of Caine begins to dilute somewhat at this distance, those of the fourth 
generation are still extremely powerful. It can be assumed they have reached their maximum 
potential in two or three Disciplines. 

Sixth, Seventh and Eighth Generations 

Vampires of these generations are powerful enough to think they can resist the workings 
of their elders, and so remain deeply involved in Kindred society. They control the Camarilla 
(at least they think so), comprise the majority of the princes, and are the pnmogen of many 
cities. Those who remain in positions of visibility tend to be important figures: leaders of clans 
or bloodlines, or princes of great cities. Most of the princes of European cities tend to be of 
the sixth generation. Princes of American cities tend to be of the seventh or eighth 
generations. 

Members of these generations have most commonly reached their maximum potential 
in one or two Disciplines. 

Interestingly, the members of the eighth generation seem to be the last Kindred viewed 
as “elders." Perhaps it is because the majority of them were created before the modem age, 
and that is evident in their manner and bearing. 

Ninth and Tenth Generations 

Though they are sometimes called elders, these Kindred often associate themselves with 
members of the younger generations. Members of these generations are frequently called 
ancillse, though of course this is based on age more than generation. Most were created in the 
modem era, and thus are somewhat alien in Temperament to the older Kindred. In more ways 
than one, they bridge the gap between the anarchs and the elders. 

Eleventh, Twelfth, and Thirteenth Generations 

The most recent generations of Kindred are often called neonates. Most characters 
belong to these generations. They are still powerful creatures, but the special gifts of Caine’s 
blood (the unique powers and abilities) are rarely found here. Bom within recent memory, the 
Kindred of these generations are products of societies that have received the benefits of, and 
been victims of, rapid change. 

Fourteenth and Fifteenth Generations 

There are exceedingly few Kindred of these generations, and none beyond. Indeed, those 
of the 15th generation have failed to sire any progeny. Their blood is far too thin, and they 
are too removed from Caine, to be able to pass on the curse. 



* 



^— A 


Chapter Two: Setting 0 53 







































Lexicon 


What's the meaning of words 
When they cease to function — 
When there's nothing to say? 

— Killing Joke, “Requiem” 


There exists among the Kindred a distinct patois, draw¬ 
ing on many tongues and giving new shades of meaning to 
certain mortal words. One can often tell what generation a 
vampire is by listening to the parlance that she employs. 
There is a sharp distinction between the words used by the 
anarchs and those employed hy elders. Using the wrong word 
in the wrong circumstances is often considered a serious 
breach of etiquette. 

Common Parlance 

These are the terms that are most commonly used among 
the Kindred. 


Anarch 


Barrens, The 


Becoming, The 


Book of Nod 


Beast, The 


Blood Kindred 


Blood Oath 




A rebel among the Kindred, one with no 
respect for the elders. Most fledglings are 
automatically assumed to be anarchs by 
the elders, and are despised as products of 
the 20th century. 

The areas of a city that are devoid of life— 
graveyards, abandoned buildings and parks. 
The moment one becomes a vampire; the 
metamorphosis from mortal to Kindred. 
Also called The Change. 

The “sacred” book of the Kindred, tracing 
the race’s origins and early history. It has 
never been published in its entirety, al¬ 
though fragments are known to exist in 
various languages. 

The drives and urges which prompt a 
vampire to become entirely a monster, 
forsaking all Humamty.Vide Man infra. 
The vampire's heritage. That which makes 
a vampire a vampire, or simply the actual 
blood of the vampire. 

The relationship between vampires of the 
same lineage and dan. The idea is much 
the same among mortals; only the means 
of transmission are different. 

The most potent bond which can exist 
between vampires; the receiving of blood 
in an acknowledgement of mastery. This 
grants a mystical power over the one who 
is bound. Vide Blood Bond infra. 

A group of vampires gathered around a 
leader (usually their sire). A brood may in 
time become a clan (qv). 


Caitiff A vampire with no clan; frequently used 

in a derogatory fashion. To be clanless is 
not a virtue among the Kindred. 

Camarilla, The A global sect of vampires in which all 
Kindred may hold membership. Its rule is 
far from absolute, and it serves as a debat¬ 
ing chamber more than a government. 

Childc A derogatory term for a young, inexperi¬ 

enced, or foolish vampire. The plural form 
is Childer. 

Clan A group of vampires who share certain 

mystic and physical characteristics. Vide 
lineage, bloodline. 

Diablerie The cannibalistic behavior common 

among Kindred, involving the consump¬ 
tion of the blood of another vampire. The 
elders do so out of need, whereas the 
anarchs do so out of desire for power. 

Domain The fiefdom claimed by a vampire, most 

often a prince. Invariably a city. 

Elder A vampire who is 300 years of age or older. 

Elders consider themsel ves the most pow¬ 
erful Kindred, and usually engage in their 
own Jyhad. 

Elysium The name given for the places where the 

elders meet and gather, commonly operas, 
theaters or other public places of high 
culture. 

Embrace, The The act of transforming a mortal into a 
vampire by draining the mortal's blood 
and replacing it with a smal 1 amount of the 
vampire's own blood. 

Fledgling A young, newly created vampire. Vide 

Neonate, Whelp. 

Generation The number of steps between a vampire 
and the mythical Caine. Caine’s Get were 
the second generation, their brood the 
third, and so on. 

Gehenna The end of the Third Cycle; the impend¬ 

ing Armageddon when the Antediluvians 
shall awaken and devour all vampires. 

Ghoul A servant created by allowing a mortal to 

drink Kindred blood without the draining 
that would give rise to a progeny. 



54 0 VAMPIRE: The Masquerade 

































\) 0 0 it If 0 0 If <f <1 if if tt if 


Haven 
Hunger, The 

Inconnu 


Jyhad, The 


Kindred 

Kiss 

Lupine 

Lush 

Life, The 


The home of a vampire or the place where 
it sleeps during the day. 

As with mortals and other animals, the 
drive to feed. For vampires, though, it is 
much more intense, and takes the place of 
every other drive, urge and pleasure. 

A sect of vampires, mostly Methuselahs, 
who have removed themselves from both 
mortal and Kindred affairs. They state 
that they have nothing to do with the 
Jyhad. 

The secret war being waged between the 
few surviving vampires of the third gen¬ 
eration, using younger vampires as pawns. 
Also used to describe any sort of conflict or 
warfare between vampires. 

A vampire. Many elders consider even 
this term to be vulgar, and prefer to use a 
more poetic word such as Camite . 

To take the blood of a mortal, or the act of 
taking blood in general. 

A werewolf, the mortal enemy of the vam¬ 
pires. 

A vampire who habitually feeds upon prey 
who are under the influence of drink or 
drugs in order to experience the sensations 
thereof. Vide Head. 


A euphemistic term for mortal blood taken 
as sustenance. Many Kindred regard the 
term as affected and prissy. 

Man, The The element of humanity which remains 

in a vampire, and which strives against the 
base urgings of the B east (qv). 

Masquerade, The The effort begun after the end of the great 
wars to hide Kindred society from the 
mortal world. A policy reaffirmed after 
the time of the Inquisition. 

Prince A vampire who has established a claim to 

rulership over a city, and is able to support 
that claim nil disputandum. A prince often 
has a brood (qv) to aid him. The feminine 
form is still prince. 

Riddle, The The essential dilemma of a vampire's ex¬ 
istence — to prevent the occurrence of 
greater atrocities, one must commit evil 
deeds of a lesser nature. The proverb is: 
monsters we are lest monsters we become. 

Rogue A vampire who feeds upon other vam¬ 

pires, either out of need or perversion. 
Vide Diablerie. 

Sabbat, The A sect of vampires controlling much of 
eastern North America. They are violent 
and bestial, reveling in needless cruelty. 


Sect 

Sire 

Vessel 


General name for one of the three primary 
groups among the Kindred 
Camarilla, Sabbat or Inconnu. 

The parent-creator of a vampire, used both 
as the female and male form. 

A potential or past source of blood, typi¬ 
cally a human. 



Old Form 


These are the words used by the elders and other vam¬ 
pires of antiquity. Though these terms are rarely used by the 
newly created, they are still the fashionable vernacular among 
the more sophisticated Kindred. Elders may often be identi¬ 
fied simply by the words they use. 

Amaranth The act of drinking the blood of other 
Kindred. Vide Diablerie. 

Ancilla An “adolescent" vampire; one who is no 

longer a neonate, but is not an elder ci¬ 
ther. 

Antediluvian One of the eldest Kindred, a member of 
the third generation. A warlord of the 
jyhad. 

Archon A powerful vampire who wanders from 

city to city, usually serving a Justicar. Ar- 
chons are frequently used to track down 
Kindred who have fled a city. 

Autarkis A vampire who refuses to be a part of 

Kindred society, and does not recognize 
the domain of a prince. 

Cainite A vampire. Vide Kindred. 

Canaille The mortal herd, especially that element 

of it which is the most unsavory and lack¬ 
ing in culture (whom the Kindred largely 
feed upon). 

Cauchemar A vampire who feeds only on sleeping 
victims and prevents their awakening. 
Cunctator A vampire who avoids killing by drinking 

shallowly and taking too little blood to kill 
the prey.faiu plus chasser, peut mieux dormir. 
Compare Casanova. 

Coterie A group of Kindred who protect and sup¬ 

port one another against all outsiders. Vidc 
Brood. 

Consanguineus Oneofthesame lineage (usually ayoungcr 
member). 

Footpad One who feeds off the derelicts and the 

homeless, and who frequently does not 
have a haven of her own. Vide A lleycat. 
Gentry A Kindred who hunts the nightclubs, dis¬ 

tricts of ill repute, and other places of 
entertainment where mortals seek to pair 
off. Vide Rake. 


Chapter Two: Setting 


































Golconda 


Humarutas 


Lextalionis 


Lineage 


Methuselah 


Neonate 


Papillon 


Progeny 


Primogen 


Regnant 


Retainers 


The state of being to which many vam¬ 
pires aspire, in which a balance is found 
between opposing urges and scruples. The 
slide into bestiality is halted, and the indi¬ 
vidual reaches a kind of stasis. Like the 
mortals’ N irvana, it is often spoken of, but 
seldom achieved. 

The degree to which a Kindred still retains 
some humanity. 

A contemptuous term for mortals, often 
used in opposition to Kindred. The expres¬ 
sion KindredandKine means “all the world.” 
A human who drinks a vampire’s blood, 
yet retains free will. Often he keeps the 
vampire as a prisoner, or offers great re¬ 
wards for the blood. 

The code of the Kindred, allegedly created 
by Caine. It suggests biblical justice — an 
eye for an eye, a tooth for a tooth. Vide 
Traditions. 

The bloodline of a vampire, traced by 
Embrace. 

An elder who no longer lives among the 
other Kindred. Many Methuselahs be¬ 
long to the Jnconnu. 

A young, newly created Kindred. Vide 
Fledgling, Whelp. 

A vampire who surrounds himself with 
mortal or ghoul followers in a cult or 
coven to better obtain sustenance. The 
practice is less common than it once was. 
The red-light district; the area of the city 
made up of nightclubs, gambling houses 
and brothels. The prime hunting ground 
of the city. 

A collective term for all the vampires 
created by one sire. Less formal, and less 
flattering, is Get. 

The right of princes to rule, as well as the 
rules, laws and customs enforced by a par¬ 
ticular prince. 

The leaders in a city or the ruling council 
of elders. Those who support the prince 
and make her rule possible. 

One who has a Blood Bond over another 
Kindred, through giving said Kindred blood 
three times. Vide Blood Bond. 

Humans who serve a vampire master. They 
are generally either ghouls or mentally 
dominated by their vampire master. This 
control is sometimes so complete that the 
mortals are unable to take any action of 
their own volition. 


Suspire 


Third Mortal 


Thrall 


Vitte 

Wassail 


Whelp 


Wight 

Witch-hunter 


A vampire who seduces mortals, but does 
not kill them and takes only a little blood 
after putting the mortal into a deep sleep. 
Vide Tease. 

The dream dance during the final stage of 
the quest for Golconda. 

Caine, the progenitor of all vampires, ac¬ 
cording to the Book of Nod (qv). 

A vampire who is held under a Blood 
Bond, and thus under the control of an¬ 
other Kindred. 

Blood. 

The final release and the last frenzy. 
Wassail occurs when the last vestiges of 
Humanity are lost and a vampire plunges 
into madness. 

A contemptuous term for any young vam¬ 
pire; originally used only in reference to 
one's own progeny. 

Human, mortal. 

A human who searches for vampires in 
order to kill them. 

Name for a Cainite who possesses an ob¬ 
sessive interest in mortal fashion and 
current events. 


Vulgar Argot 


These are the words used most frequently by the anarchs, 
the younger vampires who disdain and/or ignore the tradi¬ 
tions of the elders. They seek to establish their own culture, 
and inventing their own slang is part of the process. Of 
course, they will use Old Form when they do not have 
another word for the same thing, and some elders have even 
begun to use the vulgar form of a word so as to create a greater 
effect when they speak. 


Alleycat 


Banking 


Banker 


Black Hand 


A vampire who does not have a haven of 
any kind, but instead resides in a different 
place each night. Also used to refer to 
those Kindred who feed off the homeless 
and other street people. 

The practice, most widespread among 
younger Kindred, of taking blood from 
blood banks. Chilled blood so long re¬ 
moved from the body is less satisfying, but 
some neonates delight in entering a blood 
bank and drinking to excess. This is seen 
by many princes as a breach of the Mas¬ 
querade. 

A Kindred who engages in the practice of 
Banking. 

A sect that involves itself in diablerie. 
Vide Sabbat. 


56 0 VAMPIRE: The Masquerade 

































Blister 

A vampire who contracts an infectious 
disease, and subsequently spreads it to 
each donor from whom she feeds. 

Head 

A vampire who feeds upon those under 
the influence of a drug, so as to feel the 
effect. The term Head is used with a 

Bloodline 

The vampire's heritage. Vide Lineage. 


suitable prefix if the vampire prefers a 

Blood Bond 

A mystic servitude to another vampire as 


particular drug. Vide Lush. 


a result of taking the Blood Oath. Vide 
Regnant. 

Headhunter 

An elder who hunts other Kindred for 
their blood. Vide Rogue. Diablerie. 

Blood Doll 

A Kindred who is held in Regnant by 

Lick 

A vampire. Vide Kindred. 


another. The doll is Blood Bound and no 
longer free. 

Rack, The 

The hunting ground represented by night¬ 
clubs, bars, and other places of 

Butterfly 

One who mingles among the high society 
of mortals, and only feeds upon the wealthy 


entertainment where mortals seek to 
dance, drink and pair off. 


and famous. 

Rake 

One who habitually uses the Rack is a Rake 

Casanova 

A vampire who delights in seducing mor¬ 
tals but not killing them, and who takes 


in Vulgar argot; Papillon and Gentry are 
progressively older terms for the same. 


only a little blood, erasing the victim’s 
memory of the event when she is finished. 

Sandman 

A vampire who feeds only upon sleeping 
victims. VideCauc/iemor. 


There are rumors that the original 
Casanova was or is a vampire, but this is 
not generally believed. Vide Cauchemar. 

Slumming 

The act of feeding from the homeless and 
derelicts. A vampire who does so exclu¬ 
sively is a Slummer. 

Change, The 

The moment and the process of becoming 
a vampire. Vide Becoming. 

Stalker 

A mortal who hunts the Kindred. Vide 
Witch-hunter. 

Damned, The 

The immortal, undead race. All the vam¬ 
pires as a whole. 

Tease 

A term sometimes used for a female 
Casanova (qv). 

Donor 

A potential or past source of blood, typi¬ 
cally a human. 

Turf 

The city or section of a city that vampires 
might try to claim for themselves. Vide 

Farmer 

A derogatory term for a vampire who 


Fief, domain. 


keeps animals for the purpose of feeding 
the Hunger. Vide Vegetary. 

Vegetary 

A sarcastic term for a vampire who refuses 
to take the blood of humans, but relies 

Fief 

A sarcastic term for the domain of a clan 
or prince. 


instead on that of animals. Vide Farmer. 





































LJ 



The hero has died as a modem man; but as eternal man — 
universal man — he has been reborn. 

— Joseph Campbell 


R unning a Vampire story is not always easy, but it 
is usually completely engaging. Though being 
a player has its own unique rewards, there is 
something about being a Storyteller that transcends even 
that experience, allowing you to reach an entirely different 
level. It has something to do with the fact that, as a 
Storyteller, you are creating an entire world out of your 
imagination — in effect, conjuring it out of thin air. In some 
small but significant way you play the role of a god — in the 
same way that a poet, novelist or inventor docs. You are a 
creator of a universe, and that role supplies its own rarefied 
reward. 

If you aren’t ready for it, being a Storyteller can be a 
disaster. Besides roleplaying all the characters that the 
players don’t play, you must wear about six other hats: stage 
manager, director, prop coordinator, social director, script 
writer and even publicist. However, you shouldn’t let your 
fear of something new keep you from trying it out. You’ll be 
nervous, afraid of your players’ reactions and far too cautious, 
but after just one time as the Storyteller, you’ll discover a 
whole new side to yourself. 

Most of this chapter describes the basics of how to 
construct and tell a story. Even if you have run other 
storytelling or roleplaying games before, you will still find this 
chapter to be of interest, for it denotes the particulars of 


telling a Vampire story. All the information here is simply 
advice. Use what you want, and throw away everything that 
doesn’t fit your storytelling style. 

A Job Description 

The stage but echoes back the public voice, 

The drama's laws the drama's patrons give 

For we that live to please, must please to live. 

— Samuel Clemens 

The players have it easy. They only have to worry about 
a single character, one single alter ego. They can focus their 
imaginative powers on one unique individual, and spend all 
their effort bringing that character alive. As the Storyteller, 
your job is much more demanding. You are everything the 
players are not — you are the rest of the universe. 

First of all you must roleplay every character in the story 
who is not controlled by a player. If you think of the story as 
a movie, the players are the stars, while you control all the 
supporting cast, walk-ons and extras. 

The setting is yours alone to create and relate. If the 
characters decide to turn down a certain alley, or enter a 
certain building, you must either know what they will find or 
be able to invent it at a moment’s notice. You are their eyes 
and ears. If they treat an antagonist in an insulting manner, 
you must decide how she will react. If they tell a ne' 
about the Kindred, you will need to decide what 


ivs reporter 
happens. 


IlCI * 

li 



































Additionally, you are the final arbiter of the rules as they 
apply during the game. If any questions or disputes arise about 
any of the rules dunng play, you have the final say. Even 
though we’ve designed these rules carefully and tested them 
thoroughly, the nature of storytelling games is such that 
situations always arise which are not covered by the letter of 
the rules. Part of the Storyteller’s job is to resolve these 
situations, sticking to the spirit of the rules as much as 
possible. 

You are also in charge of the story itself. The players will 
start off knowing nothing about the story they are experienc¬ 
ing, and will learn about it as they go along. You, on the other 
hand, must be able to jump-start things from a dead stop. You 
must always keep an eye on the progress of the story and make 
sure that all of the players are enjoying themselves. 

Indeed, your foremost duty is to invent a story, or at least 
the beginning of a story, and to simultaneously entrance and 
entertain both your players and yourself. However, you 
cannot simply create a story and tell it to an audience: it is 
your interaction with the players that creates a plot. A story 
is invented moment by moment, through the dynamics 
between player and Storyteller. 


Telling a Story 




The foremost responsibility of a Storyteller is to make 
sure that a good story is being told; however, the Storyteller 
should never simply tell a story. The events and flow of the 
story are as much the responsibility of the players as the 
Storyteller. The primary duty of the Storyteller is to lead the 
story and to keep it moving briskly in the desired direction — 
or at least stop it from breaking down completely. Telling a 
story is more a matter of keeping up with the players, 
commenting and elaborating upon what their characters do 
and say, than it is of relating a narrative. 

The most important thing when telling a story is to be 
ready to abandon your expectations. Never force the players 
to follow your premadc plot; you must be willing to work with 
them. Try to anticipate what the characters will do and how 
this will affect the course of the story — you can’t foresee 
everything, of course, but have a few contingency plans 
worked out in advance. 

Before you begin to tell a story, be prepared. Don’t have 
a plot already set, but have story hooks ready, and create as 
elaborate a setting as possible. This may sound obvious, but 
it can’t be stressed enough. If you are using a premade story, 
read through the text of the story very thoroughly at least 
once before you present it to the players. Make sure you know 
when and where everything happens, who is where at what 
time, and so on. In particular, study the major antagonists, 
their personalities and motivations, and be sure that you can 
present them convincingly to the players. 

The Storyteller must make sure the game element doesn’t 
slow down or interfere with the story element. Storytelling 
is always a perpetual balance between game and story. 


Laying Down The Law 

The core rules of Vampire have been designed for 
simplicity and flexibility. They are simple so that the basic 
principles of the rules can be grasped very easily, and flexible 
so that they can cover most if not all of the infinite possibili¬ 
ties presented by a storytelling game. 

You will quickly come to develop your own personal 
style. Part of this style will arise from your own personality 
and inclinations, while part of it will reflect the tastes of your 
players. The range of different styles is best illustrated by 
referring to two storytelling archetypes, representing oppo¬ 
site ends of the scale. Both styles are exaggerated, and you will 
probably end up somewhere in between. 

At one end of the scale is the Rules Lawyer. This type of 
Storyteller insists on dice rolls for everything, and applies the 
letter of the rules to the fullest extent. The world which this 
Storyteller evokes is self-consistent and the players will feel 
as if their characters have the power to change the world. 

At the other end of the scale is the Freeformer. To this 
type of Storyteller, the story is everything. Dice are rolled 
only occasionally; in fact, the Storyteller usually decides 
exactly what is going to happen without dice, and follows the 
players as they create the story. Character actions may direct 
the story, but it is the Storyteller who decides the results of 
these actions. 

Vampire tends to be more freeform than rules-oriented. 
The rules are there to help, not to govern — freedom of 
action is the key. The players should possess maximum 
freedom of action, and should never feel that their decisions 
and actions do not make a difference. 

Breaking the Rules 

One of the biggest decisions a Storyteller ever makes is 
when she first decides to ignore the rules. This is completely 
legitimate, provided it’s done for the right reasons and in the 
right way. In fact, we encourage you to break the rules; it is 
your prerogative as a Storyteller. 

From time to time, situations will arise where applying 
the full letter of the rules would cause the story toslow or even 
collapse. For example, imagine the climax of a story in which 
the characters have just spent several weeks finding and 
recovering a medieval tome which contains vital informa¬ 
tion about the Sabbat who have entered the city. 

A freak botch (a disastrous dice roll) sends the character 
carrying the tome falling from a rooftop into a huge fire 
created by a witch-hunter. The tome is lost forever, the 
characters are doomed to die at the hands of the Sabbat (or 
the hunter), and the whole chronicle comes to an end. 

As well as being a crushing and probably undeserved 
defeat for the characters, this single bad roll means that the 
story cannot proceed. That can be very frustrating if you've 
spent your hard-earned cash on buying it or devoted several 


0 VAMPIRE: The Masquerade 



































weeks of spare time to designing it. Several different repairs 
are possible, though, so don't despair. 

One way is simply to discount the botch — reduce its 
severity so that the book is saved (or simply have the player 
try again). This works fine once, but eventually, the players 
will rely on this kind of aid from you every time they get 
themselves into trouble. 

Another option is to amend the story. The book is lost, 
but somewhere there is another source of information which 
can replace it. Perhaps one of the Sabbat is sickened by the 
excesses of her fellows, or moved by ambition or revenge to 
turn against them. She seeks out the characters and arms 
them with the knowledge they need. Again, this will work, 
but you may find players blatantly sitting around, waiting for 
you to spoon-feed them in future situations. 

Finally, you might allow the falling character a superhu¬ 
man (or super- vampiric) effort to throw the book to one of his 
comrades so that the story can continue. This is the best 
option for most chronicles, but some players may be too 
selfish to do this. 

There arc other ways out of this situation as well; your 
job, and privilege, is to decide which means you will use. 
Sometimes simply letting the chronicle come to an end is the 
best way to teach the players that their actions, and the 
vagaries of the dice, really do have an effect upon your world. 


That’s Entertainment j 

As well as being a referee, gamemaster, roleplayer, and , 
overseer, the Storyteller has another duty — to make sure 
everyone has fun. Above all else, you, as the Storyteller, must 
be an entertainer. For the most part, this consists of knowing 
your players and catering to their tastes, but eventually you 
will be faced with a problem arising from one or more players 
themselves. 

In the excitement of the moment, even the most mild- 
mannered players become agitated and try to drown out the 
others. You may find that players with strong personalities are 
dominating the quieter ones, and in extreme cases the 
loudest player in the group may end up determining the 
actions of the entire coterie. This is highly undesirable, as 
players who feel themselves to be overshadowed or ignored 
will become bored or resentful, and eventually they will drop 
out of the game. 

Take care to listen to all of your players equally. If one 
player states that another player’s character is doing some¬ 
thing, check with that character’s player first. If one or more 
players are dominating the action and not letting the others 
participate as fully as their characters deserve, take them 
aside and point out the problem as diplomatically as possible. 
Remind everyone that this is not a competitive game, and 


Chapter Three: Storytelling 0 61 









































r that those players who seek to dominate others are gaining 
nothing but resentment. As a final sanction, you may decide 
not to invite an unrepentantly troublesome player to future 
games. 

Give ‘’Em What they Want 

There are a variety of reasons why people enjoy 
roleplaying. Understanding the motivations of your players 
will enable you to better entertain them. Described below are 
some of the reasons why your players might want to spend 
time in the world you create: 

• To tell a story — A story can be a beautiful creation, 
a work of art worthy of the human imagination. Telling 
stories can be an invigorating and illuminating experience, 
and being directly involved in its creation is as fundamentally 
exciting as any human activity. 

• To be someone completely different — Like a kid 
playing dress-up, putting on a new role and trying it out, this 
person loves to see what it is like to be someone else, and 
thereby vicariously have experiences normally closed to her. 

• Problem solving — Many people enjoy being faced 
with puzzles, riddles and other mental dilemmas. They enjoy 
both the process of deducing the solution and the elation of 
the achievement. This sort of player treats roleplaying as a 
puzzle to be solved. 

• Sense of accomplishment — The player enjoys the 
satisfying feeling of completing a difficult task by stretching 
all of his creative faculties. To achieve success in a game can 
sometimes make up for a lack of success in the real world. 

• To gain power — Many people feel powerless in 
today's impersonal, hypertechnological society. The desire 
for power is common among players who do not possess power 
in real life. Those who are motivated by this urge are known 
as “power-gamers," and can sometimes be quite disruptive if 
this motivation is not properly channeled. 

• To be with friends— Many roleplay because it is a 
social occasion, a chance for them to be with their friends in 
a relaxed atmosphere. Sometimes they come just to be with 
one particular friend (such as a girlfriend or boyfriend). The 
social aspect of storytelling cannot be underrated. 

• To experience strong emotions — Fear, hate, grief 
and other emotions arc often in short supply in our sheltered 
world, but at some fundamental level we need them. A bland 
life without emotion is a life without meaning. Many players 
use roleplaying to experience a depth of emotion that would 
otherwise be lost to them. 

• Catharsis — Our lives are often highly stressful, and 
everyone needs ways of blowing off steam. Storytelling can 
sometimes provide an intensely cathartic experience, one 
unrivaled by any other form of entertainment. 


he Art of 
Storytelling 

I stood, 

Among them, but not of them; in a shroud 

Of thoughts which were not their thoughts. 

— Lord Byron, “Childe Harold’s Pilgrimage" 

An important part of your job as Storyteller is to encour¬ 
age the players to roleplay and to provide them with 
opportunities to do so. Players need to associate closely with 
their characters, but this only happens if they are comfortable 
and familiar with them. Your roleplaying of the bit parts is 
your primary means of getting the players to roleplay. The 
better you do so, the more they will roleplay and the more 
they will get into the story. This is not the only means of 
encouraging roleplaying, however. 

One of the reasons people are attracted to roleplaying in 
the first place is because they are able to employ and see the 
results of their active use of free will. They decide to do 
something and almost immediately they get results, unlike 
the real world where it is all too easy to feel like a very small 
cog in a very large machine. You need to be aware of this, and 
show your players that free will plays a role in your chronicle. 

You'll want to make your stories as open-ended as 
possible, with as many different ways to get to the conclusion 
(of which there might be many) as there are ways to drive 
home from work. There might be many quick ways to get 
through the story, but how often is a story a race to the finish 
line? 

Most of our published supplements are far more linear 
that you will want to make your own. Though we try to allow 
as much room for character decisions as we can, the nature of 
the beast (i.e., the limited size of the book) prohibits us from 
delineating a comprehensive spectrum of conclusions and 
plots. This is a weakness you will not want to repeat in your 
own stories, and even when you do use a supplement, let the 
players go off the track a little bit and explore their own 
alternative to the basic plot. 

Suspense 

Fear is more than simply essential in horror — it is 
quintessential. Anxiety is the emotion you want to be 
coursing through every player’s heart for much of the story. 
Fear is best created through suspense. Suspense, however, is 
much more than simply fear, it is anticipation and dread as 
well. 

Suspense is a key element of Vampire, and it is one of the 
things which differentiates it from other varieties of horror. 
This is not splatterpunk or slasher horror — it is suspense in 


L 


62 0 VAMPIRE: The Masquerade 
































11 11 I) 11 <1 \\ II ft {) (1 1) 1) 1) 1) 

.1 LI:. — 1 _I.. I:.: Tl _I_ 1 IJ_I_ C «__ + • _ 

tive 


the Hitchcock tradition. The players should never be sure of 
what will happen next in a Vampire chronicle. They portray 
characters who have been thrust into a world of fantastic 
proportions and kaleidoscopic reality, and who are trapped in 
a situation which is camivalesque in its strangeness. They 
have become vampires. Can you think of anything more 
strange? 

At first, they are not sure what is happening, and when 
they find out, they must find ways to adjust. It will take an 
enormous amount of effort just to discover the most elemen¬ 
tary facts about the new world they have been thrust into. 
The whole chronicle is often a never-ending process of 
discovering more and more about the Gothic-Punk world. 

The suspense in Vampire is energized by the fear that 
plagues the lives of the characters, for there is so much that 
they do not know, and so much danger that awaits them, 
unknown and ever-lurking. 

There are a number of different techniques for creating 
and maintaining suspense; some of the more important are 
described below. 

Timing 

Timing is one of the most important elements in build¬ 
ing and sustaining suspense. Timing, however, is something 
so personal and subtle that it is impossible to teach. You've 
got to already have it, or somehow learn it if you want to build 
the effects that create a great story. In a general sense, timing 
usually means that you start with mystery and drama, and 
slowly spiral into the real horror. Things move slowly during 
investigations, but much more quickly when the real actions 
starts — mimicking real life. Gun battles often take only a 
few seconds. The game systems described in the Drama 
chapter take this into account, playing out some dramatic 
moments and shortening others. 

Pace events quickly enough that the players feel that 
they are actually in the moment, and don't have the freedom 
to dawdle all day. Whenever the players spend too much time 
deciding what to do, create an event that interrupts their 
discussion. Let the action come to them if they don’t go to 
it. Don't let the story stall just because the characters can’t 
decide what they want todo (though be careful that you don't 
take away their free will either — it’s a delicate balance). 
Create a sense of the real flow of time, but be careful you don’t 
push them too much. 

Description 

Give the players a staggeringly complete description of 
what they sense, down to the blood on their noses and the 
catch in their voices. The pace at which you describe things 
and the length of time it takes you, as well as what you are 
actually describing, can serve to build the tension. Thus, you 
can lavishly detail the exterior of an old, rotting mansion 
before the players attempt to break into it. The time you 
spend and the words you use can slowly build up a feeling of 
anticipation and dread. 


Imagination 

Sometimes the opposite technique is equally effective 
— if you don’t describe something, the players' imaginations 
go wild. This is the ancient Chinese ideal of the vacuum — 
used in music, art, and all aspects of life — in which the blank 
slate is filled with the constructs of the imagination. You 
want to direct the players' imaginations in certain directions, 
but you do not want to tell them what to imagine. For 
instance, you can have one of the characters’ retainers, who 
is guarding over them while they sleep in an abandoned 
cellar, simply disappear without a trace. This is guaranteed 
to drive them nuts. 

Changes of Pace 

Altering the pace of the story is an interesting tech¬ 
nique, but one that is often difficult to employ. Don’t make 
the players face horrifying situations every single moment of 
every single game session. Horror doesn’t work that way. The 
horror will be all the more tangible after they’ve had a little 
break from it (the technique of contrast cannot be under¬ 
rated). 

Keep the suspense constant when you want the players 
to be on the edge of their seats, but make sure you manufac¬ 
ture moments where they can relax and sit back — then bring 
on even more suspense later on. Make sure that somehow 
this period of calm serves as a potent contrast to what is 
coming ahead — the eye of the hurricane, so to speak. The 
way in which you build and relieve tension, and the sharpness 
of your timing, are basic to the drama of your story. Tension 
is the one thing you should always have absolute command 
over. Be aware of it in your players. 

Changes of pace can often be achieved by switching 
between mortal and immortal opponents for the characters. 
Perhaps at one moment they are opposed merely with a petty 
hindrance, such as the police, while the next moment they 
must face a power even greater than their own, like a 
ravenous Methuselah. 

Deadline 

Give the characters a deadline. If they don’t do such and 
such within a given time frame, then a certain result occurs 
(usually something really, really bad). The players are aware 
of the deadline, and usually become frantic near the end of 
their attempt to complete the mission. Of course, you may 
need to manipulate things to ensure that the mission still 
needs to be completed as the deadline approaches, so the 
deadline technique will not be ruined by overly successful 
players. If they do well enough, however, you may want to 
simply let them win to allow the continuity and reality of the 
story to continue. This is one of the best ways to build 
suspense in a story — a deadline creates a powerful climax. 


1 II IT 



Chapter Three: Storytelling 0 63 





























r Delay Success 

Because of the structure of the rules system, partial or 
marginal successes are common, and it often takes several 
turns to complete a given action. Therefore, you can plan 
dramatic scenes in which a character’s friends must hold off 
a horde of enemies while he struggles to repair a malfunction¬ 
ing vehicle or disarm a bomb. A race across a railroad bridge, 
where the characters need 18 successes to get all the way 
across, can be equally dramatic. The fewer turns it takes, the 
fewer chances the characters’ opponents will have to shoot 
them as they run across. 

Secrecy 

Many elements of a story must be kept hidden from the 
players. When you use this technique, you try to heighten the 
importance of these elements (so that players really want to 
find out the truth) and you try to establish even more secrets. 
In short, the idea is to populate the story with so many secrets 
that the characters are surrounded by them. The story will be 
a great deal more fun if the players do not realize what is going 
on, but must deduce the truth behind everything (problem 
solvers love this sort of thing). Mystery is essential to 
Vampire, for it adds that extra layer of detail that transforms 
the game into an engaging way to tell stories. Always keep the 
players guessing. 

Intrigue 

Plotting and intrigue are the meat and drink of vampiric 
existence; they arc constant elements in their strange society. 
There are mysteries within mystenes within mysteries, most 
of which involve the plots of the Antediluvians against one 
another. Many of your stories should contain some aspect of 
intrigue. The characters should try to figure out what is going 
on as they pursue their goals. They should be constantly 
confronted and confused by this intrigue. Their lives can be 
twisted and manipulated, their sanity damaged, and their 
safety imperiled. Eventually, they should be given the 
chance to figure out what is going on, but not until the 
tension and suspense have gotten very thick. 

Safe Haven 

The best way to keep the players scared is to make sure 
they never feel completely safe. Simply never give the players 
a safe haven or a home to retreat to. Better yet, give them a 
place where they can feel secure, a place which they can call 
home. Over time, get them to place more and more trust in 
it, until they believe deep down inside that nothing can 
happen to them while they are there. Then trick them 
somehow so that they invite some form of danger in (it has to 
be their mistake). Don’t destroy this safe haven through 
physical danger, do it psychologically. 


L 


Scope 

Begin a story on a small scale and then slowly increase 
the parameters of the tale, or alternately, start big and then 
slowly focus, becoming more and more detailed and in¬ 
volved. Both of these techniques are very effective storytelling 
tools. By changing the scope in your stories, you can create 
an unfolding panorama before the eyes of the players. One 
of the best examples of this technique is in Star Wars'”, where 
the sheer size of the Death Star makes the human drama of 
the story seem insignificant at first. 

Dependents 

Encourage the characters to develop friendships with 
mortals. This gives them a chance to regain some Humanity. 
However, once the players develop an affection for these 
unique personalities (you’ve got to roleplay them well), kill 
them off one by one. Nothing makes a player as mad and as 
scared at the same time. A really fun thing to do is to create 
a dependent who becomes an integral and trusted part of the 
characters’ lives; then, reveal the person as a villain. A word 
of warning, however don’t create a dependent and then 
decide to make him a villain whenever it suits you. Players 
will catch on and will think less of the chronicle when they 
find out. You’vc got to be very subtle about how you go about 
this, putting in hints and clues that the players only pick up 
on after the fact. 

Advanced 

Storytelling 

The secret thoughts of man run over all things , holy, profane, 
clean, obscene, grave and light .without shame or blame. 

— Thomas Hobbes 

Below arc a number of techniques you can use to create 
special effects in your stories. You need experienced players, 
who are as focused on high-quality roleplaying as they are 
good at it, to even consider using any of these techniques. As 
the Storyteller, you should have at least some experience 
under your belt before you try any of the following. These 
techniques arc extremely difficult to play properly and they 
must be carefully planned and executed with grace and 
finesse to work effectively. If you employ them correctly, 
however, you will create a story your players will never forget. 

Flashbacks 

Flashbacks are a way to roleplay scenes in a character’s 
past in order to present a new perspective on the current 
story. The flashback is a second story which is told alongside 
the basic story about the characters. You can either tell the 
second story outnght, or you can have the players create 
characters and roleplay through it. You design a second story 


VAMPIRE: The Masquerade 


































which will be played alternately with the current Vampire 
story as a type of interlude between the major scenes. How¬ 
ever, though the stories may be unconnected by time and 
space, they must be connected in theme, mood or subject. 
Each story must somehow illustrate the salient features of the 
other. The best way to do this is to have something happen 
in the second story that somehow reflects the original story. 

A flashback could be a short story concerning the early 
childhood (mortal) of one of the characters. The player of 
that character plays himself; another player might play his 
best friend, another his sister, and still others his mother and 
father. In the original story, the players are searching for that 
character's sire, and may thus be confused by why you are 
having them play out a flashback. But soon they realize that 
the sire is in the flashback as well, and is watching the 
character. You can reveal clues about the sire, and make him 
a more realistic character by having him be a part of the 
child's early life. Anything the characters leam can be 
explained by the fact that the character has suddenly “re¬ 
membered" that portion of his childhood, so long forgotten. 
The players might have so much fun with the flashback that 
they'll want to play it out as a chronicle in its own right. 

Parallel Story 

A parallel story, much like a flashback, is played out as 
a second story alongside the first. However, the second story 
is taking place at the same time as the original story. Thus, 
the two stories could start out as separate and seemingly 
unconnected events, but eventually they relate to one an¬ 
other. 

The parallel story might concern a vacationing family 
driving through the mountains, a group of high school 
students whose car breaks down, forcing them to sleep 
overnight in an old abandoned mansion, or even a group of 
Sabbat vampires weaving a plot to kill the player characters. 
Just have the players make up the secondary characters at the 
beginning of the story, and then switch off from story to story 
over the whole game session, always cutting to the other story 
after a cliffhanger. 

You will not want to conclude the parallel story until 
near the end of the game session — delay having the high 
school students meet their fate until the primary characters 
are about to walk into the house themselves (only it’s not 
abandoned anymore). Somehow the parallel story has to 
focus on the central story, adding to its theme and power. 

Foreshadowing 

By using the discipline of Auspex as a rationalization, 
you can foreshadow the future. Make up little playlets and act 
them out for the players, perhaps having one or two of them 
help you out. If you have time, write up a script and 
photocopy it ahead of time so it can be even more dramatic. 
To do foreshadowing right is very difficult, but it can have 
great effect. The simplest way to use it is to describe 






































mmirntn ii 

something really nasty — the players will get so worried about 
what is ahead that they may inadvertently lead themselves 




into it. 


Dream Sequence 

Have the players roleplay through a dream of one of the 
characters, or perhaps of the coterie’s major antagonist. The 
players don’t necessarily need to know whose dream they are 
in. This can be done in the same way you acted out the 
parallel story or flashback. There are many reasons why you 
want to roleplay out dreams, but foremost among them is the 
opportunity to get the players to focus on the essential 
personalities of their characters. The dreamworld has very 
different rules and laws from the real world. Nothing quite 
makes sense or has any solid reality. Yet the images and 
themes of the conflict found inside the dreams are important. 

In a dream sequence, you can have the characters play 
out their greatest failure — over and over again until they 
succeed. Or you can have them search for the “Talisman," 
an object which does not really exist, as a way to get them to 
focus on and decide what they are tmly looking for in the real 
world. 

Characters with appropriate powers (such as Auspex 
4+) may be capable of entering the dreams of other charac¬ 
ters; in this way they might even be able to enter the 
demented psyches of their worst enemies. Imagine being 
trapped in the mind of a madman! Dreams become very 
important in the quest for Golconda, and the final ritual 
known as Suspire involves a great dream dance that requires 
the extraordinary from the character. 

Symbolism 

Having something actually represent something else is 
an ancient literary technique, and it’s amazing how great an 
impact symbolism can have on a story. Symbolism is particu¬ 
larly important in horror literature, as monsters (such as 
vampires) are often symbols for human fears. Try to figure out 
what concerns the players personally. What are their fears, 
needs and loves? Then represent these symbolically in the 
story. This is almost always an overpowering (and occasion¬ 
ally unpleasant) experience in a story. However, if done 
right, it can help create the very best stories possible. 

Live-Action 

Living in the limelight, the universal dream, 

For those who wish to seem, those who wish to be, 

Must put aside the alienation, get on with the fascination, 

The real relation, the underlying theme. 

— Rush, “Limelight" 


ters) act through the scenes created and introduced by the 
Storyteller. This makes a much more intense and immediate 
roleplaying experience. 

Usually in roleplaying, the players describe what their 
charactersdo, and even say—but in Live-Action rolcplaying, 
they do what their characters do and say what their charac- 
terssay (within limits). They can stand up, walk around, hold 
up a letter, shake hands or rush to a window to see what is 
going on. Of course, the imagination still needs to be 
employed, and the Storyteller may still interrupt the action 
to describe objects and special situations. 

No dice are normally rolled during Live-Action. In¬ 
stead, everything is roleplayed. The new tools will be candles, 
capes and canes. The Storyteller simply decides how the 
other characters react to the players, and how well the 
characters manage to perform certain mechanical actions 
such as picking a lock, based on a general idea of the 
characters' Traits. 

Often, you, as the Storyteller, will want to have a First 
Mate, someone to help roleplay the non-player characters. 
Because Live-Action is so direct and immediate, it can be 
hard for you to switch roles. The First Mate option means 
that you won’t have to switch as often. Live-Action offers 
many opportunities for roleplaying that will be greatly im¬ 
proved if two people can interact with each other as non-player 
characters (try talking to yourself when playing two roles — 
it isn’t easy). This dynamic interaction lets those characters 
be seen as separate individuals, rather than as variations of a 
single voice. 

The First Mate must be familiar with the story to keep 
from making mistakes while ad-libbing a character's actions. 
A First Mate can be a player whose character is no longer a 
part of the coterie, or a friend of the Storyteller brought in just 
for this chapter, or a member of the troupe for whom it is a 
permanent position. 

For a particularly important Live-Action scene, you will 
sometimes want to have a number of First Mates assisting, to 
play all of the other characters who are involved in the scene. 
At times, you may have more First Mates than actual players 
— this makes for an exquisite gaming session. 

When you choose characters to play for yourself or your 
First Mates, try to arrange it so that they and you are playing 
characters that suit their and your respective gaming styles 
and tastes. For instance, if a First Mate is good at roleplaying 
pompous buffoons, make up a character that lets her show off 
her skills. You should usually play the most powerful, central 
character, so that you can easily affect the tempo of the game 
and redirect the plot when it needs shifting. 

Rules 

There are a few basic niles which you must follow to 
make sure that the roleplaying progresses smoothly and safely 
in Live-Action. These must be followed if you intend to do 
any Live-Action at all. Safety is always a primary concern. 



Live-Action roleplaying is one of the more dynamic and 
innovative aspects of Vampire. It is integral to the way 
Vampire stories are told. Live-Action roleplaying is similar 
to improvisational theater, wherein the actors (the charac- 




66 0 VAMPIRE: The Masquerade 
































• Don’t Touch: A player may never actually strike or 
grapple another member of the troupe. No sort of combat 
may ever be performed — that is one thing that you should 
leave for the dice to decide. Live-Action in Vampire 
involves talking, not fighting. 

• No Weapons: No props can be used if they must touch 
another player to be effective. No real weapons of any sort 
can ever be handled at any time during Live-Action 
roleplaying. Only those toy guns that can be easily detected 
as being toys can be used (like squirt guns), but the no-touch 
rules must still apply. 

• Play Inside: Play inside your own home, or whatever 
private place the game normally takes place in. Make sure 
that anyone else in the area understands what you are doing. 
Never perform Li vc-Action where people may be confused or 
frightened by the event. 

• Know When to Stop: When the Storyteller calls for 
a time-out, all action must immediately stop. Even during 
Li ve-Action (especially during Live-Action), the Storyteller’s 
word is final. 

Atmosphere 

Before the players arrive, think about the atmosphere of 
the area where you arc going to game. 

• If at all possible, play only in the evenings. The 
daytime is all wrong for Vampire. 


• Try to eliminate all overhead lighting; it is too remi¬ 
niscent of the sun. Use only table lamps or candles, and make 
the light as indirect as you can. 

• Candles are ideal for Vampire; no game session should 
be without them, but be careful with open flames. 

• Hang black lace, or some other kind of dark fabric, up 
on the walls to try and change the look of what might be an 
all too familiar room. You want to make people feel as if they 
are somewhere else. 

• Try to play music that will add to the setting. Try 
classical when you're trying to convey a sophisticated setting, 
or loud punk when the characters visit a club, or maybe 
country when they're with a real hick. Creepy music is nearly 
always appropriate. The contrast in musical styles can be a 
great way to build up a feeling of discordance. 

Props 

Props are real objects that are used to represent similar 
objects which the characters use or discover. The most 
common examples are what are conventionally called “player 
handouts." These are things like letters, pictures, scrawled 
maps and other objects which are generally included in a 
published adventure; these are cut out and handed to the 
players when their characters find the “real" counterpart in 
the story. Other things might include objects such as cloaks, 
silver-tipped canes or anything else you like. Props can add to 

































the reality of the story quite a bit, as players present not only 
the speech but also the actions of their characters. Props are 
most often used during Live-Action roleplaying, but are 
useful any time. 

Props are very much a matter of personal taste. Each 
gaming group has its own preferred style, and there’s no right 
way or wrong way — as long as everyone is having a good 
time, you're doing just fine. Props are, however, a great way 
to get people involved in the story. Here are some ideas for 
props you can use: 

• Skull-shaped candle 

• Fake ancient map 

• Fake scroll 

• Books, especially ones with a musty smell to them 

• Hats 

•Cloak 

• Wooden stake 

• Walking cane 

• Cigars 

Do's and Don’ts 


Life has confided so many stories tome, I shall have to retell 
them to people who cannot read the book of life itself. 

— Elly Hillcsum 

Being a Storyteller is as much a challenge and a delight 
as being a player. There are some specific responsibilities to 
keep in mind when you run Vampire. 

Do’s 

• Keep all the characters in mind: Provide something 
for everyone to do, no matter what the scene. Even if one 
character is the hub of the story on whom everything rests, 
cut off your roleplaying with that player after a bit and do 
something with the other players. It may not make any 
difference to the plot, but it will let everyone have some fun, 
keep them from being bored, and will make them a part of the 
scene. Let every player have an equal chance to take an 
action or interact with one of your characters. Though you 
may naturally give more time to the more creative and 
inventive rolcplayers in your group, never ignore the others. 

• Go beyond the rules: The rules are for keeping 
characters in line. Ifyour imagination is superior to the rules, 
then go beyond the rules. Especially for non-player vampire 
powers, you should let your imagination roam free. There are 
werewolves and wizards and even ghosts in this world, yet in 
this game they are not carefully detailed. You'll have to make 
up their powers on your own. You may make them as 
mysterious and enigmatic as you desire. Future products in 
the Storyteller"" series will detail these beings more com¬ 
pletely. 















































• Encourage the players to roleplay among them¬ 
selves: Vivid interaction between the players is vital. If they 
don’t roleplay unless they’re talking to you, something is 
wrong. 

• Take breaks: Sometimes you need to take a break. At 
such times, simply stand back from the table and take a short 
walk, or open this book and pretend you are reading. Don’t 
feel embarrassed about this; everyone needs these rests. The 
players get them all the time, but the Storyteller almost never 
does. It’s almost impossible to sustain a high level of dynamic 
storytelling without breaks. It is a good idea is to start the 
players roleplaying with one another before you rest, since 
this ensures that they aren't bored while you’re not involved. 

• Encourage player input: Don’t run the game without 
being aware of what your players like and don’t like. Balance 
the desire of the players to achieve the objectives of their 
characters with their desire to roleplay — let them accom¬ 
plish their goals while remaining in character. 

Don’ts 

The following are things which you should never do: 

• Don’t take away the characters’free will: Players are 
invariably protective of what they consider to be the free will 
of their characters. They want real choices, and the freedom 
to choose their characters’ actions. While they need to feel 
that if they do something stupid they will be punished, you 
don't want them to feel as if you will punish them if they come 
up with a clever idea because it wasn’t what you had antici¬ 
pated. 

• Don’t force the characters into a predetermined plot: 
In Vampire the characters need to be self-motivated. You 
cannot simply stick them into your story. You have to weave 
the story around them and let them become involved in it at 
their own pace. Often this means you must create the story as 


you go, making up each scene and doing a great deal of 
impromptu roleplaying. It is difficult, but fulfilling. 

• Don’t let luck rule the plot: Characters should get to 
win on the basis of their own skill and ingenuity, not on 
unrelated dice rolls. Try to give the players every chance to 
have the experience and Traits of their characters make the 
difference. Automatic successes are an excellent way to 
emphasize how important their ratings are. 

• Don’t cater to stereotypes: Though you will use 
stereotypes regularly, you should always try to twist or change 
them. Stereotypes are excellent tools for the Storyteller, 
since they allow you to quickly present a character or a 
situation. Put a stereotype into a story, play it like a stereotype 
for most of the story (outraging the players in the process), 
and then, near the conclusion, suddenly flip everything 
upside down by breaking apart the stereotype. As an extreme 
example, the evil snarling villain can turn out to be a simple- 
minded Nosferatu who is as terrified of the characters as they 
are of him. It can be very effective and pleasantly educa¬ 
tional. 

• Don’t ignore the characters’ Traits: It is important 
to be aware of the characters’ Traits, especially those flaws 
which the players so often “forget” such as Derangements. 
Some Traits that you are unaware of can sometimes become 
relevant to the story and make your planned resolution 
inconsistent or unrealistic. It is vital that you have a good 
grasp of who and what the characters are. 

For instance, you might spring a trap on the characters, 
roll the damage dice, and start describing wounds, only to 
have one of the players say, “My character has Auspex. I get 
to see if he sensed danger.” Even if he misses the roll, it ruins 
the momentum you had established and damages the story 
that you were weaving. Look over the characters before the 
game and make notes of things you should remember. 


Chapter Three: Storytelling 0 69 
































The Book of Nod 

The earliest history of the Kindred is said to be recorded in the legendary Book Of Nod. Named for the 
land east of Eden where Caine first traveled, it chronicles the tumultuous birth of the bloodlines and the 
origins of the Jyhad. 


In the beginning there was only Caine. 

Caine who murdered his brother out of anger. 

Caine who was cast out. 

Caine who was cursed forever with immortality 
Caine who was cursed with the lust for blood. 

It is Caine from whom we all come, 

Our Sire’s Site. 

For the passing of an age he lived in solitude, 

In loneliness and suffering. 

For an eon he remained alone. 

But the passing of memory drowned his sorrow. 

And so he returned to the world of mortals, 

To the world his brother and his brothers children had 
created. 

He returned and was made welcome. 

The people saw his power and worshipped him, 
Making him King of their great City, 

The First City, a place by the name of Enoch. 

Though he became ruler of a mighty nation, he was still 
alone, 

For none were as he. His sorrow grew once again. 
Then he committed another great sin, for he begat 
Progeny, 

Of which there were only three. 

But from them came more Progeny, his grandchildren, 
And then Caine said “An end to this crime. There 
shall be no more.” 

And as Caine’s word was the law, his Brood obeyed 
him. 


L 


The city stood for many ages, 

And become the center of a mighty Empire. 

But then came the Deluge, a great Flood that washed 
over the world. 

The City was destroyed, 

And its people along with it 

Again Caine fell into great sorrow and went into 
solitude, 

Becoming as a dog amidst the wastes, 

And leaving his Progeny to their own ends. 

They came to him and begged him to return, 

To help them rebuild die City. 

But he would not come with them, 

Saying the Hood had been sent as punishment 
For his having returned to the world of life 
And subverting the true law. 

So they returned alone to what mortals were left 
And announced that they were the new rulers. 

Each created a Brood, 

In order to claim the glory of Caine, 

Yet they did not have his wisdom or restraint. 

A great war was waged, the Elders against their Chil¬ 
dren, 

And the Children slew their parents. 

The rebels then built a new city 
And brought to it 13 tribes. 

It was a beautiful city and its people worshipped them 
as gods. 

They created new Progeny of their own, 

The Fourth Generation of Cainites. 


VAMPIRE: The Masquerade 

































But they feared the Jyhad, 

And it was forbidden for those Children 

To create others of their kind. 

This power their Elders kept for themselves. 

When a Childe was created, it was hunted down and 
killed, 

And its Sire with it. 

Though this city was as great as Caine’s, eventually it 
grew old. 

As do all living things, it slowly began to die. 

The gods at first did not see the truth, 

And when they at last looked about them it was too 
late. 

Their city was destroyed and their power extinguished, 

And they were forced to flee, their Progeny along with 
them. 

But many were killed in the flight, for they had grown 
weak. 

With their authority gone, all were free to create their 
own Broods, 

And soon there were many new Kindred, 

Who ruled across the face of the Earth. 


But this could not last. 

Over time, there came to be too many of the Kindred, 
And then there was war once again. 

The Elders were already deep in hiding, 

For they had learned caution. 

But their Children had founded their own cities and 
Broods, 

And it is they who were killed in the great wave of war. 
There was war so total, that there are none of that 
Generation 

To speak of themselves any longer. 

Waves of mortal flesh were sent across continents 
In order to crush and bum the cities of the Kindred. 
Mortals thought they were fighting their own wars, 
But it is for us that they spilt their blood. 

Once this war was over, 

All of the Kindred hid from one another 
And from the humans that surrounded them. 

In hiding we remain today, 

For the Jyhad continues still. 































Book Two: 
The Becoming 





































t t I I 1 I I I I t 1 I I 1 j 

- - -- - - - • - - - ■ - - ■ a. . ^ 


T e aroma, yes. The succulent savor. Its weight and marrow. I 
imagine the cooling flames of the elixir cascading down my 
throat, nourishing me. But I am parched and barren. A husk. 
My need envelops every painful step I take. 

Soon. I will need blood soon. 

The click of heels on cement rouses me. I move into the darkness of the 
alley. The growing cadence is maddening as the vessel draws near. 

There.. . ahhh. A whiff of cheap perfume. The odor of nervous tension. 
The fragrance of pumping blood. I can almost taste the sweet nectar. 

The pale light of a streetlamp brings my prey into focus. Her long hair 
bounces lightly off her shoulder. A face, rosy with exertion: a beauty only 1 
can appreciate. Her anxious eyes scan the doorways, doubtless envisioning 
rapists and muggers. 

She passes by, quickly glancing into the alley. I break away from the 
shadows. An arm’s length away, I can hear her heart throbbing. 

I have become death, the destroyer of souls. 

Gliding toward her, the smell of her lifeblood wafts over me, arousing 
me. She is only inches from my caress. My mind screams with lust. 

NO! ‘ 

I pull back, my arm shaking. I cannot do it. A low moan escapes my lips. 
She whirls, staring into the darkness, eyes wide with terror. But she is blind 
to my presence, and with a low sigh turns away. I taste my own blotxl as it 
seeps between my clenched teeth, and watch her fade into the night. 

I am alone. 



Book TworThe Becoming 0 73 





























































Mythology is a rendition offorms , through which the formless 
form of forms can be known. 

_Joseph Campbell 


E very game has rules. Some have only a few and 
are fairly simple, such as Chutes and Ladders, 
while others have many and are extremely com¬ 
plicated, such as bridge. Vampire has something in common 
with both — it has only a few simple rules, but these few rules 
have a large number of permutations. You need only learn 
the basic rules, but their permutations evoke the flavor of the 
game to reflect the true complexity of real life. This chapter 
provides the basic rules of Vampire; the permutations are 
what Book Three is about. 

Rules are like the myths which shape and describe a 
culture. They define what is important and delineate the 
possibilities of existence. Though these rules may seem 
somewhat strange and exotic, they really aren’t all that 
complicated. Once you understand them, you’ll understand 
how to play this game. Just concentrate on learning these 
basics and everything else will come naturally. 

Time 

Time is the moving image of reality. 

— Plato 

The first thing you need to learn is how time passes in 
Vampire. There are five different ways to describe time, 
going from the smallest unit to the all-encompassing one. 


• Turn — One unit of time within a scene, anywhere 
from three seconds to three minutes in length. A turn is 
enough time to take one action (discussed below). 

• Scene—One compact period of action and roleplaying 
which takes place in a single location. A scene is made up of 
a variable number of turns (as many as it takes to complete it); 
it can also be completed with straight-up roleplaying, which 
requires no use of turns. 

• Chapter — One independent part of a story, almost 
always played in one game session. It is made up of a number 
of scenes connected by periods of downtime. 

Story—A complete tale, with an introduction, buildup 
and climax, which often takes several chapters to complete. 

• Chronicle — A whole series of stories connected 
together by the lives of the characters and perhaps a broadly 
conceived theme and plot. It is simply the ongoing story told 
by you and the players. 


Actions 


Besides acting out their characters’ speeches and con¬ 
versations, players will want their characters to attempt to 
perform actions they have described to the Storyteller. Ac¬ 
tions can be anything from jumping over a gorge to glancing 


Chapter Four; Rules © 75 


































* 1; 0 II towNEm- 1 •'.* 

1 ; v, -afK®"- A'-.?/ 


(v ( 

' * "* ll i 

1 J v \ 

v v \ i /,v' ■ 7 

v W 

l'./// 


behind oneself to see if one is being followed. The player tells 
the Storyteller what her character is doing and details the 
procedure she uses. 

Many actions are automatic, such as when a player tells 
the Storyteller that her character walks across the street 
toward the warehouse, for instance. All the Storyteller needs 
to do is keep track of where the character is and what she is 
doing. However, certain actions require a dice roll to 
determine success or failure. 


Rolling Dice 


And the game never ends when your whole world depends 

On the turn of a friendly card. 

— The Alan Parsons Project, ‘Turn of a Friendly Card” 

There is always chance in life. There’s a chance you’ll 
win the lottery, a chance you’ll be audited, and a chance 
you’ll die in a plane crash. Chance plays a role in Vampire 
as well. However, we use dice to simulate the duplicity of 
Lady Luck. 

The game system in Vampire consists of rolling 10-sided 
dice, which you can buy in any game store. If you are the 
Storyteller, you will want a lot of dice, at least 10, all to 
yourself. As a player, you’ll want dice as well, but sharing dice 
with other players will work. 

Whenever the success of an action is in doubt or the 
Storyteller thinks that there is a chance you might fail, you 
will have to roll dice. This gives your character an opportu¬ 
nity to let both weaknesses and strengths exhibit themselves, 
thereby revealing something of the character’s true nature to 
both you and the other players. 


Ratings 


.A 


A character is described by her Traits — the innate and 
learned abilities and aptitudes she possesses. Traits are 
defined by numbers; each Trait has a rating from 1-5, which 
describes how good the character is in that particular Trait. 
One is lousy and five is superb. This scale of one to five is the 
“star” rating system made famous by movie and restaurant 
critics. 

You should consider the normal human range to be from 
one to three, with two being average. However, exceptional 
people can have Traits of four (exceptional) or five (superb), 
oreven have azero in a Trait (which is extremely rare, but not 
unheard of). 

x Abysmal 

• Poor 

• • Average 

••• Good 

• • • • Exceptional 

• • • • • Superb 


€> VAMPIRE: The Masquerade 
















































For every dot your character has in a particular Trait, you 
get to roll one die. Thus, if you had four dots on Strength, you 
would get to roll four dice. If you had a one Perception, you 
would get to roll only one die. However, you almost never 
simply roll the number of dice you have in an Attribute, 
which defines your intrinsic capabilities. Usually you get to 
add the number of dice you have in an Attribute with the 
number of dice you have in an Ability — things which you 
know and have learned. 

So if the Storyteller wanted the players to roll to see if 
they notice the patrol car creeping up behind them, he would 
have them roll their Perception + Alertness — an Attribute 
+ an Ability. They would take as many dice as they had 
points of Perception, put them in their hands, and then they 
would take as many dice as they had points of Alertness, and 
put those in their hands also. They get to roll as many dice 
as they have total points in their Ability and Attribute. 

These dice are called the Dice Pool, which is a descrip¬ 
tion of the total number of dice you roll in a single turn — 
usually for a single action, though you can divide up your Dice 
Pool in order to be able to perform more than one action. You 
almost always roll the number of dice equal to a Trait’s 
permanent rating (the circles), not its current score (the 
squares). 

There are many actions that don't require or even have 
an appropriate Ability, such as when you want to break down 
a door. In such cases, you would only use an Attribute, 
rolling the number of dice you have listed for that Attribute 
— in this case, Strength. 

There is absolutely no situation where more than two 
Traits can add to a Dice Pool. Only one Trait can be used if 
it has a potential value of 10 (such as Humanity or Will¬ 
power). It is generally impossible for a normal human being 
to have more than 10 dice in a Dice Pool (though vampires 
are a different story). 

Difficulties 

Oftentimes, to win us to our harm, 

The instruments of darkness tell us truths; 

Win us with honest trifles, to betray's 

In deepest Consequence. 

— Shakespeare, Macbeth 

Now you've got to figure out what you need to look for 
when you roll the dice. The Storyteller will give you a 
difficulty number, which is the number that you need to 
obtain in order to succeed in whatever you are attempting. A 
difficulty is always a number between two and 10. You need 
to get that number or higher on at least one of the dice you 
roll in order to succeed. Every time you do so, it’s called a 
success. If the difficulty is a six and you roll a 2, 3,6, 5 and 
9, you have scored two successes. Though you need only one 
success to actually succeed, the more successes you get, the 


- m n -n i! n 

better you do. Getting only one success is considered a 
marginal success, while getting three is considered a com¬ 
plete success, and getting five is a momentous event. 


Difficulties 


Three 

Easy 

Four 

Routine 

Five 

Straightforward 

Six 

Standard 

Seven 

Challenging 

Eight 

Difficult 

Nine 

Extremely Difficult 

Degrees of Success 

One Success 

Marginal 

Two Successes 

Moderate 

Three Successes 

Complete 

Four Successes 

Exceptional 

Five Successes 

Phenomenal 


You can see that if the difficulty is lower, it becomes 
easier to get a success, and if it is higher, it is more difficult. 
The Storyteller will assign high difficulties whenever the 
action you have decided to take is difficult, and will either let 
you do something automatically (because your Attributes 
and Abilities are so high) or give you a low difficulty if it is 
particularly easy. 

Though they are not on the list above, you, as the 
Storyteller, can also assign a difficulty of two or 10. However, 
these should almost never be used. Difficulty two is so 
pathetically easy that you might as well let the player succeed 
without wasting time on a roll. Difficulty 10 is so difficult that 
there is an equal chance to botch (described below) as there 
is to succeed, no matter how many dice the player is rolling. 
A 10 is pretty near impossible. On the rare occasions when 
you do announce a difficulty of 10, be sure you realize how 
impossible you are making the chance of success. If a player 
ever rolls a 10, it is automatically a success, no matter what. 

Unless the Storyteller says otherwise, the difficulty for a 
particular task is always a six. This is the standard, assumed 
difficulty. 

Rule of One 

There is one last thing about rolling dice, and that is the 
“rule of one.” Whenever you roll a one, it cancels out a 
success. It completely takes it away. You remove both the 
“success” die and the “one” die and pay them no more heed. 
If you roll more ones than you do successes, a disaster occurs; 
something called a botch takes place. Don't count the ones 
that canceled out successes, but if even a single one is left after 
all the successes have been canceled, a botch occurs. Getting 
a single one or five ones is about the same; the circumstances 


=»*o-c 

77 


i mr 


Chapter Four: Rules 

































surrounding the botch determine if it is catastrophic or a 
minor mishap. If there aren’t any ones or successes left, 
you’ve simply failed. 

Automatic Success 

You don’t want to be rolling dice all the time as it can get 
in the way of the roleplaying. Vampire employs a very simple 
system for automatic successes so players do not have to make 
rolls for actions characters could perform in their sleep. 

It works like this: if the number of dice you have in your 
Dice Pool is equal to or greater than the difficulty, then you 
succeed automatically. It is considered the equivalent of only 
getting one success, so sometimes a player will want to roll 
anyway in an attempt to gain even more successes. But for 
very simple and often-repeated actions, automatic successes 
can eliminate a lot of wasted time. 

The automatic success rules can be used to completely 
eliminate dice rolling, something you will want to do during 
Live-Action roleplaying. In such situations, automatic suc¬ 
cesses aren’t a matter of choice. Either you are good enough 
to succeed or you are not. It is simple, but so was Cops ‘n’ 
Robbers and we liked it just fine. The story was what was 
important and the rules didn't matter. 

This simple system even has a twist, making it not quite 
so black and white. A Willpower point can be used to earn 
an automatic success. You won’t want to do this often, but on 
certain actions it can be very advantageous to do so. Of 
course, the Willpower only counts for one success if multiple 
successes are required. 

When we play, we usually use a combination of dice 
rolling and automatic successes. During most scenes — 
especially when we're deep into the story — we don’t even 
roll dice, preferring to roleplay through them without inter¬ 
ruptions. However, when we get in the mood for 
playing-a-game, rather then celling-a-scory , we make lots of 
dice rolls and add many complications to the rules. 


Complications 


You may have already realized that it is quite easy to get 
a single success, even when you roll only one or two dice. You 
have a 75% chance for a marginal success when you roll only 
two dice and the difficulty is a six. While that may sound too 
easy, there are various ways to complicate matters, some of 
which are discussed below. For troupes heavily into 
roleplaying, simple rolls and automatic successes are enough. 
Generally, you will use a complication if the players or you 
want a break from the roleplaying, if you want a realistic 
result or if you want to make a game out of the scene. 
Complications can add drama to the story and create a depth 
of passion and focus. 

Specific systems of complications have been developed 
completely in the Drama Chapter. However, below are the 
basic complications that can be employed in Vampire. 


Extended Actions 

In order to fully succeed, you will sometimes need more 
than one success — you will need to accumulate three, or 
seven, or even 20 successes (on rare occasions). When you 
only need to get one success to accomplish an action, it’s 
called a simple action. When you need to get more than one 
success to get a marginal success, it’s called an extended 
action. Extended actions are not uncommon, but simple 
actions are the ones most frequently made. 

In an extended action, you will roll over and over on 
subsequent turns in an attempt to collect enough successes to 
succeed. For instance, your character is climbing a tree and 
the Storyteller announces that when you get a total of seven 
successes, she has climbed to the top. She’ll get there 
eventually, but of course the more times you roll, the more 
chances your character has to botch and injure herself. If she 
is attempting to climb down the tree because it is on fire, the 
amount of time it takes becomes exceedingly important. 

During an extended action, you can keep trying to 
obtain successes for as long as you want, or at least until you 
fail to get even one success. If you botch, your character may 
have to start over from scratch, with no accumulated suc¬ 
cesses. The Storyteller may decide to not let the character try 
again at all. 

Because of the dramatic effect that extended actions 
provide in the story, they are used frequently in the systems 
described in the Drama chapter. However, this type of action 
is more complicated than a simple action and should not 
often be employed in the middle of intense roleplaying. As 
the Storyteller, it will be your decision as to what type of 
action is called for. A little bit of experience will serve you 
well when employing these rules. 

Resisted Actions 

Sometimes you will make an action in opposition to one 
made by another character. Both of you will make rolls, with 
a difficulty often indicated by a Trait of the other player, and 
the person who gets the most successes succeeds. However, 
you are considered to get only as many successes as the 
amount by which you exceed your opponent’s successes. The 
opponent’s successes eliminate your own, just as ones do. 
Therefore, it is very difficult, and rare, to get an outstanding 
success on a resisted action. Even if your opponent cannot 
beat you, she can diminish the effect of your efforts. On 
actions that are both extended and resisted, one of the 
opponents must collect a certain number of success in order 
to completely succeed. Each success above the opponent’s 
total number of successes in a single turn is added to a success 
total. The first to collect the designated number of successes 
wins the contest. 

Teamwork 

Sometimes characters can work together to collect suc¬ 
cesses, most often during an extended action. At the discretion 
of the Storyteller, two or more characters can make rolls 


78 0 VAMPIRE: The Masquerade 

































separately and add together their successes. They may never 
add together their separate Traits into one roll, though. 
Teamwork is effective in some circumstances, such as in 
combat, shadowing prey, collecting information, and repair¬ 
ing devices. In others it can actually be a hindrance, such as 
in many social actions (where it can confuse the subject). 

The chart below may serve to clear up your confusion on 
some of the different types of rolls that can be made. 


'gh. ( 


Action 

Example 

Description 

Simple 

Firearms, 

Alertness 

Task is completed with 
one roll. The Storyteller 
announces the difficulty 
and the players roll their 
dice. Automatic success 
is possible. 

Extended 

Running, 

Research, 

Track 

Task is completed when 
a given number of suc¬ 
cesses are obtained, 
which may require more 
than one roll (thus pro¬ 
viding more chances to 
botch). 

Resisted 

Shadowing 

A contest of skill be¬ 
tween two individuals. 
They compare their 
number of successes and 
the one with the highest 
number succeeds. 

Extended 

Arm 

Two individuals com- 

& Resisted 

Wrestling 

pete as in the resisted 
action, but before one 
can claim success he 
must accumulate a cer¬ 
tain number of successes. 


The Golden Rule 

Remember that in the end there is only one real rule in 
Vampire: there are no rules. You should fashion this game 
into whatever you need it to be — if the rules get in your way, 
then ignore or change them. In the end, the true complexity 
and beauty of the real world cannot be captured by rules; it 
takes storytelling and imagination to do that. Indeed, these 
rules are not so much rules as they are guidelines, and you are 
free to use, abuse, ignore and change them as you wish. 


Try it Out 


Well, that’s it. Those are the rules. This system for dice 
is all you really need to know to play this game. All the other 
rules are just clarifications and exceptions to these ones. As 
long as you understand what's been discussed here, you won’t 


J 


Chapter Four: Rules 






































The Character Sheet 


On this page we have provided you with an example of a complete Vampire character sheet. The character is a newly 
Embraced vampire named Malcolm, and the examples throughout the book will use him as their subject. The following is a quick 
look at the Traits that describe him. 


• Nature and Demeanor: A description of 
the personality of a character. The Nature is his 
true personality, while the Demeanor is the 
facade he presents to the world. 


• Generation:The 
distance between the 
character and Caine 
in terms of sires. 


• Haven: The 
residence of the character, 
particularly during the 
vulnerable daytime hours. 


• Chronicle: 
The title of the series 
of stories and the 
world in which the 
character exists. 


• Clan: The 
particular bloodline of 
vampires to which the 
character belongs. 


• Advantages: 
This category is 
divided into three 
subcategories. Disci¬ 
plines are the mystical 
traits which define the 
powers of a vampire. 
Backgrounds detail the 
character’s social and 
material advantages, 
while Virtues describe 
the moral advantages 
of the character. 


• Humanity: A 
measure of the gulf that 
separates humans from 
vampires; the extent to 
which a vampire has 
resisted the Beast. 


• Combat: 
This is a place to list 
combat statistics for 
various weapons. 


rAMRIRE 


Njune: MrtLC.OU'n 
Player Li%/\ 
■Chronicle: *Hlc4c,o 


Strength_ 

Dexterity _ 
Stamina 


Physical 


Talents 


Dod* _ 

Empathy_ 

Intimidation. 

Leadership_ 

Streetwise_ 

Subterfuge_ 


Tie Masquerade | / 

nature: c.ow£S GcucrafM: 

Detaeanor FAMrtTiC. Haven: ^<-0 *P**Tih&T 

.Clan: G»AM0>ACU Concept: ^Rc. 

=Attributes 

Social-Hental 

Charisma_00000 I 1 H111 «a^^___OOOOQ 

Manipulation_•••00 Intelligcnce^_^5^u4£2£P_ 

Appearance_*0000 Wit*_••••»* 

=—: Abilities — ■ 

Skills \ knowledge 

Animal Kn_oooohw Bureaucracy_00000 

Drive_00000 ^\Compuler_00000 

Etiquette_OOOOO F&hqcr_00000 

Firearms_OOOOO InvestNtfon tV’AtCPna oooOQ 


knowledge 

Bureaucracy_OOOOO 

^Computer_OOOOO 

FUl^ce_OOOOO 

Inyfvn^un tva«C0ncl QOOOO 
law OOOOO 

Ijneuistics > *V, OOOOO 
Medicine ~\n OOOO 

Occu h 3bqpO 

Politics_OOOO^ 

Science_OOOOO 


Advantages^ 


Virtues 

Conscience_ 



• Concept: 
The overall image 
of the character; 
who he was in his 
mortal existence. 


• Attributes 
The innate aptitudes 
and potentials of a 
character. 


• Abilities: 
Those aptitudes 
which a character 
intuitively knows or 
which have been 
learned over the 
years. 

• Health: 

This is a place to 
record wounds and 
the character's 
current health. 


• Willpower: 
A measure of the 
character’s self- 
confidence and 
determination. 





r l 1 yT l 1 


1 1 1 i 1 V JT 

y 

• Blood Pool: A measure of 
how much blood is currently in the 
character’s body, as well as how 
much the character can hold. 


• Experience: This is where you 
record the experience points awarded by 
the Storyteller, which you can later 
spend to improve your character. 


80 © VAMPIRE: The Masquerade 
































































have any difficulty understanding anything else. If you don't 
think you've caught everything, just read it over again and 
you'll find it will make more sense the second time around. 

Now go ahead and make a few rolls, using the example 
character from the other page. Malcolm is attempting to 
jump from the roof of one building to the roof of another, a 
distance of 15 feet. The Storyteller decides the action has a 
difficulty of seven. Take four dice because of Malcolm's 
Dexterity of four, and two dice because of his Athletics rating 
of two. You should now have six dice in your hand — that's 
a lot. You don't have much chance of failing, but go ahead 
and roll; you never know. Look to see how many successes 
you have, making sure to take away a success for every “one" 
you roll. Did you make it, or did you botch? The more 
successes you get, the better you land. Only one success might 
mean that you jumped to the other roof, but are hanging on 
by your fingers (which would require more rolls to see if 
Malcolm managed to keep hanging on and climb up to the 
roof). 

Next, try out an example of an extended and resisted 
action. An example of this is an arm wrestling match. It 
requires an indefinite series of rolls, each using a different 
Trait and requiring different difficulties. You need to accu¬ 
mulate five successes more than your opponent in order to 
finally win. A botch eliminates all of your accumulated 
successes. 

• First roll: Each player rolls Strength; the difficulty is 
the opponent's Dexterity + 3 (speed is important at first). 

• Second and third rolls: Each player rolls Strength; the 
difficulty is the opponent’s Strength +3. 

• Fourth roll (and all subsequent ones): Each player rolls 
Strength; the difficulty is the opponent’s Willpower. 

Examples of Rolls 

Following are some examples of rolls, to provide you 
with some ideas on how to incorporate these rules into your 
roleplaying. Please note that each Attribute can work with 
each Ability, so there are 270 potential types of simple rolls 
that can be made. Admittedly, you will not often roll Stamina 
+ Computer, but it might come up. 

• You threaten the young man by trying to lift him up by 
his collar. Roll Strength + Intimidation (difficulty 8). 

• You want to break down the metal door that was just 
slammed in your face. You need to roll Strength (difficulty 
8). You need to collect six successes in order to break it open 
enough to slip through. 

• Flow flawlessly do you conduct yourself at the formal 
dinner at La Omini (even though you can't actually eat 
anything...)? Roll Dexterity + Etiquette (difficulty 8). 

• You try to slip out of your handcuffs (good luck!). Roll 
Dexterity + Streetwise (difficulty 10). 


































• After being questioned for hours, you roll Stamina + 
Acting to see if you can maintain your story successfully 
(difficulty 8). Five successes will completely convince your 
interrogators. 

• The ritual takes three days to complete. Can you stay 
awake for 72 hours? Roll Stamina + Occult (difficulty 9). 

• How long can you remain motionless in the bushes 
as the two guards chat for hours on end? Roll Stamina + 
Stealth (difficulty 7). Each success is an hour. 

• Yelling and screaming at the taxi driver, you try to get 
him to drive even faster. Roll Charisma + Intimidation 
(difficulty 6). 

• You go out on the street and try to gather some 
information about the new gang moving into the projects. 
Roll Charisma + Streetwise (difficulty 8). The more suc¬ 
cesses you get, the more you know. It takes a whole evening 
to get the information. 

• By showing off your moves, you try to convince your 
opponent to back off. Roll Manipulation + Brawl (difficulty 
6). Three successes will cause him to pause a turn, but you can 
try this action only once... 

• You attempt to convince the clerk of the court that 
you really are the EPA inspector, and that you need to see the 


court records. Roll Manipulation + Bureaucracy (difficulty 

8 ). 

• You want to make a good impression at Modius’ party. 
Roll Appearance + Etiquette (difficulty 4). 

• You attempt to entice the young woman to join you in 
your limo parked outside the club. Roll Appearance + Sub¬ 
terfuge (difficulty 7). 

• An initiate of the Sabbat is creeping up behind you. 
Roll Perception + Alertness to see if you notice his approach 
(difficulty 9). 

• Do you notice the old lady pulling the gun out of her 
purse in time to dodge out of the way? Roll Perception + 
Dodge (difficulty 6). 

• You try to analyte what's wrong with the car engine 
from the strange sounds it is making. Roll Perception + 
Repair (difficulty 6). 

• What language is she speaking? Roll Intelligence + 
Linguistics to figure it out (difficulty 6). 

• Why are the ravens crying so loudly ?Roll Intelligence 
+ Animal Ken (difficulty 9). 

• Suddenly, a man pushes a crate out of the van you 
have been chasing—roll Wits + Drive to see if you can avoid 
hitting it (difficulty 6). 


82 0 VAMPIRE: The Masquerade 














Game Terms 

Words used by the players: 


Ability: 


Action: 


Advantage: 


Attribute: 


Botch: 


Character: 


Dice Pool: 


Difficulty: 


Downtime: 


Extended Action: 


A Trait that describes what a char¬ 
acter knows and has learned, rather 
than what she is. Abilities are 
Traits such as Intimidation, Fire¬ 
arms and Bureaucracy. 

An action is the performance of a 
deed, which is a consciously-willed, 
physical, social or mental activity. 
When a player announces that his 
character is doing something, he is 
taking an action. 

This is a catch-all category which 
describes the mystical Disciplines 
and Backgrounds of a character. 

A Traits that describes what a char¬ 
acter inherently is. Attributes are 
such things as Strength, Charisma 
and Intelligence. 

A disastrous failure, indicated by 
rolling more ones titan successes 
on the 10-sided dice rolled for an 
action. 

Each player creates a character, an 
individual she roleplays over the 
course of the chronicle. Though 
“character” could imply any indi¬ 
vidual, in Vampire it is always 
used to describe the players’ char¬ 
acters. 

This describes the dice you have in 
your hand after adding together 
yourdifferentTraits. It is the maxi¬ 
mum number of dice you can roll 
in one turn, though you can divide 
them among different actions. 
This is a number from 2-10 mea¬ 
suring the difficulty of an action a 
character takes. The player needs 
to roll that number or higher on at 
least one of the dice rolled. 

The time spent between scenes, 
where no roleplaying is done and 
turns are not used. Actions might 
be made, and the Storyteller might 
give some descriptions, but gener¬ 
ally time passes quickly. 

An action that requires a certain 
number of successes for the char¬ 
acter to actually succeed. 


Health: 


Points: 


Refresh: 


Rating: 


Resisted Action: 


Scene: 


Score: 


Simple Action: 


Storyteller: 


System: 


Trait: 


Troupe: 


Willpower: 


This is a measure of the degree to 
which a character is wounded or ^ 
injured. 

The temporary score of a primary 
traitsuch as Willpower, Humanity 
and Health — the squares, not the 
circles. 

When points are regained in a 
Dice Pool, it is said that they are 
being “refreshed". The number of 
points regained is the refresh rate. 

A number describing the perma¬ 
nent value of a Trait, most often a 
number from 1-5, though some¬ 
times a number from 1-10. 

An action that two different char¬ 
acters take against each other. Both 
compare their number of successes 
and the character with the most 
wins. 

A single episode of the story; a 
time and place where actions and 
events take place moment by mo¬ 
ment. A scene is often a dramatic 
high point of the story. 

The temporary value of a Trait or 
combination of Traits used in a 
single roll. 

An action that requires the player 
to get only one success to succeed, 
though more successes indicate a 
better job or result. 

The person who creates and guides 
the story by assuming the roles of 
all characters not taken by the 
players and determining all events 
beyond the control of the players. 

A specific set of complications used 
in a certain situation; rules to help 
guide the rolling of dice to create 
dramatic action. 

A Trait is any Attribute, Ability, 
Advantage or other character in¬ 
dex that can be described as a 
number (in terms of dots). 

The group of players, including 
the Storyteller, who play Vampire 
— usually on a regular basis. 

One of the most important Traits 
is Willpower. It measures the self- 
confidence and internal control 
of a character. However, Will¬ 
power works differently than most 
Traits—it is usually used up, rather 
than rolled. < 



















































try* V . 



Character 


All che world's a stage 
And all men and women merely players 
They have their exits and entrances 
And one man in his time plays many parts. 
— Shakespeare, As You Like It 


B efore you can begin to play Vampire, you must 
create a character. However, unlike make- 
believe, you don’t just make up a character as 
you go along (though the Storyteller is faced with this 
challenge regularly). Instead, you’ve got to create a character 
before you begin to play. There is a certain amount of work 
involved — characters are built, not bom. Building a 
compelling, yet honest, character is a creative struggle even 
for the most experienced of us. 

This chapter describes how to create a unique characters 
beginning with a general concept and translating this con¬ 
cept into numbers that can be used in the game. It provides 
guidelines for the players when they create their characters. 
This process is very simple and the players can easily figure it 
out for themselves. However, the Storyteller should have a 
good grasp of the process in order to answer their questions 
accurately and succinctly. 

These numbers may not seem particularly evocative. It 
is hard to imagine a novelist describing a character by saying 
“Her silver tongue must have meant she had a Charisma of 
four." However, these ratings make it simple to describe the 
strengths and weaknesses of a character. More importantly, 
it means the random factor created by dice can be employed 
in relation to the character's Traits. A strong character has 
more of a chance to break the door down than a weak one. 


Character creation always follows a pattern from the 
general to the specific. First, you develop a general concept 
of who and what your character is — is she more socially or 
mentally developed?— and then get specific by selecting the 
ratings of your Traits — how strong are your Charisma, 
Manipulation and Appearance? Do not use this process as 
a chance to create the “best" possible character; that defeats 
the whole purpose of making up a really interesting indi¬ 
vidual. These numbers are intended to enhance roleplaying, 
not open an avenue to some mythical Hall of Fame. 

Character creation is not unlike cooking: you’ve got to 
gather the ingredients, stir and whip them together, and then 
let the mixture bake for a few hours. You start by deciding 
what kind of character you want. Are you going to be a street- 
hardened punk or a rich and somewhat spoiled ex-debutante ? 
Arc you a college graduate or were you tutored in life 
somewhere in the Appalachian Mountains? The back¬ 
ground and personality of your character are the essential 
ingredients of his persona. From your basic concepts, you can 
then start to work out the details, such as Attributes and 
Advantages. 



























am 


Getting Started 


There are five basic concepts you need to be aware of 
before you begin to create your character: 

• You can create a character of any age from any culture 
or nation; however, she begins the game as a fairly young and 
unsophisticated vampire who has only recently left the 
tutelage of her sire. Your character knows little about 
vampire society or Kindred life, except what she has been told 
by her sire. In any case, she has been a vampire for 50 years 
or less. Your character’s apparent age is the age when she 
“died." 

• This character creation process was designed as much 
to help you define your character as it was to provide you with 
a means to interact with the rules. The process of creating the 
character is meant to help you better focus the concept of 
your character. Remember that a character cannot exist only 
as numbers; it is your rolcplaying which will shape and define 
an alter ego. 

• This character creation system is a purchase system 
with only one die roll involved. By choosing Traits from a 
variety of lists, you decide who your character will be. You 
will get extra points called "freebies” at the end of the process, 
which you can then use to add dots to any Trait, so do not 
agonize over all your choices. 

• A Trait of one is poor and a trait of five is superb, so 
if you only have one dot on something, you are either not very 
good or only a beginner. Traits are based on the human range, 
as a vampire’s special powers are defined by Disciplines and 
the use of Blood Points. 

• It is your responsibility to create a character who fits 
into the group. If you fail to get along with the others and 
disrupt the story because of it, you will have to create a new 


Character Creation Process 

• Step One: Character Concept — 

who are you? 

Choose Concept, Clan, Nature and Demeanor 

• Step Two: Choose Attributes — what are 
your basic capabilities? 

Choose Physical, Social and Mental Traits 

• Step Three: Choose Abilities— what do you 
know? 

Choose Talents, Skills and Knowledges 

• Step Four: Choose Advantages — in what 
ways are you unique? 

Choose Disciplines, Backgrounds and Virtues 

• Step Five: Last Touches — filling in the 
details. 

Choose Willpower, Humanity and Blood Pool 
(and spend “freebie” points) 


LL 


Concepts 

• Criminal — jailbird, mafioso, cat burglar, drug dealer, 
bandit 

• Dilettante — artist, writer, intellectual, gambler, student 

• Drifter — hobo, cowboy, prostitute, hermit, pilgrim 

• Entertainer — comic, musician, movie star, clown 

• Investigator — detective, cop, government agent, In¬ 
quisitor 

• Kid — child, runaway, nerd, gang member, street urchin 

• Outsider—aborigine, Third World resident, homosexual 

• Politician —judge, mayor, senator, public official, gover¬ 
nor 

• Professional — engineer, doctor, mortician, scholar 

• Punk — club crawler, mosher, skinhead, classic ’70s punk 

• Reporter — anchorperson, newspaper, paparazzo, town 
crier 

• Soldier — bodyguard, mercenary, Green Beret, knight 

• Worker — trucker, farmer, wage slave, servant, serf 

character. Life as a vampire is far too dangerous for animosity 
to exist within a brood; in order to survive, you need to work 
together. 

Role of the Storyteller 

As the Storyteller, you must guide the players through 
the character generation process. After your players arrive 
for the game session, you need to introduce them to the basic 
premise of the game and describe the rules system. Your main 
goal should be to make it as easy for the players as possible. If 
they are beginners, keep things as simple as you can; let them 
discover the intricacies of the system on their own. 

Start by passing out the character sheets, and then give 
the players a minute to look them over and ask questions 
about them. You may also photocopy the “Character Cre¬ 
ation" sheet from the back of the book (for personal use only) 
to use as a reference aid throughout the process. If the players 
can refer to this sheet and listen to your explanations at the 
same time, character generation will be much easier to 
understand. Then go through the character creation process 
step by step, filling in all the details of the character Traits. 

It is usually advisable to spend an entire game session 
creating characters. This ensures that the players don’t feel 
rushed and that they take the time to make complete, flesh- 
and-blood characters, not paper-thin stooges. Once you are 
finished with the practical details of the character creation, 
you can spend the rest of the game session conducting a 
prelude for each character. A prelude is a form of abbreviated 
storytelling in which you tell the story of the character’s life 
up to the Embrace. This will be their introduction to the 
chronicle as well as their character, so make it memorable. 
The prelude is described at the end of this chapter. 


86 © VAMPIRE: The Masquerade 



































Clans 

(Complete descriptions can be found on pgs. 126-139) 

• Brujah: Respecting no authority and acknowl¬ 
edging no leaders, the “rabble” consider themselves free. 

• Gangrel: Loners and rustics, the “outlanders" are 
the only Kindred who dare venture outside the cities. 

• Malkavian: Commonly (and correctly) believed 
to be insane, the “kooks” nonetheless possess an uncanny 
vision and wisdom. 

• Nosferatu: Ostracized and misunderstood by oth¬ 
ers, the hideous “sewer rats" live out their sordid existences 
in hiding. 

• Toreador: Known for their hedonistic ways, the 
"degenerates” prefer to think of themselves as artists. 

• Tremere: Wizards descended from an ancient 
legacy, the “warlocks” work together to increase their 
influence and power. 

• Ventrue: Aristocrats of rarefied taste and man¬ 
ner, the “blue bloods" are leaders of cool cunning. 

• Caitiff: Those with no clan — the outcasts and 
the disgraced. 


Step I: Character Concept 

Each person is many persons: a multitude made into one 
person; a corporate body; incorporated, a corporation ...the unity 
of a person is as real, or unreal, as the unity of the corporation. 

— N.O. Brown 

Before you write a single thing down, you need to 
develop a concept for your character. It only needs to be a 
general idea of what your character will be like, something 
unique and interesting that will be enjoyable to play over the 
long term. This involves choosing a clan (the bloodline of 
vampires from which the character descends) as well as the 
personality of the character, which is described by choosing 
her Nature and Demeanor. 

The better you can interrelate these three aspects of your 
character, the more intricate and complete she will be. Often 
the Demeanor of a character will be completely different 
than her actual Nature, and the stereotypical image of a clan 
can be contradicted with great effect by choosing the Nature 
and Demeanor carefully. 

Though short lists arc given in this chapter, complete 
descriptions of the clans and the archetypes can be found in 
Chapter Seven, Traits. 

Concept 

Many Kindred find it difficult to abandon their concept 
of themselves as humans and cling tenaciously to the trap¬ 
pings of their former lives. Thus the first thing you need to 
do is to come up with an overall concept of who the character 




























Personality Archetypes 

(Complete descriptions cm be found on pg. 140) 

• Architects You arc unhappy unless you are creating 
something of lasting value. 

• Bon Vivant: Life is meaningless, so enjoy it as long as 
it lasts. 

• Bravo: You are something of a bully; you like to be 
feared. 

• Caregivers Many need your love and protection, and 
you need them to need you. 

• Child: You never really grew up, and want someone to 
take care of you. 

• Conformist: A follower at heart, you find it easy to 
adapt, adjust and comply. 

• Conniver: There’s always an easier way — which 
usually involves someone else doing your work. 

• Curmudgeon: You are a real sourpuss and cynic of the 
Nth degree. 

• Deviant: You're just not like everyone else. 

• Director: You hate chaos and are forever taking 
charge to set things right. 

• Fanatic: You have a cause and it gives your life mean¬ 
ing. 

• Gallant: You are as flamboyant as you are amoral. 

• Jester: Always the clown, you can’t take life, or death, 
seriously. 

• Judge: You seek justice and reconciliation. 

• Loner: You are forever alone, even in a crowd. 

• Martyr: You need to be needed, and enjoy being 
morally superior. 

• Rebel: No need for a cause; you rebel out of habit and 
passion. 

• Survivor: You struggle to survive, no matter what the 
odds. 

• Traditionalist: You prefer the orthodox and conserva¬ 
tive ways. 

• Visionary: Wisdom is your quest, insight your key. 

was before he was Embraced: what he did, how he lived, and 
what was unique about him. This concept may describe his 
profession, how he saw himself, or what others felt about him. 

Some concepts, such as knight or hermit, indicate that 
the character was Embraced hundreds of years ago, while 
others, such as trucker or movie star, indicate that the 
character is a product of the modem era. Regardless of when 
the character was Embraced, he has spent only 50 years or less 
as a vampire; all years of undead existence beyond that are 
assumed to have been spent in torpor, sleeping the long sleep 
of the Damned. 


See the “Concepts” chan for ideas on the concepts 
available to you. 

The Clan 

The next step, and arguably the most important element 
of character conception, is to choose your character’s clan. 
The clan describes the essential lineage of the character — 
you are always of the same clan as your sire. The seven clans 
from which the players can choose are all members of the 
Camarilla. There are others, but they exist either in their 
own sects or on the outskirts of Kindred society. 

A player does not necessarily need to choose a clan, for 
some younger vampires are of such diluted blood that the 
characteristics of any single clan have not been imprinted 
upon them. These clanless vampires, known as Caitiff, are 
increasingly common among the Kindred, but they are out¬ 
casts — accepted by none, scorned by all. If you wish to play 
such a character, simply list “Caitiff” as the character’s clan. 

Nature and Demeanor (Optional) 

At this point you can, if you wish, choose personality 
archetypes that fit your conception of both the internal 
nature and outward disposition of your character. 

Your Nature is the most dominant aspect of your 
character’s true personality, but not necessarily the only 
archetype that may apply. The archetype you choose for your 
character’sNature describes the character’s most deep-rooted 
feelings and beliefs about herself and the world; it also 
provides the primary way in which she can regain Willpower 
into her Willpower pool. Choosing a Nature helps you 
describe who your character really is, on the inside. 

You should also choose a Demeanor to describe the 
personality your character pretends to possess. This is the role 
she plays to the world, the facade she presents to it. It should 
probably be different from the archetype you have already 
chosen as the character’s Nature, but not necessarily. What¬ 
ever you choose is only the character’s typical pose; people 
can change Demeanor as quickly as they change mood. You 
may change your character’s Demeanor at any time, allowing 
her to adapt to different people and different situations. 
Demeanor lias no practical effect on the rules. 

Some examples of personality archetypes you can choose 
are listed on the next page. 

Step 2: Choosing Attributes 

His ardor smolders • Phosphorus flies 

He radiates with urgency to hypnotize 

Stoke the furnace • Feed his need 

This thirst for fire is all he sees. 

— Siouxsie and the Banshees, “Bum Up” 

Now you get to start assigning numbers. The first step in 
this process is to determine your character’s basic Attributes. 
The Attributes are everything which a character naturally, 


88 0 VAMPIRE: The Masquerade 


































intrinsically is. How strong is she? How quick are her 
reflexes ? How persuasive can she be ? Questions such as these 
are answered by the character’s Attributes. 

First, you must prioritize the three different categories of 
your character's Attributes — Physical, Mental and Social. 
You must decide in which your character is best (primary), in 
which he is average (secondary), and in which category he is 
poor (tertiary). Is your character more physical than social 
— is he smarter than he is brawny? 

• Physical Attributes are everything that has anything 
to do with physical effort. They describe how strong, nimble 
and sturdy your character is, and are the primary Attributes 
of an action-oriented character — the Physical Attributes 
concern only the strengths and weaknesses of the body. Is 
your character powerful, quick-footed or hardy? 

• Social Attributes describe your character's ability to 
relate to (and sometimes use) others. Social Attributes are 
vital in determining first impressions, the character’s ability 
to inspire and motivate people, and the nature of her inter¬ 
actions with others. Is your character charming, well-spoken 
or good-looking? 

• The Mental Attributes represent your character’s 
mental capacity, and include such things as memory, percep¬ 
tion and the ability to leam and think. Is your character 
insightful, astute or clever? 

The concept and clan of your character may suggest to 
you what your priorities should be, but feel free to pick any 
scheme you please. For now, your character conception 
should be very general — it is necessary to paint a broad, 
sweeping outline before filling in the details. 

All characters start with one dot in each Attribute. Your 
priority selection determines how many “dots” you get to 
spend in each category — which category of Attributes you 
get to add seven dots to, which you get to add five extra dots 
to, and which one you only get to add three extra dots to. 
Thus you may choose to add seven dots to your character's 
Physical Attributes, five to her Mental Attributes, and only 
three dots to her Social Attributes. The dots may be divided 
among the Attributes of a category as you see fit — you could 
assign all three of your Social Attribute dots to Charisma, one 
dot to each of the three Social Attributes, or two dots to one 
and one dot to another. 

Later in the character creation process it is possible to 
increase these ratings, so don’t worry too much. Let your 
intuition guide you. 



Attributes 


Primary: 

7 dots 

Secondary: 

5 dots 

Tertiary: 

3 dots 


Note: The space after each Attribute (and Ability) 
is for you to fill in a specialty, a subcategory of the Trait 
in which the character excels. Specialties will be fully 
explained in the Traits chapter, for now, concentrate on 
choosing your ratings. 


- 





( 




































90 © VAMPIRE: The Masquerade 







































Backgrounds 

(Complete descriptions can be found on pg. 171) 

• Allies: Human confederates, usually family or 
friends. 

• Contacts: The number of information sources the 
character possesses. 

• Fame: The character's renown in the mortal world. 

• Generation: How far removed from Caine the 
character is. 

• Herd: The vessels to which the character has free 
and safe access. 

• Influence: The character’s political power within 
mortal society. 

• Mentor: The Cainite patron who advises and 
supports the character. 

• Resources: Wealth, belongings, and monthly 
income. 

• Retainers: Followers, guards and servants. 

• Status: The character’s standing in undead society. 


ter. Three points isn’t a whole lot, but characters should start 
out weak, and Disciplines can be raised (or new ones added) 
during the chronicle. 

Backgrounds 

Every character also gets five points to allocate among 
the various Background Traits. You have only five points to 
allot, and in some chronicles your choice may be restricted to 
certain Backgrounds; the Storyteller will let you know the 
ground rules. Your Background Traits should fit into the 
general scheme of the concept originally chosen. 

Virtues 

Virtues are fundamental to a Vampire character, for 
they describe the moral strengths and weakness that play 
such an essential role in the vampire myth. Each of the three 
Virtues are rolled in different circumstances to determine the 
emotional reactions of the character. Self-Control is rolled 
to see if a character can resist the urge to frenzy. Courage is 
rolled to see if the character can avoid panic at the sight of 
open flames or the sun, and Conscience is rolled to see if 
remorse is felt and Humanity loss thus averted when a 
character commits acts of evil. 

Every character automatically starts with one dot in 
each of the three Virtue Traits, and you may then assign 
seven additional dots as you see fit. The Virtues are a primary 
factor in determining what your character’s Humanity and 
Willpower will be, so you will want to be especially careful. 
Later you may wish to use “freebie" points to boost your 
character’s ratings. 


1 


- 1 





































Step 5: Finishing Touches 


What is the worst of woes that wait on age’ 

What stamps the wrinkle deeper on the brow.' 

To view each loved one blotted from life's page, 

To be alone on earth as I am now. 

— Lord Byron, “Childe Harold's Pilgrimage" 
Often the most important stage of character creation is 
applying the last touches — the little details and flourishes 
that complete the character. In this step you gain your 15 
“freebie" points, enabling you to add more dots to any of the 
Traits on the character sheet. Before you start on the 
“freebies," however, you must determine what the base scores 
are for your character's Willpower, Humanity and Blood 
Pool. 


Humanity 

Your character’s initial Humanity is equal to her Con¬ 
science + Self-Control ratings, ranging from 2 to 9. However, 
it is generally a good idea to purchase a higher Humanity by 
spending “freebie” points. Humanity is critical for determin¬ 
ing how far your character has degenerated into bestiality. A 
character with no Humanity has completely succumbed to 
the Beast and can no longer be used as a player character. 


Blood Pool 


The crowning touch of character generation is deter¬ 
mining how large a Blood Pool the character has at the 
beginning of the game. The Blood Pool indicates how much 
“energy" the character has — blood is the life force of a 
vampire. Simply roll a 10-sided die to determine the number 
of Blood Points possessed. This is the only die roll that will 


Willpower 

Your character’s beginning Willpower is equal to his 
Courage rating, and will thus range from 1 to 5. You should 
probably raise it even higher by using “freebie" points. Will¬ 
power is essential for controll ing the act ions of your character, 
especially in times of stress when your predatory instincts 
emerge. Willpower is also vital for resisting Domination and 
employing the Discipline of Thaumaturgy. 


Point Pool Costs 

Disciplines (any): 

7 points per dot 

Attributes: 

5 points per dot 

Abilities: 

2 points per dot 

Virtues: 

2 points per dot 

Willpower: 

2 points per dot 

Humanity: 

1 point per dot 

Backgrounds: 

1 point per dot 


92 0 VAMPIRE: The Masquerade 



































be made during the character creation process. The irony of 
a vampire's existence should not be confined to the story 
alone. 

Freebie Points 

You now get 15 points to buy Traits anywhere on the 
character sheet. However, it's not as straightforward as it 
might seem. If you want to add a dot to an Attribute, each one 
costs five freebie points, while a Background dot only costs 
one point. Costs are listed in the chart below. You can buy 
any Discipline (even ones that arc not listed as Clan Disci¬ 
plines). 


Spark of Life 


There are other aspects of a character that can be 
detailed in addition to the above. You do not necessarily 
need to write these things down, but you should certainly 
think about them — not only now but throughout the career 
of your character. 

Appearance 

Your character's appearance makes her Traits visible to 
the other characters. You should turn the relevant Traits of 
your character — such as the Social Attributes and concept 
— into aspects of her appearance. High Intelligence can 
become a clear, piercing gaze. A Dilettante concept could 
mean the character wears stylish and expensive clothes. In 
this way, the players can make their characters’ Traits more 
tangible and interesting. It is much more evocative to say, 
"There always seems to be a sneer of disdain on my face," than 
to say, “You can tell I'm very disdainful." 

Contacts 

Make a list of your character’s Major and Minor Con¬ 
tacts (if any) on the back of your character sheet. Remember, 
you gain one Major Contact for each rating point of Con¬ 
tacts. All you need are the names of the Contacts, details on 
where and how they can be reached, and what kind of 
assistance they might be good for. See Chapter Seven for 
more details. 


Retainers 

Detail what kind of Retainers your character possesses, 
if you have selected this Background Trait. Each Retainer is 
a loyal servant who will steadfastly serve your character. Ask 
yourself these questions about your Retainers: How do you 
secure their loyalty? Do you Dominate them? Docs your 
Presence overpower them? Have you befriended them? Do 
they owe you for something? What are their special skills? 
What do they do during the day? Are they ghouls or do you 
feed from them? See Chapter Seven for more details. 

Specialties 

You may wish to give your character specialties from the 
outset. Though most players select specialties for their Traits 
during play, you can pick them immediately. Specialties are 
particular aspects of larger Traits that your character is 
especially good at. Simply fill in the space next to the Trait 
with an appropriate specialty; suggestions arc made with each 
Trait in the Traits chapter. Though primarily used for 
roleplaying, specialties can give the character a bonus to dice 
rolls when performing certain feats or can assist in other ways. 
What effect they have on play is up to the Storyteller. See 
page 125 for more details. 

Equipment 

If you want to spend money right away to buy equip¬ 
ment, you may do so now. You may buy weapons, clothing, 
homes, condos, cars, anything — use an appropriate catalog 
for prices. As the Storyteller, let those who have the time do 
as much work as they want, but don’t punish those who don't 
— just have them make a Resources or Influence roll during 
play to sec if they have access to various possessions. 

Quirks 

By giving your character quirks (interesting personal 
details and anecdotes) you can add a great deal of depth and 
interest to him. Write a few sentences on the back of your 
character sheet about the strange and possibly interesting 
things that define your character. A quirk could be a twisted 
sense of humor, a gentleness to animals or a habit of gmnting 
when answering yes to a question. 































LLLLU I I « o o <> t j 

Example of Character Creation 


Lisa decides to create a Vampire character. Mark, the 
Storyteller, hands her a copy of a character sheet and the 
Character Creation Outline sheet. Using the outline, Lisa 
begins the process that will turn an idea into a full-fledged 
character. 

First, she must come up with a 
character concept. Lisa wants to play 
a male character, since her last char¬ 
acter was female, so she uses that to 
limit her concept choices. A recent 
TV show on undercover narcotics 
agents has intrigued her, so she makes 
her character a narcotics agent. The name Malcolm springs 
into her mind at this point, so the character suddenly has a 
name. 

After looking through the list of vampire clans, Lisa 
decides on the Gangrel clan — she’s always been fascinated 
by wolves! 

Lisa ponders for a moment about Malcolm's Nature and 
Demeanor. These two Traits will help her to nail down 
Malcolm’s personality more easily. The Nature is Malcolm’s 
deep-rooted self, the part of him which affects all his thoughts 
and actions. Lisa decides that he is a Loner, which is the 
reason he got into the narcotics part of police work — he 
liked working undercover, alone. To the world, Malcolm 
pretends to be a Fanatic — i.e. his Demeanor. He figures that 
most people shy away from Fanatics and leave them alone, 
thus facilitating his Nature. His vendetta against the drug 
kingpins of Chicago has given him quite a reputation in the 
police force and is the focus of his fanaticism. Lisa will decide 
in the prelude what exactly caused Malcolm to become so 
fanatical over the drug issue. At this point, Lisa also adds a 
quirk to Malcolm, deciding that he only feeds off of drug 
pushers, addicts or other drug-related people. 

Now Lisa must choose 
Malcolm’s Attributes. She priori¬ 
tizes his categories in the following 
way: 

Mental is Malcolm's primary 
category, since his job requires a 
keen Wits and Perception in order 
to survive in the inner city. 

Physical is Malcolm’s secondary category, since being a 
cop requires a certain degree of physical fitness. 

Social is Malcolm’s tertiary category. This is because he 
is a loner and also because his undercover work makes him 
seem like a lowlife. 


Step 

2 ^ 

Attributes 


Step 


Concept 


Dividing up Malcolm’s seven Mental points, Lisa assigns 
him a 3 Perception (two points + the one point that is free in 
each Attribute), a 3 Intelligence, and a 4 Wits (all of which 
are vital for his job as an undercover cop). 

Three of Malcolm's five Physical points are spent on 
Dexterity, giving him a very high rating of 4, while the two 
remaining points are split between Strength and Stamina, 
leaving him with ratings of 2 in each. 

Finally, of the three Social points, two are spent on 
Manipulation, giving him a 3 (handy in the streets) and the 
remaining point is spent on Charisma, giving him an average 
score of 2. His Appearance remains at the base 1 (he’s not 
very handsome). 


Next, Lisa has to prioritize and 
pick Malcolm’s Abilities. She de¬ 
cides Malcolm relies more on his 
innate Talents to survive on the 
street (this becomes his primary 
Ability category). Skills are also 
important to police officers, so this 
becomes his secondary category, while Knowledges become 
tertiary by default (scholastic subjects don’t amount to much 
in the face of a revolver). 


, Step , 

3 

Abilities 


Lisa has 13 points to spend in Talents. She spends her 
first six points to give Malcolm ratings of 3 in both Streetwise 
and Brawl (important Talents for urban survival). She then 
spends two points each in Alertness (a cop has to watch his 
back), Subterfuge (a must for undercover work), and Athlet¬ 
ics (a police officer has to be in good shape). She assigns the 
last point to Dodge (to avoid those lethal blows). 

For the nine points Lisa has to spend in Skills, she gives 
Malcolm a 3 in Firearms (a must for a cop). Then, she spends 
the next four points to gain ratings of 2 in both Drive and 
Stealth (again, essential for his work), and finally assigns 
ratings of 1 each in Melee and Survival with her last two 
points (she may need to spend some of her freebie points 
here). 


Finally, Lisa puts three of her five Knowledge points into 
Investigation (Malcolm’s main line of work), while the 
remaining two points arc put into Law (he knows just enough 
about the law to get by as a cop) and Linguistics (he speaks 
Spanish, the language of the narcotics world) respectively. 

Now comes the vampiric as- 


/*■ 

Advantages 


Animalism, Fortitude 
Gangrel lineage. Lisa puts all three points into Protean (she 


pect. Lisa has to figure out Malcolm’s 
Advantages, starting with the Disci¬ 
plines — those powers which make a 
vampire different from a human. She 
has only three points to spend on 
Disciplines; she must choose from 
or Protean because of Malcolm's 


Step 

4 


Hi ii ii i « i ii ii ii ii i i I ii 

94 0 


VAMPIRE: The Masquerade 





































wants to get that ability to change into a wolf, but that will 
be somewhere down the line). 

Lisa decides to spend most of Malcolm’s Background 
points on things connected with his past (i.e., before he 
became a vampire). Therefore, she spends two points each 
for Influence and Contacts (with the police department and 
the drug underworld). The remaining point is spent on 
Resources (probably equipment from his previous life, with a 
little dirty money included). 

Lisa must now assign points to Malcolm's Virtues. She 
has seven points to spend (there is already one dot in each 
Virtue). Malcolm is gutsy and unshakable under pressure, so 
Lisa expends three points each in Courage and Self-Control, 
bringing both ratings to 4- The remaining point is spent on 
Conscience, raising it to 2 (Malcolm has a cynical view of 
human nature after spending a good portion of the last 10 
years in the cesspool of human existence — the world of 
drugs). 

Now Lisa has to put the finishing touches on her char¬ 
acter. First she must calculate Malcolm’s starting Willpower, 
Humanity and Blood Pool. Malcolm's Willpower is the same 
as his Courage rating; i.e. 4- She marks off that many dots on 
his character sheet. His Humanity is the sum of his Con¬ 
science and Self-Control; i.e. 4+2 or 6, which she marks on 
her sheet. Malcolm's starting Blood Pool is determined by a 


Step^ 
Last Touches 


die roll, which comes up 6 for Lisa, so she marks off six boxes 
on the character sheet. 

Finally, Lisa gets to spend 15 
“freebie” points on Malcolm. She 
really wants Malcolm to be light¬ 
ning-quick, so she spends seven of 
the points to give Malcolm one point 
of Celerity (a Discipline that 
Malcolm couldn't get from his clan). 
Lisa also wants Malcolm's Melee to be a little higher, so she 
spends two points to raise it to 2. She decides that Malcolm 
should be almost inhumanly cool under fire, so she spends 
two more points to raise his Self-Control to 5 (which adds a 
point of Humanity in the process). Finally, she puts the 
remaining four points into Willpower, since Malcolm is very 
strong-willed. 

While this officially ends the character generation pro¬ 
cess, Lisa decides that she wants to fill in a few more little 
details in order to fully bring Malcolm to life. These details 
may change during the prelude, but they provide both her 
and the Storyteller with a base to expand upon when they 
enact the prelude. 

Malcolm has two Major Contacts — Sgt. Grabowski in 
the Homicide Division and “Softshoe,” his informant on the 
street. Lisa doesn’t want to specialize too much yet, but she 
decides Malcolm’s Investigation Knowledge will be concen¬ 
trated in narcotics, and she writes this in the spot provided on 
the sheet. Malcolm still rents the apartment he had as a 
human, using it as a haven and financing the place with 
money stolen from the drug dealers he kills. 

Malcolm’s prey arc all the derelicts and rejects who sink 
themselves into the drug subculture — and there is a never- 
ending supply of them. 

The only possessions of note for Malcolm are his service 
revolver and badge, both of which he still carries even though 
he has been relieved of his duty due to a poor attendance 
record (those daytime meetings can be lethal). He also has 
an old, rusty cop car which he bought at a police auction. In 
order to picture Malcolm, think of a very unsavory member 
of a motorcycle gang — unkempt, unshaven and dirty. 

Lisa has already established the quirk that Malcolm will 
only feed on people connected with the drug culture. At this 
time, Lisa also decides that Malcolm has developed a drug 
problem of his own from drinking the blood of drug users. 
Malcolm's main motivation is to continue his life as if 
nothing had happened. He’s content to use his newfound 
powers to bring the drug community to justice, but he refuses 
to accept that his life as a human is at an end. Therefore, he 
still hangs on to his badge, gun and car as the last vestiges of 
his former life and occupation. At this point, Lisa doesn't 
have a clear idea about Malcolm’s sire, except that he was one 
vagabond too many in Malcolm’s fanatical desire to rid 
Chicago of drugs. 

Voila! A completed character. Now Mark will take Lisa 
and Malcolm through a prelude to further flesh out some of 
Lisa’s ideas about her character. 


Chapter Five: Character © 95 


































Looking Ahead 


Looked in the mirror and saw what was wrong 
Got to get back to where I belong — where I belong. 
— Joy Division, “Something Must Break” 


In the process of creating a character, you have hopefully 
become ready to roleplay that character as well. An impor¬ 
tant part of the character creation process is the attachment 
that develops between you and your character, enabling you 
to play the role creatively and with purpose. Nurture your 
empathy for your character — if she is at all different from 
you, it might not come naturally. 

The process of character creation does not end with the 
beginning of the first story, for a character never stops 
growing, changing, developing and maturing. As the chronicle 
progresses, create new personality traits and historical de¬ 
tails. Use your experience wisely to develop your abilities. 
Seek to build your character’s Willpower and maintain her 
Humanity, and always, always add more and more flesh to the 
bare bones listed on the character sheet. The true essence of 
the character can only be captured in your roleplaying; it can 
never be listed upon the character sheet. 

Most importantly, you should think of ways in which the 
personality of your character might change because of the 
things that occur in her life and then guide her in that 
direction. Let her determine her own fate. Never force her 
to fall into your earlier conceptions of who and what she 
should be. An angry Deviant who leams to control his rage, 
or an aimless Loner who gains a sense of hope can be a 
beautiful thing — especially if the Storyteller catches on to 
what you are doing and builds a subplot around it. Even 
characters who only get “worse” can develop deeper and 
more fully realized personas. 

If your character ever bores you, it’s probably because 
you have not developed and changed her enough over time. 
Ideally, the character simply grows more real as you play in 
the chronicle, developing as a character and as a person. The 
way in which a character changes reveals as much about that 
character as the way she is described. A character in a short 
story is rarely as real and complete as one in a novel — there 
simply is not enough time for proper development. Make 
your characters as complete, vital and interesting as you 
possibly can throughout the course of the chronicle. 

Novelists often speak of characters in their books com¬ 
ing to life, refusing to be manipulated or directed by the 
writer. This type of character stands out from the page and 
says “Leave me alone, I’m real”; he then does as he will, 
regardless of the author’s original intent. We can learn much 
from this experience—it is the epitome of what makes a great 
character. 



o ii i r 

VAMPIRE: The Masquerade 





































I remember, before, my mother dragged me out to the shops 
with her. She of ten did. I'd been a good boy, for a change, and she'd 
take me to the sweet shop for a couple of candied sticks, or some 
such. My reward, as it were. We were only there a moment when 
my mother spied a friend of hers in the shop too. She went over to 
talk, and left me standing there. It took me a moment, but I 
realized that I was alone. Me and the metal scoops of candy piled 
high. A lifetime of dreams, and no one to see me. No one to stop 
me. 

When my mother returned, she found me standing there, 
shaking, my face red and hands clenched until they nearly bled. 
Oh, how I 'd wanted to just grab and take and stuff my pockets until 
they overflowed and then fill myself up, stuffing the sweets inside 
me until I couldn't fit anymore. Only then would I stop. 

But I was afraid. Frightened of being discovered, terrified of 
never being allowed into the sweet shop again, of not being able to 
stuff enough inside me to be happy forever. I was afraid. 

I am not afraid anymore. 

— Johann 


It is our past that defines us most clearly, for it is the best 
indication of what we might become. The purpose of the 
prelude is to give each character a past so the future might be 
told. It is, in fact, a form of one-on-one storytelling in which 
the story of a character's life (and death) is told. 

The prelude is a way to create character biographies 
before the chronicle actually begins, allowing the characters 
to live out their lives prior to the moment when the first story 
starts. It is quite similar to normal play, except that many 
years are compressed into a series of rapid-fire decisions. 

The prelude provides a frame of reference for everything 
else that happens in the chronicle. Without it, a character 
will not make as much sense or be as complete. It’s a way of 
doing some quick and dirty roleplaying to get a character 
ready for play, much like the page or so of character descrip¬ 
tion a novelist gives major characters when they enter the 
story. It is essential for the story, but it doesn't need to go on 
for 100 pages. 

A vital part of a character’s background is the creation 
of a personal history, which is one of the things the prelude 
does best. It helps you create a sense of where your character 
grew up and what her life was like. The personal biography 
a player creates in the prelude will be relevant throughout the 
chronicle, and you may well refer to it frequently as a 
storytelling technique. 

The Right Technique 

Each player undergoes the prelude alone. It is one-on- 
one unless two or more characters were friends and spent a lot 
of time together before the Embrace. While you, as the 
Storyteller, spend time with each player separately, the rest 


































of them can socialize and start to get excited about what lies 
ahead. Remember, it’s anticipation which can make a story 
blossom. 

You will need to direct the player much more than you 
usually will. Give him lots of decisions to make, but rush 
everything and don’t give him much time to think. You need 
to play through things quickly, unless you are willing and able 
to spend more time (which can enable the creation of very 
detailed characters). Characters almost never engage in 
combat during the prelude. If they do, you simply describe 
the results of any fights (you can’t have the characters die 
before the game even begins!) 

During the time you set aside for the prelude, be sure to 
let the player have a chance to interact with both the setting 
and the rules. You need to give him a chance to explore both. 
If the player wants to change a few Traits during the prelude, 
you should let him, as long as it is done for a rational reason 
and not as an attempt to create a super-character. 

There are many ways to progress through a character’s 
life; any way that helps mold a complete character is fine. 
During the course of the prelude, you will want to explain the 
full background of the character, including the origin of her 
Resources and the identity of her Contacts. The player 
should have a firm idea of the details of her Background 
Traits. 

You should play through one or more typical scenes from 
the character’s life to give the player a sense of how the 
character lived as a mortal. You can get the player into her 
vampire role by showing her the bland tedium of the character’s 
mortal existence. This scene can be something so mundane 
and common that it will radically juxtapose with the horror 
of becoming a vampire (which occurs next). Remember, it 
is the mundane that gives scope to the magnificent. 

It can proceed something like this: “You’re coming 
home from work on a Friday and the traffic is especially foul. 
You've had a bad day at the agency, and find it hard to hold 
back your temper. You climb up the three flights of stairs to 
your apartment and try to unlock the door, but your key won’t 
work. What do you do?” 

As you describe things, let the player interrupt with her 
own ideas and details concerning what is going on. You are 
telling a story together, so treat the player more like a partner. 
You can also include details that provoke the player into 
feeling the emotions of her character — “Your father is in a 
coma in the hospital.” Of course, once the character becomes 
a vampire, she can’t freely visit anymore. The father may 
awaken or may die, but the character may never see him 
again. The player needs to feel a profound and overwhelming 
sense of loss in order for the true horror of the game to come 


98 0 VAMPIRE: The Masquerade 







































Questions and Answers 

Described below are some questions which should be 
answered by the end of the prelude. If there is no time for a 
full prelude, you should at least make an effort to answer these 
questions. It often helps to write out the answers, even if you 
have undergone the full prelude. 

W ith each question we list what sorts of things the player 
should ask himself, as well as some advice to the Storyteller 
on how to run the prelude in relationship to the question. 

• How old are you? 

How old were you when you "died"? What year were you 
bom! How many years has it been since the Embrace? How old 
do you look? 

If the current game year (the year when you intend to 
begin the chronicle) is 1993, and the character is about 37 
years old (19 years as a human, 18 years as a vampire), then 
you could start the prelude out in 1965, when the character 
was only nine years old. Since one of the objects of the 
prelude is to give the player as much freedom as possible when 
determining the course of her character’s life, starting so 
young is not completely out of line. Sometimes it is easier to 
assign dates and such after the prelude is over. 

• What was unique about your 
childhood? 

How did you spend your early years —the period when your 
basic motivations and attitudes were forged! Where did you go to 
school! Who were your parents? Didyou travel very much? What 
was high school like? Did you go to college? Did you run away from 
home? What sports, if any, did you play? 

Y ou should try to give each player a sense of his character’s 
childhood, and provide something special to remember it by. 
Concentrate especially on things that will affect the character’s 
future life — perhaps you can even bury some story leads as 
you progress through his childhood. 

You might include subtle clues in the prelude concern¬ 
ing how the character was being watched over by his sire, 
even in childhood. Sometimes a vampire is especially taken 
by a child and spends years watching him grow up, Embracing 
him only when he is fully grown. 

• What kind of person were you? 

Were you a good person ? Were you popular? Did you have 
a family or live alone? 

Once the character is fully grown, you’ve got to establish 
the setting just as you would do at the beginning of a scene. 
Briefly describe to the player what the character’s adult life 
was like, perhaps letting her invent a lot of the basic details. 
You need to give her the chance to roleplay the character as 
a mortal, interacting with other humans. 


• When did you first meet a 
vampire? 

When did you first realize that you were being stalked? What 
made you first believe in vampires? Were you afraid? Incredulous? 
Angry? 

There are countless different circumstances surrounding 
the Embrace; however, much like sharks, vampires usually 
spend a considerable amount of time stalking their prey prior 
to the actual attack. Evoke and describe the sensation of 
being watched; slowly build up the tension and suspense. The 
player knows what’s coming, especially if she’s read the title 
of the game, but sometimes that can make the tension all the 
more palpable. A character may notice a person constantly 
watching her; whenever she turns around, however, the 
person is gone. Though the character may try to lose her 
stalker, somehow she never can, 

• How did the Embrace change you? 

Was the Embrace painful? Did you get a kinky pleasure out 
of it? Did the hunger tear at you? Did it frighten you? Did it feel 
right? 

You should play through the transformation in detail, 
allowing the player to actually feel the trauma of being 
changed. If the player is attacked by the vampire, then make 
it horrific and let the player make rolls to push the vampire 
away. However, such attempts are all ineffective. Depending 
on the type of chronicle you want to run, you can add in 
details that make the personal horror overwhelming. The 
sire might throw the character’s spouse into a cell with her, 
as the new vampire begins to grow hungry. Try to lure the 
character into committing that first horrible act, but encour¬ 
age temperance as well. You might want to roleplay this part 
out in detail, making the feeding rolls as described in the 
Drama Chapter. 

• Who was your sire? 

Was your sire brutal, arrogant, or wise? What did you know 
about her? Did you get along with your sire? Did you know your 
sire at all? 

Many neonates know nothing about vampire society, for 
they have been kept in the dark by their sire. Most sires 
consider themselves the princes of their progeny, ruling over 
them and treating them like slaves. They are reluctant to 
introduce them to other Kindred. 

• How did your sire treat you? 

How long did you stay with your sire? What was your sire 
like? Did she aid or hinder you? How long was your “apprentice¬ 
ship?" Where did you live? Where did you go? Why did you sire 
Embrace you? 

The sire is the most important person in a neonate’s first 
few years. The treatment the character receives from his sire 
will make a big difference in the character’s personality. It 
will be the primary indication of how he will interact with 

































other Kindred. Most sires keep their progeny with them for 
many years, training and tutoring them, and keeping them as 
companions. Many such fledglings are told nothing of vam¬ 
pire society at large, and are even prevented from interacting 
with it. Sires do this because they are intensely jealous and 
wish to forge the personality of their childe without interfer¬ 
ence. 

There are many reasons why a vampire will create 
progeny. You must determine why the sire of the character 
created him. Maybe she will use the progeny to regain her 
humanity, or perhaps she simply wants company. Does want 
a slave, or is her blood so thinned with age that she needs 
progeny as vessels? 

• Were you presented to the 
prince? 

Did the prince welcome you to the city with open arms, or was 
he reluctant to accept you! Did he need to be bribed or threatened! 
Are you on the run from the prince! Is he your enemy! 

Eventually, the character is released into the world and 
given her freedom. The sire relinquishes all hold, and in so 
doing, no longer has responsibility for the neonate. This 
moment is marked by the age-old tradition of presenting the 
neonate to the prince. 

The pnnee may accept the character reluctantly, an¬ 
grily, with good grace, or (on rare occasions) with great 
kindness. Normally this depends on the sire’s relationship 
with the prince. The most important consideration, how¬ 
ever, is whether the sire asked for permission before or after 
the Embrace. A surprising number of vampires do not bother 
to gain permission from the prince first, but insist upon it later 
(most likely because they probably wouldn’t be given permis¬ 
sion before). 

The character might be released because she has become 
too dangerous to keep. In some cases, a neonate only conclu¬ 
sively learns that there are others of her kind after she has 
been released. 

In terms of roleplaying, make sure the sire explains the 
Six Traditions handed down from Caine. It starts out with 
the neonate being told of her clan and generation: “You are 
of the Eleventh Generation from Caine, of the Clan Tremere, 
and so his words are not so distant from you, for they were 
spoken by him to his Fledgling and so unto you.” These 
Traditions are described in theChapterTwo: Setting on page 

37. 

• How did you meet the others in 
your brood? 

Were you brought together through chance or design! Do you 
get along with the others! Are you united m purpose and attitude! 
How long have you been together in the city! 

Before the chronicle begins, the characters need to trust 
each other, otherwise your stories will self-destruct. If the 
Storyteller is the glue holding the coterie together, then their 


0 VAMPIRE: The Masquerade 




























t • 


relationship won’t last very long. Let the characters forge 
their own ties and give them the responsibility for maintain¬ 
ing them. 

Each character needs to meet the others at some point, 
and it is best if this is some sort of unique meeting. It can be 
done two at a time, so that each character has a unique 
relationship with one or two other characters, or you can 
have everyone meet all at once and get it over with. It is not 
suggested that you wait until the game begins before you 
introduce the characters. It is generally best to solidify a 
relationship between them before the action gets hot and 
heavy. 

• Where is your haven? 

Where does your character live? Where does she hide during 
the day? 

Some Kindred have an actual home in which they 
reside, while others have a particular part of the sewers where 
they like to lie. Others, particularly the more paranoid 
Kindred, have many secret places where they might spend 
the day. 

• What are your habitual feeding 
grounds? 

Whom do you feed upon , and where ? Do you have a domain 
you seek to protect? Is your favorite hunting ground used by 


others? Do you compete with others for the same vessels? Do you 
ever kill when you feed? 

It is likely that a character maintains regular sources of 
food near his haven. As long as a character is near his haven, 
he can feed without requiring a roll or any roleplaying. But 
you need to detail this source of blood — does he feed from 
the inmates of an asylum? Go club-hopping every night? Or 
do children come over to his house each evening for piano 
lessons? 

• What motivates you? 

Do you have any enemies, anyone you wish to seek ven¬ 
geance against? Do you have any desire to return to your old life? 
What is it that you search for most avidly? 

Your characters’ primary motivations are central to 
understanding who and what they are. After they cease being 
human, vampires’ priorities and standards often change, 
usually drastically. Things that were once important no 
longer are, and new values become central in their lives. If 
you want to have a real and complete character, you must first 
have an understanding of what drives her and keeps her from 
depression and total aimlessness (which can be interesting to 
play as well — simply decide that your character has no 
motivations at all). Your Nature and Demeanor can be of 
great assistance in determining your motivations. 








































T his chapter describes how to establish and de¬ 
velop a Vampire chronicle. It serves the same 
function for the Storyteller and the chronicle 
that the previous chapter docs for the player and the charac¬ 
ter. It not only describes how to design a chronicle, but 
includes advice on how to keep the level of player interest 
high throughout its course. The process of designing stories 
as well as chronicles is explained in detail, and examples are 
provided. This chapter provides you with the tools to create 
a compelling and complete Vampire chronicle, not only at 
its genesis, but at all stages of its development. 

Creating a chronicle is not unlike creating a character, 
and involves at least as much work and creativity. A 
chronicle is not always easy to create, simply because of the 
scope of the story which it describes. Indeed, a chronicle is 
never truly designed, but evolves through a series of stories. 
Stories are the blood and sinew of a chronicle, and are almost 
as important, in their own way, as the characters. 

However, this chapter is not intended to be an all- 
inclusive description of the stories you can tell in Vampire. 
That would be impossible in this limited space (it would take 
an encyclopedia). We will, however, try to present some of 
the best story archetypes, along with some of the most 
interesting chronicle archetypes as well. 

Regardless of their undeniable import, a chronicle is 
more than the sum of its constituent stories — it is in fact a 
story itself. The chronicle is the saga told by the characters’ 


No one commands me. No man. No god. No Elder. No 
Prince. What is a claim of age for ones who are immortal? What 
is a claim of power for ones who defy death ? Call your damnable 
hunt. We shall see whom I drag screaming to Hell with me. 

— Gunter Dorn, Das Ungeheuer Darin 


lives. It has a beginning and an ending. It has obstacles for 
the characters to overcome and it has a consistent style and 
motif. More than likely, the same antagonists will appear 
again and again to terrorize the characters. A chronicle is not 
simply a string of stories slapped together — not unless you 
are willing to settle for something mediocre. A chronicle 
must be created with as much patience, creativity and grace 
as a model plane or an oil painting. It must be treated as the 
central character in the game. 

Creating a 
Chronicle 

Her lips were red, her looks were free 
Her locks were as yellow as gold, 

Her skin was white as leprosy. 

The Nightmare Life-in-Death was she, 

Who thicks man’s blood with cold. 

—Samuel T ay lor Coleridge, The Rime of the Ancient 
Mariner 


You need to begin designing the chronicle long before 
the players create their characters. Hopefully, you will have 
already spent several hours of work, at least, in determining 
the substance and texture of the chronicle you want to run. 


ung / 

zJ 


Chapter Six : Chronicle 0 103 



































Everything else depends on what you come up with initially. 
The sharper your ideas and overall concept, the better 
everything else will work later on. It can be time-consuming 
to create a Vampire chronicle, but the work you do at the 
beginning will pay off in spades later on. 

While the players create their characters, you shouldn't 
sit around idly. Before the chronicle can begin, you need an 
idea of what it will be like — its setting, antagonists and 
central issues. You must create a setting that will excite the 
players, antagonists that will provoke them, and issues that 
will involve them. Creating the chronicle is like creating the 
most important character of the game. 

You have a number of decisions to make as you create the 
chronicle. First, you need to decide the setting — what city 
is it set in and what is that city like? Second, you need to 
determine what connects the characters and binds them 
together, and what you can do to help describe their motiva¬ 
tions. Third, the primary antagonists of the players need to 
be delineated — what are their motivations and powers? 
Fourth, a plan of the progression of the chronicle should be 
constructed, to detail where you want to take it and where 
you must start. Finally, you need to determine the motif of 
the chronicle, which describes the recurring images, subjects, 
moods and special rules you will include in it. Making these 
decisions wisely will ensure that your chronicle runs smoothly. 

Elements of a Chronicle 

• Motif 

• Setting 

• Characters 

• Antagonists 

• Scheme 

Motif 

A motif is a recurring subject, theme or idea that comes 
up again and again in an artistic work, and in some ephemeral 
way unites the work. For your chronicle to be truly complete, 
it needs a motif. 

You need to decide what will be the dominant idea or 
feature of the chronicle. What are you trying to say? What 
issues galvanize and connect every story ? What is the theme 
of the chronicle and how will it be presented? 

The motif even incorporates such things as your style as 
a Storyteller. Will you be abrasive, understated, gory or 
combative? What effect do you hope to gain by using that 
style? You can use your style to direct the players' attention 
to the things you want them to be aware of, or the motif itself. 

Will there be special rules in the chronicle that cause it 
to work differently than most Vampire chronicles? Will you 
make the frenzy rolls uncommon, or perhaps make Humanity 
even more precious? Will you call for a lot of dice rolls, or 
none at all? 

Many chronicle concepts restrict which Backgrounds 
the players may choose, as well as how high a rating the 


0 VAMPIRE: The Masquerade 


































players can take on them in general. Before the players get 
to Step 5 in the character creation process, you must have a 
firm idea of what restrictions you will place, and that means 
you have to do some planning. W ill the cost of Generation 
(a Background Trait) be double normal, or will you restrict 
the score to only 3? 

You can invent a unique feature that the characters can 
encounter or interact with repeatedly. A distinctive and 
recurring character, theme, mood, place or object can bond 
the players to what is going on. This can be anything from 
a club which they frequent to a bum they keep meeting whose 
drunken ramblings contain an uncanny wisdom. Perhaps 
you keep mentioning a tarnished statue of Achilles on the 
street, never directly explaining its significance. These 
recurring features can do a great deal to add a mood and a 
sense of significance to your chronicle. Invent something 
that will add depth, and then weave it into your stories. 


Setting 


In Vampire, it is not necessary to create an entire world 
from scratch, for the world is so much like our own. However, 
the counterpart to it is creating the city. The city is the locus 
of the Vampire game. It is where vampires live and feed, and 
it is where they are often trapped. 

You need to present yourcity in a realistic and consistent 
manner if you want the players to believe in it. The setting 
must live and breathe for the players; until it does the 
characters cannot themselves fully exist. The setting is 
where the plot of the story takes place — the more interesting 
and exotic it seems the more everything will come to life. 
With each story you run, define the city a bit better, but don’t 
give away everything at once. As the chronicle progresses, 
add details of geography, custom, plot, and so on. Build it bit 
by bit and at whatever pace you choose. 

The mortal structure of the city is fairly easy to deter¬ 
mine. Though the setting is Gothic-Punk, much of it is 
identical to our world. Get a travel book for that city, or write 
the Chamber of Commerce. If you live in the city where you 
are setting the chronicle, details shouldn’t be a problem at all. 
You will want to change a few details here and there to suit 
the mood of the game, but the basic structure is in place. 

Creating the vampiric aspect of the city is a little more 
difficult. You need to decide how the power structure 
functions and who controls it. The prince is likely to be the 
most important individual in a city, but that is not always the 
case. The prince might be the actual niler, or she could 
simply be a figurehead, with some elder manipulating things 
from the shadows. 

The intrigues among the Kindred of a city are often quite 
ferocious, so decide how they work in your city. How many 
different “sides" are there? Why are they opposed to one 
another? Members of various clans could be antagonistic, or 
the classic elder versus anarch conflict could be the major 


source of division. Are there Methuselahs behind the scenes 
manipulating the various sides, or are most of the Kindred 
slaves only to their own passions? 

You need to decide what groups oppose the group or 
individual who controls the city, and which groups support 
the status quo. How do the Kindred of the city interact with 
the mortal rulers? Are the police becoming suspicious, or do 
ruling Kindred control the mortal authorities? 

Some cities, especially the smaller ones, might have very 
few or no conflicts between the Kindred who live there. But 
how interesting would that be? Don't make your city one of 
those peaceful, and boring, ones. Fill it with enough intrigue 
and iniquity to power a hundred stories, or at least plan future 
strife to devastate the peaceful city you create now. 

Last, but not least, you should make sure the design of the 
city meshes well with the motif of the overall chronicle. If the 
chronicle is going to be about corruption, then the city ought 
to be corrupt as well, both the mortal and Kindred elements 
of it. 


Characters 


The characters are the basis of the chronicle, as it is for 
their sake that the chronicle is told in the first place. The 
characters are always the focus of events, and the decisions of 
the players determine the course of the plot. A great chronicle 
requires equally great characters. 

One thing you must determine as the chronicle begins is 
why the characters are together—why they form a brood. Of 
course, the players will have a lot to say about this, perhaps 
even the primary say, but it is up to you to make sure the 
characters fit together. Does each character in the group 
have a reason for being a part of the group? Ask yourself what 
kind of relationship the characters have with one another. 
Why are they friends? Why do they work together? In short, 
will the characters make sense in terms of the chronicle? 

Ask the players to decide how theircharacters will relate 
to one another and what roles each will play in the group. 
Make sure that at least one of the players with leadership 
skills plays a character who is a leader. If you have any players 
who tend to be disruptive, gently direct them toward charac¬ 
ters who strongly share the same aims as the brood. If your 
players are incorrigible anarchists, select a chronicle concept 
that gives them strong and forceful allies, provides them with 
significant responsibilities, or which allows them to be ex¬ 
actly what they want to be: anarchs rebelling against the 
establishment. 

You must be sure that character conflicts won’t become 
the focus of the chronicle (unless that’s what you are looking 
for). All too often, players will create their characters in 
isolation from one another and worry about meshing into a 
group once the game starts. Often what results is a group of 
anarchists, with no system for working together or getting 
anything done. A lot of time is wasted with endless, meander¬ 
ing debates on what to do next. 
































































described by the Storyteller and not roleplayed through. You 
should think of stories as the exciting but infrequent events 
that punctuate months or even years of quieter pursuits. 

Naming Vour Creation 

At some point before the chronicle begins, you will need 
to name it. A name can be, strangely enough, quite impor¬ 
tant, for it sets the tone from which everything else follows. 
Every character is described by the chronicle in which she 
belongs, so the players are likely to be pestering you for a 
name. The name should be suggestive of the theme and 
potential of the chronicle without giving too much away. A 
chronicle name can he very simple: for example, the name of 
the city in which it is set, or the prince who controls it. 

Chronicle Archetypes 

It is precisely the soul that is the traveler ; it is of the soul and 
of the soul alone that we can say with supreme truth that ‘being 
necessarily means 'being on the way.' 

— Gabriel Marcel 

Below are a number of descriptions of different types of 
chronicles you could create. They are described according to 
the type of group they require. There are three different 
categories of chronicle concepts: Classic, Roleplaying and 
Bizarre. You should have some idea of the mood and gaming 
style of your players, so choose accordingly. 

The Classics 

These are the classic examples of a Vampire chronicle 
— the best examples of what it should all be about. They 
should be very familiar to you, because they are the ideas 
which are most often depicted in the movies and in books. 

• Gang: The characters are a group of anarchs (or even 
elder-sponsored “counterterrorists") in a major city, who 
have formed a brood molded in the pattern of a street gang. 
They live death as exuberantly as they can, eking as much 
pleasure and enjoyment out of their existences as possible. 
Proud and often haughty, they hold in scorn all those who are 
not members of their brood. To the mortals, they may seem 
little more than a gang of hoodlums, but their image belies 
their power. 

The characters must constantly protect their “turf” 
(hunting ground) from other gangs, as well as from Kindred 
who might encroach upon it. Elders are loath to acknowl¬ 
edge that it is the characters’ domain, for it was not awarded 
to them by the prince. But since the “turf” is all they have, 
the characters protect it fiercely. 

Like all anarchs, they scorn the power of the prince and 
pretend that he has no power — but they understand the 
Traditions and fear the power of the Justicars. Much like 
mortal gangs, they rebel against the establishment — only in 
their case, the establishment is less restricted by the law. 



if . ... 

.7-; v .. . V 

, «.••» / 7 >■ _ •; 5'.. V- fl'l Vfc • I 


tv* 

y i 










































A Typically, such Kindred are affiliated with mortal gangs, 

> and may control them (treat mortal gangs as either Allies or 
Herd). In fact, each member of the vampire gang may be the 
leader of a mortal gang, which each character should create 
and develop. 

• Wanderers: The characters travel around the country 
on motorcycles (or perhaps in an RV or stolen car), finding 
a safe place to sleep every night. They are focused on survival, 
and are bound to run into the Lupines at one point or 
another. There is much that they will discover on their 
journey. 

You and the players will need to decide why they are 
wanderers. Are they hunted, continuing their headlong 
flight out of terror and a strong sense of self-preservation ? Or 
do they simply have nowhere to go? The characters must rely 
upon one another to survive in a hostile and constantly 
changing world. 

Each story could begin with the characters arriving in a 
new city, attempting to adjust and make themselves at home, 
and each time their efforts result only in their flight once 
again. Keep 'em scared, and keep 'em running — and don’t 
let them stop. 

Whatever type of wanderers the characters are, the focus 
needs to be on survival. Accentuate the side effects of life as 
a fugitive. Because the characters are wanderers, they will 
not have Contacts or Influence. The setting, of course, will 


vary wildly from story to story, so you must always be on your 
toes and will need to do more preparation work than with 
most chronicles. 

• Rock Band: Another possibility is to let the charac¬ 
ters form the nucleus of a rock band (or even a classical, folk, 
jazz or country ensemble). They are trying to make it as 
musicians. Perhaps they were a band in their mortal exist¬ 
ence and were all taken by the same sire, or perhaps they have 
decided to do this after being vampires for some time. 
Whatever the case, they are bound to get in considerable 
trouble as the Camarilla and most of the elders vigorously 
suppress any activities that threaten the Masquerade. 

Each character will need a rating in Music (unless that 
character is the manager), and each will have to choose a 
specific instrument. Who will be the lead vocalist? Who is 
steady enough to be the drummer? Mellow enough to be the 
bassist? Creative enough to break those stereotypes? What 
kind of music do they play — jazz, pop, punk, metal, rap? 
They start in the local clubs of their native city, but success 
may bring a concert tour. How do they handle this? 

• Refugees: The characters are castoffs from another 
city; perhaps they are even from a clan which does not belong 
to the Camarilla. They have run away from their prince, sire 
or clan. The city in which the chronicle is based is the place 
where they have fled for refuge. They must spend much of 
their energy and time hiding both from mortals and other 
Kindred. 



0 VAMPIRE: The Masquerade 































The chronicle begins as the characters arrive in town, 
without a clue as to the power structure. Don’t give the 
characters any Background points, to reflect this and to drive 
the point home. Because they arc new to the city, detail more 
of the mundane aspects than normal, including the things 
only a newcomer might notice. 

They get a rats-eye view of the underside of a city. They 
will probably not reveal themselves to the prince at first, so 
later they may get in big trouble for violating the First 
Tradition. Make the players truly afraid, and try to convince 
them that the other Kindred will kill them if they are found, 
even if it is not true. 

• Historical: You can play Vampire in many other 
periods besides the present day. Any era, from the ancient 
world of the Nile to the Victorian age, can be fascinating 
when you add the vampire myth. Choose any time period 
and set your chronicle there. Just make sure you know a little 
history before you start, or at least more than your players. 

Imagine roleplaying Vampire in the age from which 
many of the legends stem — the Middle Ages of historical 
Europe. The vampire is most frequently a member of the 
nobility, the ruling class of the time. It is a time of decadence 
and romance, of cruelty and honor. Entire regions may be 
under the control of the undead. However, the populace 
grows gradually restless, and when the envoys from Rome 
learn what is going on, the vampires may face a Crusade. 
Though the characters may not be truly evil vampires, they 
can be trapped in the same situation as the evil ones. 

The chronicle could go something like this: Embraced 
against their will, the characters find themselves vassals to 
those whom they despise. Ultimately, they must choose 
between survival and morality — or chart a careful course 
between the two poles. 

Roleplaying 

These are chronicles that emphasize roleplaying, and 
thus have little combat or dice rolling. These sort of chronicles 
are intended for advanced roleplayers, though they are chal¬ 
lenging for any group. 

• Primogen: The characters are the primary Kindred of 
a medium-sized city (less than one million) — about the size 
of Charleston, North Carolina or Madison, Wisconsin. In 
some sense, they “own” it; they certainly rule it. Because of 
the size of the city, the characters might even be the only 
vampires living there. 

When danger or peril arrives, it is up to them to protect 
their “turf." Any elders who do exist are likely to be mentors 
of the characters, capable of providing much assistance but 
demanding aid in return. 

You will need to create some sort of crisis for the 
characters to deal with. It could be anything from a powerful 
coterie of elders seeking a new city to control after being 
exiled from the one they once ruled, to a Methuselah who 
simply wants peace. Play up the travails of being responsible. 


The characters might even be anarchs who have taken 
the city from the elders who once ruled it. Now they must 
maintain control of it, as well as survive the arrival of a 
Justicar and her Archons. Other elders may come in order to 
punish the characters, or simply to take over the city for 
themselves. 

Player intrigue will be high, and you should encourage it. 
Limit the Resources and Influence available, and make them 
fight among themselves for it. A different style of play might 
be called for, with players interacting with you separately 
much of the time. 

• Brood of a Prince: The characters are the brood of the 
city’s prince. Their sire is either a vampire of great nobility 
or a total bastard. The characters thus support the ciders of 
the city, and work to control and restrain the wilder impulses 
of the anarchs. Making sure that the mortal authorities of the 
city don't discover the Kindred can be a full-time job — one 
has to suppress evidence, intimidate officials and cover up 
deaths. 

You might want to make the characters a little more 
powerful than normal, giving them more freebie points (20 or 
so). Most of the chronicle will be centered around the haven 
of the sire, but the city needs to be detailed as well. You must 
create may different areas of potential conflict and aggrava¬ 
tion — who is out there to give the characters trouble? 
Remember that their sire is a prince as well, and thus has 
many demands made upon her as well as innumerable con¬ 
straints. Does she take things out on the characters? Can the 
characters trust the prince, or are they only pawns in the end ? 

• Mortal Politics: For some reason, the characters wish 
to manipulate politics, either in their city or on a national 
level — probably because other vampires are attempting to 
manipulate it in an opposite way. Vampires control many of 
the institutions in the mortal world, especially those which 
arc centrally located and controlled by one city. Those 
institutions might be employed by vampires who control 
them as pieces in the Jyhad. This means the characters might 
get involved in campaigning, political espionage, and even 
electoral cheating (or preventing the other group from doing 
the same). Such intrigue-oriented activities are rare but not 
unheard of among the Kindred, and frequently can be traced 
to a maneuver of the Jyhad. 

Influence and Resources would be very appropnate 
Background Traits for the characters. You need to detail the 
participants in the political race and their importance to the 
Kindred. This can make for a very intrigue-ridden and 
bloody chronicle. Play up the plot twists and the intensity of 
what is going on. 

• High Society: The characters mingle in the high 
society of the upper class, and become embroiled in its 
politics and affairs. Though it is only a game for them, it is a 
most intriguing one and it may be a means for the characters 
to compete with one another (c.g. who can seduce Vladimir 
the Russian pianist first?). Howe 
the elite of a city, the characters 


rer, by being involved with 
may be able to manipulate 

































rr 


events and decisions in times of crisis. If the police are about 
to launch a major investigation, such contacts can be essen¬ 
tial. Mingling with the high society could be the “duty” 
assigned them by the prince or another elder. Play up the 
elegance and beauty of the setting, so as to make the stain of 
blood even more vivid. 

Before the game starts, give each character an automatic 
Resources of 3, and encourage them to purchase that Back¬ 
ground Trait even higher. You will need to decide who are 
the leaders, gossips, hosts, wannabes and outcasts of this high 
society. 

Bizarre 

This type of chronicle is for those who like things that 
are truly different. These concepts describe some very unique 
ways to play Vampire. Try them out only if you have a taste 
for the strange. 

• Archons: The characters are among the most feared 
and respected Kindred in the Camarilla. They are the 
enforcers who travel from city to city, assisting the Justicars 
(and sometimes the princes) in maintaining the status quo. 
The characters will become heavily involved in Camarilla 
politics. They are united by ambition or by shared views on 
political affairs. 

Either selected and trained by or created as the brood of 
a Justicar, it might be wise to let the characters begin the 
game with five or more Discipline points (if they ever have 
to venture into Sabbat territory, they will need them). Give 
the characters 25 Freebie points each, so that their characters 


hazardous duty which brought them into contact with their 
eventual sire. Define the nature of the extremist group to 
which they belong, and have their opponents fully worked 
out as well. 

• The Cult: The characters have created a cult around 
themselves, which offers them security and easy access to 
vitas. They could be the objects of devotion for the cult, or 
simply the figures who manipulate it from behind the scenes. 
It could be a mixture of the two, with one character serving 
as the charismatic leader, while the others are manipulators 
and organizers. The characters are cheating these people, 
and they are using them for evil purposes. You need to work 
the effects of such an attitude into the stories. It could 
certainly lead to a loss of Humanity. Also, something will 
eventually happen to threaten their idealistic existence. 

Each character will likely have a Herd rating to reflect 
the members of the cult, and perhaps Resources as well. 
Unless the players wish to establish the cult on their own, 
starting from nothing, you will have to detail what it is and 
how it works—more than likely with the participation of the 
players. 

• Patrons: The characters are patrons to some human 
institution, such as an orphanage, a small business, a church 
or even a baseball team. The characters are do-gooders, but 
the more good they do, the more they are expected to do. 

They seek to promote their institution in every way they 
can. Protecting and serving it is the focus of their existence. 
All you have to do is figure out why they are oriented in this 


will be capable of combating more powerful Kindred. Team¬ 
work will be essential regardless. They might have Mentor 
or Status as backgrounds. They will travel, but will likely be 
based in a single city. 

Present the players with moral conflicts like Duty vs. 
Justice. Do they search for truth or do they continue to 
mindlessly serve their masters? Play up the intrigue — the 
characters should not know what is going on, and should be 
able to trust no one. Ask yourself what is going on: what is 
the nature of the greater conflict? 

• Fanatics: The characters can play IRA partisans, 
Moslem fundamentalists or eco-anarchists. They are mem¬ 
bers of some sort of extremist group who will go to nearly any 
lengths to carry out their cause. The characters are dogmatic, 
idealistic and totally committed to their group. Though they 
have become vampires, they have not given up their mortal 
beliefs (not yet at least) and they use their powers to do 
whatever they can for the cause. Can the characters gain the 
wisdom of restraint in time to preserve their own humanity? 
Start the chronicle with the characters carrying out their 
missions, but gradually bring in other issues and themes. 
Eventually, they must leave the cause in order to preserve 
their Humanity or to have any hope of rebirth or Golconda. 

The characters should all be from the same fanatic 
group. They probably volunteered as a unit for some sort of 


You need to decide what type of institution the charac¬ 
ters are protecting, and what problems are facing it. It is a 
good idea to let the players decide, so that they feel the urge 
to protect and nurture it. If you simply tell them they must 
protect it, they will feel like you have taken away their free 
will. 

• Other World: Though Vampire is already set in a 
Gothic-Punk world, you can elect to place it in a setting even 
more removed from our own reality. A chronicle can be 
forged from the fantasy, post-holocaust, science fiction or 
even cyberpunk genres. You can twist and change the setting 
to nearly anything your fervid imagination can invoke, 
though it can help your players visualize your setting if it is 
taken from a movie or a novel. 

You can even craft your chronicle around a fictional 
setting, such as the horrific worlds of H. P. Lovecraft and 
Edgar Allan Poe, or J.R.R Tolkien’s Middle-Earth. Vampire 
can work well in nearly any kind of medieval fantasy cam¬ 
paign, especially when undead comprise much or all of the 
nobility. 

Depending on what type of setting you use, you can 
create a radically different mood for your chronicle than what 
is described in this book. If you have the creativity and the 
time, you might as well make use of it. 




110 0 VAMPIRE: The Masquerade 


































Creating a Story 

So fair; so street; withal so sensitive 

All vom desires, till lawless wishes quelled 

Be tfiou to love and praise alike impelled 

Whatever boon is granted or withheld. 

— William Wordsworth 

A Vampire story is more complex than other story forms 
because it is interactive. The players take a very active role 
in its creation; you, as the Storyteller, do not have complete 
control over the form that the story will take. In fact, you are 
more of a guide than a teller of tales. 

A story is almost always built around a series of conflicts 
or problems that the characters attempt to overcome to 
achieve their aims. Your primary job is to present the 
characters with a problem, and then let them run with it. You 
shouldn’t try to predict what the characters will do; just 
invent a conflict and leave the players to deal with what you 
give them. 

If you have problems coming up with ideas, just look in 
a newspaper for story concepts. Nearly any article can be the 
genesis of a story; just twist and mold what you read until it 
fits the dictates of the world of darkness. Remember, vam¬ 
pires are behind many major disruptions in the world, so the 
repercussions of the ir conflicts are sure to end up in the news. 

Designing a story is very similar to designing a chronicle, 
only you need to do so on a regular basis. It is a difficult task, 
because you should not “over-design." In fact, sometimes the 
less you do, the better the story is. 

While you do not always have to design a story ahead of 
time, make sure that some sort of consistent story is told. If 
your chronicle becomes rich enough in detail, the characters 
will be able to find something interesting to do without any 
prior planning on your part. They will guide themselves 
through their stories. Until that point, however, you will 
need to devise stories for their amusement. Even if they do 
direct themselves, you should try to get an idea of what they 
want to do in the next session so you can plan for it. 

Preparation is often the most important part of a good 
story. While stories can often be conducted with just a few 
notes and some good ideas, a story is usually much better if 
you have time to think it out at your leisure. If you plan your 
stories carefully, they will seem more real than stories for 
which you have not prepared at all. However, prepared 
stories tend to give the players less free choice. This can make 
things a lot less fun for them. 

Though the players may go where they will and do what 
they want, itdocsn'tmeanyoudon’thavetodoany work. On 
the contrary, it means you have to work even harder to come 
up with appropriate things to interest them, such as charac¬ 
ters, plot twists, traps and obscure items. The best way to 
ensure a good story is simply to have a firm and detailed grasp 
of the setting. Your efforts to design the city are essential to 
give stories the depth they truly require. 



































Just as a character is an amalgamation of many parts — 
Attributes, Abilities and Advantages — so is a story made up 
of several things. Though some literature professors might 
not agree with us, we have divided the story into five different 
aspects to give you a better insight into what stories incorpo¬ 
rate as well as to make it easier for you to design them. These 
aspects are Theme, Conflict, Drama, Plot and Mood. 

Theme 

Every story needs atheme—away you can fit everyth ing 
together. Furthermore, a theme focuses the players’ atten¬ 
tion upon the story and makes it easier for them to leam 
something from it. Stories with depth are stories which have 
something to say. 

The theme is more than the moral of an Aesop’s fable — 
it is the tangible embodiment of the direction, flavor and 
purpose of a story. While it is not necessary to pay attention 
to the theme while playing the game, this information will at 
least provide a foundation for your story. If you are ever 
unsure on what to do or how to react, then you can always fall 
back on the theme for guidance. 

Stories almost always have a theme. However, in good 
stories, the lesson learned is subtle rather than overt. You 
shouldn’t have a prepackaged lesson ready; rather, the story 
should present a situation and let the players make of it what 
they will. 

The central purpose of your story should be the explora¬ 
tion of the theme. It is what ties everything together and 
makes sense of the disparate elements of the story. Focusing 
on the theme can add a new dimension to your roleplaying by 
making it a more artistic, fulfilling and thoughtful process. 

A story becomes larger than life when is not only an 
adventure but a moral lesson as well. Fairy tales, passion plays 
and even Star Trek™ use this technique. This is a key reason 
why we tell stories in the first place. 

The theme is not meant to make the story more serious 
or highbrow. Neither is it intended to give you the opportu¬ 
nity to lecture the players with a diatribe on good and evil. 
The theme is simply intended to help you create a better 
story, a story with more depth, pathos and poignancy. Don’t 
place too large an onus on the theme and it will work out for 
you. 

The theme is usually expressed as a question which the 
story presents, but without an answer given. Pose the theme 
as a question you would like answered, and then do nothing 
to answer it. It can be practically anything, from “What is 
evil r to “Why do so many people lie about their age !" Some 
of the most common themes in Vampire concern corruption, 
violence and the nature of reality. 

Below are several examples of themes you can employ in 
your stories. Do not take this as any sort of complete list; 
there is no end to the themes you can create. 

• Love — What is the fragility of love, and the weak¬ 
nesses and strength that it can bestow? What effect can it 
have on the characters’ lives; how can it change them? What 


should or should not love be? Can anyone feel love, even the 
most depraved? What sustenance does love provide? 

• Hate — What creates the emotions of hate and 
vengeance? Why can’t they be controlled? How can they 
ruin a life? 

• Chaos — Is there any truth or security in the universe? 
Is everything in such a continuous state of flux that true 
stability is impossible? Is true peace possible is such a world? 

• Morality — How useful is conventional morality? In 
what ways could it be improved? Where does it excel and 
where does it fail ? Why do people bother with morality at all? 
Is perfect morality impossible? Are there any immutable and 
absolute rules of morality? 

• Leadership — Where does the need for leadership 
come from? What is required of a leader? When does 
leadership fail, and when does it succeed ? What is the tragedy 
of authority? 

• Society — Where do our societal myths originate? 
Why are they so important to us ? What have they done to us; 
how have they programmed us? Can we ever escape our 
upbringing, or arc we slaves to our culture forever? Are myths 
only symbolic, or are some true? 

Conflict 

Conflict provides energy and direction to a story, and 
influences the course of the plot. It propels the story by 
involving and motivating the characters. Though the char¬ 
acters need not be the primary participants in the conflict, 
they may become involved simply by being enveloped in the 
struggle. Conflict is the reason the story is interesting 
enough to tell or to listen to in the first place — it can be both 
entertaining and illuminating. 

Any collision or disagreement, contention or contro¬ 
versy, struggle or quarrel can be seen as conflict. Conflict 
occurs whenever people or groups of people find it difficult to 
get along, whether it be due to incompatibility, mutual 
antagonism, or an intrinsic opposition of interests and prin¬ 
ciples. Conflict need not be between enemies, and it need 
not be resolved by bloodshed. Sometimes it can be simply an 
internal disharmony in one individual. 

You can mix many different conflicts into the same 
story, but in order not to confuse things too much, one or two 
primary elements are best. You can use conflicts in your story 
in the same way that Archetypes are used in a character — 
one conflict is what the characters think is going on (the 
Demeanor) while the second conflict is what is really going 
on (the Nature). 

In Vampire, there are 13 primary levels of conflict that 
you can use in your stories. Though we describe them only 
briefly below, you can use them in innumerable ways. 

• Kindred vs. Hunters: There are many who pursue 
vampires. Some merely wish to leam more about the Kin¬ 
dred, but most want to slay them out of hand. 


112 0 VAMPIRE: The Masquerade 
































• Kindred vs. Lupines: The werewolves deeply resent 
the intrusion of Kindred into their territory, which includes 
most of the land outside the cities. Lupines may also have 
obscure plans and missions that compel them to enter the 
city, a place they despise. 

• Anarchs vs. Elders: The young always resent the rule 
of the old. When the old live forever, the effect is only 
exaggerated. 

• Elder vs. Elder: The Jyhad is an ancient, immortal 
war, and most Kindred are somehow tangled up in it; indeed, 
many of them struggle and die without realizing what they 
fight for. The Jyhad exists on every level of Kindred society, 
and practically any sort of intrigue can be considered to have 
its origin in the eon-old war. 

• Camarilla vs. Sabbat: This is, at base, simply the 
conflict between these two sects, but it can also be seen in 
terms of the eternal war between order and chaos, mercy and 
hate. 

• Humanity vs. the Beast: The inner war between the 
silence and the rage never ceases. “A Beast 1 am, lest a Beast 
I become.” For more roleplaying-oriented stories, this makes 
an excellent conflict, as it allows you to probe deeply into the 
personalities of the characters and players. 

• Clan vs. Clan: The clans continually war with one 
another, and the envy and antipathy run deep. The Ventrue 
could be attempting to take over the Mafia, or the Tremere 
might be pushing for a Conclave. 

• Kindred vs. Kindred: Warfare over hunting grounds 
and turf is not uncommon, and the horror of diablerie is 
always of concern. 

• Kindred vs. Magi: There are many wizards who have 
uses for vampires. It is said that they have strange rituals 
which require the blood and organs of Kindred. 

• Kindred vs. Prince: Political upheaval in the city is 
always tumultuous, especially if the prince is involved, not as 
a judge, but as a contestant. 

• Kindred vs. Society: The Masquerade must be main¬ 
tained lest all be destroyed. The Kindred must constantly 
struggle to keep their secret from the press and society. 

• Kindred vs. Victims: The characters might find them¬ 
selves hunting a powerful and interesting member of the 
kine. It could be anything from “feed-on-the-mob-boss’s- 
girl" to vessels who actually fight back. 

• Sanity vs. Madness: There is much in the life of a 
vampire that can drive one over the edge of sanity. Resisting 
madness is most difficult, as it is often impossible to escape 
the circumstances which created such a terrible state. 

• Survival vs. Justice: The most cerebral of conflicts, 
the conflict between the needs of survival and the demands 
of justice, is often the most difficult to resolve. 

• Kindred vs. Unknown: The characters do not realize 
who their enemy is, or who seeks their demise. This makes 
it all the more terrifying. 































Plot 


The plot is the fabric and pattern of a story. In fact, 
sometimes when we talk about the story, we are actually 
speaking of the plot. Plot describes the progress of the story, 
through scenes, actions and events. A poorly conceived plot 
invariably leads to a trite story, but a complete and intricate 
plot may well provide the skeleton for a story of great depth. 

The main thing to keep in mind about plot is that it 
should progress in a series of distinct phases. There are a 
number of story conventions in Western culture, and the 
ones that dictate the plot are the most rigid. The story is often 
expected to have a beginning, a middle, and an end. The end 
is expected to be climactic, and stories that start with a bang 
are more appreciated. The audience expects to be drawn into 
the story, and resents anything which pulls it back from full 
immersion. Although we encourage you to experiment, you 
violate these conventions at your own risk. 

Detailed below are the various stages the plot can go 
through. Use them as a rough guide on how to structure your 
plots and to provide ideas on what you might need to include. 

• Setting the Scene: You need to explain to the players 
where they are and what they might expect. This can take 
only a few seconds, or you might want to have a whole 
description of the scene worked out ahead of time which can 
then be read to them. It is usually best to set the scene 
actively, by allowing the players to interact with it, rather 
than simply reciting a descriptive monologue. Make sure you 
use all the five senses: sight, hearing, smell, taste and touch. 

• Hook: You need something realistic and compelling 
to get the characters and the players involved in the story. 
You can be brutal and force them into it (e.g. "You hear 
knocking on the door, and someone shouts ‘Open up! Po¬ 
lice!'"), but there are many more subtle ways. 

You should present the players with the major conflict of 
the story in a unique and compelling way that teases, tanta¬ 
lizes and promises extraordinary adventure. You want to 
capture their imaginations from the start, so as to deeply 
involve them in the story. 

In each story, the player should immediately become 
aware that something is amiss, danger is awaiting, or some 
threat hangs over the characters’ heads. The hook draws the 
players into the narrative and arouses their curiosity. 

This must happen early in the story. You should present 
the hook as dynamically as you can, so that the players have 
a chance to affect the plot from the very beginning. If you 
don’t get them involved from the beginning, they will give up 
on the story. 

• Buildup: You need to give the characters chances to 
overcome obstacles by providing them with elements of the 
central conflict to confront. The buildup needs to create a 
feeling of suspense and propel the characters onward into 
some sort of climax. In Vampire, the buildup should be 
constant and inexorable. When it is halted by dead-end 
investigations or dull periods, you should try to make those 






























interruptions as short as possible. Keep the players involved 
and tell the story so that there are multiple ways to reach the 
conclusion. Don't let them bog down so completely that the 
mood and urgency of the story is lost. The buildup refers to 
a buildup in emotions, and it is a very tricky medium to affect. 
Do not falter. 

• Cliffhanger: Sometimes you will want to build the 
tension up, way up, and then relax it again, as a way to really 
get the players raring to go. Cliffhangers are one of the most 
common ways to do this. You simply make the characters 
think that they have reached the climax, and then present 
them with new elements of the problem to face. These might 
even be miniature climaxes that give the players some sense 
of resolution, but do not completely wrap things up. At the 
end of each chapter of your story (each game session), you 
might want to leave things in a cliffhanger — it will make sure 
that the players come back... 

• Plot Twist: Try to insert plot twists whenever pos¬ 
sible. Simply change the plot in midstream to add an clement 
of surprise to the story. This could be a “snake in the grass” — 
a friend that turns out to be an enemy or a victim that turns 
out to be a monster. Or it could be the old “Switcharoo” — 
one of the player characters that lost all his Humanity 
becomes the biggest villain in the chronicle. 

• Climax: This is the great resolution of the story, 
where all the questions are answered (or at least some). If the 
characters are successful (not that they should always be) 
then this ending should satisfy the players. In any case, it 
must be a logical result of events that occurred at the 
beginning of the story. The climax cannot be forced — the 
players must he emotionally prepared for the ending. It must 
evolve naturally from what has occurred before and be 
affected by what the characters have done. The characters’ 
actions must have an effect upon the story’s conclusion. The 
climax should never be preordained. 

• Resolution: Thisisaspecialendingthatoftenfollows 
the climax and winds down the story. For some reason, it is 
hard to make such trailers work out right; they either seem 
trite or get ignored by the players. Though a resolution may 
be difficult to effect, it is an excellent way to set up the next 
story and unwind the players from the intensity of what has 
just occurred. It is also a time when characters who squared 
off during the story can make up. Resolutions can be a lot of 
fun to roleplay, as they allow the characters to interact with 
one another in a relaxed way. Use the resolution as a time to 
reward your players. Give them new information, wrap up 
the loose ends of the story, or provide them with extra power, 
money, or mystical artifacts. 

However, do not mix the resolution with the climax — 
keep the two separate. Furthermore, do not ramble on with 
the trailer for too long; it should normally be very short. Once 
the suspense and drama is concluded, the curtain should c lose 
shortly thereafter. 


Drama 

Just as plot is the most important element of the story, 
drama is the most important element of the plot. Drama, for 
our purposes, is any series of events that has vivid, emotional, 
or striking results upon the lives of the characters. Dramatic 
moments are the sensational, startling, and deeply involving 
periods of the story, when everyone’s attention is riveted 
onto what is occurring. They are the most intense and 
exhilarating moments of the plot. 

Often drama is achieved because the lives of the charac¬ 
ters are at stake, or the object of all their attention is about to 
be revealed. Staging a dramatic scene can be a difficult task, 
but it is essential if you want to create an engaging story. 
Drama can be thought of as synonymous with excitement, 
but there is more to it than that; drama is the essence of a 
story. 

Just as an author or director has to maintain tension, 
pace and flow in the stories she presents, so a Storyteller in a 
Vampire game has the same responsibilities toward the 
“audience"; i.e., the players. Drama is essential if the charac¬ 
ters are to have the opportunity to directly affect the plot 
through their characters’ actions. 

There are a number of different techniques you can use, 
but you should realize that the way in which you create drama 
must suit your storytelling style. Dramatic verisimilitude is 
not so much a skill as it is a talent — you’ve got to pick it up 
on your own. 

You shouldn't simply stage a dramatic scene straight up. 
Always mix it with something else to make it different and 
new. If you’re planning a gun battle, don’t simply have two 
sides blast each other; mix it with a heart-stopping car chase 
down a mountain, set it in a graveyard with lots of stealth and 
misinformation, or somehow introduce new situations that 
force and encourage new strategies and tactics. Make each 
scene different so that later on, the players can look back and 
have something they will remember it by. 

The Drama chapter is your guide to creating effective 
dramatic monuments. Use it to create and sustain drama in 
your story. Those action scenes are often intrinsic to the 
players’ enjoyment. 

Mood 

Every story should have a certain emotional quality that 
is in some way unique to it. The mood of a story describes the 
emotions you want your players to feel as it is told. The 
emotional response of the players is of immense importance, 
as it defines how much they “get into it". A good story causes 
the players to get into the story so much that they feel what 
their characters feel. The mood can affect the players in a way 
that heightens the effect of the story. 

Create a distinct atmosphere for each story. Ask yourself 
what is the dominant emotional tone of your*6ry. Adding 
mood to a story is the best way to arouse real and vivid 


emotions. 


< 

A_4 



Chapter Six : Chronicle 





























































give it to them — not as much as they want, perhaps, hut 
enough to keep their blood pumping. However, don’t let the 
players think they can treat the police as if they were 
punching bags, and make sure that no matter how outrageous 
things get, Humanity rolls are always made. After the excite¬ 
ment is over, there needs to be a period of silence and solemn 
introspection. However, if you need really foul villains and 
bad guys, only fellow Cainites will really do. 

• Wilderness Trek: There are many reasons why a 
Kindred would leave the city; unfortunately, none of them 
are good. The Gothic-Punk countryside is populated with 
werewolves, spirits, faeries and farmers canying 12-gauge 
shotguns in their pickup trucks. Is that old bam where the 
characters want to spend the day haunted by ghosts, home to 
a pack of young lycanthropes, or simply deserted? 

As far as vampires are concerned, any area outside the 
city is considered wilderness, and it is even more dangerous 
for Kindred than it is for kine. The city offers security, as so 
many of the mortal institutions in a city are controlled by the 
undead, and there are places to hide no matter where one 
goes. There arc so many people in the city that it is easy to 
fade into the crowds and find food. In the wilderness, 
strangers are easily noticed — especially by the Lupines. 

There arc many reasons why vampires might want to 
travel in the wilderness, such as to speak with one of the 
Inconnu (necessary if Golconda is sought). The characters 
may have to track down someone who is hiding in the 
wilderness, or punish a group of Lupines who have made a 
foray into the city. You can also combine the wilderness trek 
with the Escape story concept for a very deadly story. 

• Diablerie: Whatever the unique motivations and 
goals of the characters, they are likely united by their desire 
for power. This concept only works if the characters are 
engaged in the dangerous and destructive struggle to locate, 
exterminate and drink the blood of their elders — and in so 
doing effectively advance from one generation to the next. 
As a group, they are able to take on these extremely powerful 
beings. However, the possibility for Humanity loss should be 
extremely high, especially if the elder had any redeeming 
qualities (i.e. he was a nice guy). 

This is a simple hunt and kill concept. Each story should 
present the characters with a new target, quite likely an evil 
and oppressive elder. You will want to tie some basic moral 
issues into the chronicle, thereby making it a little more 
involved than a series of hack-and-slash adventures. Force 
the characters to pick and choose their targets, investigate 
them before they go in for the kill, and do the deed with 
finesse and cunning. At some point, you will want to have 
the characters face their own vigilantism and ask themselves 
if they are any better than the ones whom they hunt. For the 
purposes of this chronicle, you may want to change the rules 
to allow all those who partake of the blood of an elder to lower 
their generation level, not just one. 


Chapter Six : Chronicle 0 117 

































Illuminatus 

One of the best types of stories to tell in Vampire is the 
tale of intrigue. It fits the Vampire psyche very well, and is 
very easy to do — simply involve the characters in the 
Machiavellian politics of vampire society. They may be 
blamed for something, witness something, or get involved of 
their own accord. Intrigue is far better if the characters get 
involved on their own initiative. You need to offer them 
obtainable goals and ideas on how to get there, then cut them 
loose. 

• Jyhad: Tire Antediluvians see no reason to end their 
everlasting existences, especially not at the claws of those 
fourth generation whelps. For millennia they have battled 
one another through pawns of lesser generation which they 
have manipulated, dominated and subjugated. The players 
may become involved in anything from helping such an 
Ancient eliminate the pawns of another Ancient to prevent¬ 
ing an all-out assault on her haven. However, no matter how 
many others they must battle, their true enemy will always be 
the one behind the scenes who is using them as pawns. 

The Jyhad also exists on other levels as well, for all 
Kindred are in competition with one another. The charac¬ 
ters must watch their steps carefully, lest those with power 
choose to use it on them. For instance, a character’s sire 
enlists the characters in her scheme to become prince by 
promising them great power. However, if the current prince 
ever discovers their role in destroying his reputation, he will 
stop at nothing to extinguish them. 

• Vendetta: This story starts out with something really 
nasty happening to the players (something embarrassing 
usually works the best). Make sure that you attach an antago¬ 
nist to the “evil deed,” giving said antagonist a spiteful and 
hateful personality, and then let the players loose. They'll 
tear each other apart just trying to get at the evil bully. This 
is probably the easiest kind of story to run, because the players 
do all the work for you. The hardest part is setting things up 
so that the players really hate the bully, down to their very 
cores, It's almost impossible to go too far in making the bad 
guy bad — lay it on thick. 

Make sure the players spend a lot of time planning how 
and when they are going to get their revenge. Encourage 
them to imagine it often and in great detail. The longer you 
can delay their vengeance, the hotter they will get. In the 
end, you can have it all be a big misunderstanding — the bad 
guy is really a nice guy — but this can be a dangerous practice. 
The players get very frustrated when you try to pull things like 
that. 

• The Masquerade: Neonates’ temptations to make the 
world their oyster through their newfound powers must be 
tempered by a realization of what the world, even a world of 
ants, can do to them. Often the players will have to deal with 
hunters without killing, injuring or even threatening them, 
lest their disappearance alert the nest of danger. They must 
prevent mortals from discovering the truth about the exist¬ 
ence of vampires. Violence is not often an option — for 


118 © VAMPIRE: The Masquerade 








































instance, killing the newspaper reporter hot on their trail will 
only draw the attention of even more journalists, so the 
players must figure out a way to misdirect him. 

Alternately, some other vampires may become too obvi¬ 
ous for the players to allow their activities to continue 
unhindered. How do they deal with a rock star who can back 
up his claims to immortality? 

• Escape: No matter how powerful the players are, 
there is always something more powerful. Imagine the 
players having to escape from New York with the mob, their 
sires, the Sabbat and the police all after them for one reason 
or another. This can be a thrilling story, and a great way to 
flip everything in your chronicle upside down. There is 
something very primal about having to live by the seat of 
one’s pants in hostile territory, simply surviving from day to 
day (or night to night, in the vampire’s case). However, 
players do not like to lose—don’t let them know about it, but 
you've got to give them a better than even chance of survival. 
In some cases, you might want them to have something to run 
to as well as something to run from. 

• Mission: The players must undergo some sort of quest 
or mission, which has been “assigned" to them by a greater 
power. They may be rewarded for doing so, or may be forced 
into action through Domination, threats, or blackmail. The 
characters may even undertake the mission as a favor to a 
friend. While on the mission, they not only have to deal with 


the enemies of the person they are serving, but must also 
explore their relationships with the one who now controls 
their existences. 

The Mission concept gives you a great deal of latitude to 
create any sort of story you desire, since it does not need to 
mesh with the rest of the chronicle as closely as other sorts of 
stories do. However, the mission is also less fulfilling for the 
players and can be very aggravating. Use missions rarely, and 
space the stories in which you use this concept widely. 

Bourbon Street 

Many of the best Vampire stories incorporate very 
human values and issues which the characters must face. 
They are trapped in very alien situations, yet still deal with 
very familiar problems. Bourbon Street is a style of story full 
of pathos; it is the most advanced of all the styles, and the 
most difficulty to employ. 

• Tragedy: While Vampire as a whole is marked by 
constant tragedy, it is possible to weave individual stories 
around that idea. The basic idea of tragedy is that no matter 
what the protagonist does, there is no way to avoid the tragic 
ending — the hero is doomed. Whether it is Oedipus 
destined to slay his father and marry his mother, or King Lear 
killed by his own pride, the main character is what she is and 
cannot change her fate. In Vampire, the players have more 
free will than these figures of literature; however, the very < 


Chapter Six : Chronicle 0 119 



































fact of vampiric existence leaves them open to the destruc¬ 
tive rampages of frenzy. Though they may sometimes be able 
to control that frenzy, this will not always be the case. 

The secret of using tragedy in a story is finding a way to 
make the characters’ intrinsic nature work against them. If a 
character or characters frenzy at an inopportune moment, 
such as when visiting the prince or while surrounded by 
police, the characters will have to spend the rest of the story 
atoning for these mistakes. 

Place the characters in situations where they must feed 
off loved ones in order to survive or have their enemies strike 
at them through those same allies. Remember, however, that 
even though the world of Vampire is rife with such horror, 
you must always give the players at least a modicum of free 
will in their characters' fates. 

• The Becoming: Start the players out as humans and 
take them through the whole process of being created. It is 
a very traumatic, intense and emotional experience. You 
have to decide why the characters were chosen and why they 
were selected as a group. Are they the brood of a single sire, 
or perhaps the progeny of the elders of a single city who 
created many neonates at a single time? 

The goal of the characters could be to find a way to 
become human again. They have left behind people whom 
they love and who need them. The focus of the chronicle is 
their increasingly desperate desire to escape the curse. What 
lengths will they go to in order to attain their goal, and will 
they, tragically, destroy their Humanity in the process? 

Characters start with no Disciplines, but they will gain 
their three points over the course of the chronicle — as they 
are trained by their sire. You need to describe the haven of the 
sire in detail, as well as his immediate enemies and friends. 
The sire must be an exquisitely complete character. Make 
both the haven and the chronicle as a whole have a claustro¬ 
phobic feel, so that when they finally move on they will truly 
feel a sense of wonder and anticipation. 

• Romance: Vampires of both myth and cinema are 
often deeply sensual beings, both sexually and romantically. 
As creatures of untamed passions, they forge much more 
intense bonds than most mortals will ever know. The 
conflict between a vampire’s hunger and love, and the 
attempt to keep the Beast from destroying that which is most 
treasured, can be the concepts for innumerable adventures. 
For instance, how does the player cushion the shock for his 
mortal lover after he becomes a vampire? 

Besides their attachments to mortals, vampires have to 
deal with the deep emotions they sometimes feel for one 
another. The relationship between a sire and his progeny is 
not only that of a parent and a child, but can also be that of 
an experienced lover with a virgin. This makes it even 
harder, and perhaps even more important, for a childc to 
become independent. 

There are also the deep attachments Kindred form 
through Blood Bonds. While it is easy to play this out 
through the guidelines provided, it is more interesting to 


120 © VAMPIRE: The Masquerade 
































force the players to test the boundaries of their love and characters look for that which is not real, yet is true, and for 
devotion to the other vampire. They will sacrifice their that which is illusion, yet so essential. The quest leads the 

friends, their plans and even their lives to make their master characters into their own souls, so it is absolutely essential 

happy. Of course, this becomes even more interesting when that they be fully created and realized. Often it is best to 

the other vampire is Blood Bound as well (to the player or a transform a story into a quest after it has been going a while, 

third vampire). • A Normal Life: The characters are attempting to 

• Redemption: Some vampires want nothing to do with continue their mortal lives even after the Embrace. They 

the hunts and riddles which make up other Kindred’s lives. must somehow balance their two lives, keeping each a secret 

For them, the goal is to regain their humanity. Simply from the other. The characters must learn to rely upon one 

present the characters with an opportunity to set something another to succeed. If they are well-known for any reason, it 

right, to do something good. This could be anything from can make things all the more difficult. Play out the prelude 

assisting an old man in combating the Brujah who is living in at length, to make the characters as real and detailed as 

his home to helping a Malkavian see past her delusions and possible, but start the chronicle soon after they are Embraced, 

accept the fact that she is a vampire. Often stories about The whole point is to roleplay through the transition period, 
redemption can involve the gaining of Humanity, and in- You will need to detail the everyday worlds of each 

deed this is the only way to regain one's mortality. character in order to give them something to interact with. 

• The Quest: The characters seek Golconda as a means Provide something of compelling interest in the city as well 

of not merely escaping, but transcending their curse. This is to draw them into the world of vampires. Juxtapose the two 

a somewhat existential approach to roleplaying, for the opposing worlds as often and as vividly as you can, and force 

the characters to balance the two of them. 


































Book Three: 
Permutations 






































I I I I I I I I 1 I I I I 1 

>1 ■ I ■!■■■■■ H ■ ■■ ■ ■ I—I I ■■■ ■ f 111 ■ ■■ ■■ I ■ ■■■ ■ I ■ ■■■■ ■■■ I . . ■ ■ » - I 


T ie scent of decay is a perfume to me. The malignant air clasps me 
like an old lover. When a tire screeches on asphalt, or a flash of 
neon illuminates the dream of the city, 1 know I have come 

home. 

Even as the Hunger prowls on the edge of my consciousness, even as I 
stagger through the haze of my delirium, 1 know this is my place. Here the 
dinner table is always set. Here the music of life accompanies every meal. 

Lovers walk by, hand in hand. 1 feel the Hunger build within me. Their 
lives are mine, should I wish it. The Beast stirs. But 1 shall not feed on 
them. The Beast must be controlled, though it cannot he destroyed. I must 
fight it one day at a time. 

1 have fed upon many. Their faces float before me, some to haunt me and 
some to thank me. Full lips beg for pleasure and receive ecstasy. Glazed 
eyes plead for life, but find only release. Before my hunger, their fates were 
sealed. My need was their end. My desire the final nail in their coffins. 

Those who died, were they not criminals? Had not those feces looked 
upon death before I met them? They knew me when our paths crossed. 
Death destroys death; just as life begets life. I am the Beast. 

The sound of violence assaults me in a music of power. It sings of my 
need and awakens my hunger. 1 track the music to its source — a peacock 
costumed in garments of color. 

Beating a painted woman onto the ground, he pulls money from her bag. 
Parasite. Slowly 1 approach him. Cancer. His shallow eyes meet mine. 
Disease. 1 swallow his essence into mine. Dust. A Beast 1 am lest a Beast I 
become. 

He who fights with monsters might lake care, 
lest he thereby become a monster 
And if you gaze for long into an abyss, 
the abyss gazes also into you. 
— Friedrich Wilhelm Niet/scbe, "Beyond Good and Evir 
































The good want power, but to weep barren tears. 

The powerful goodness want: worse need for them. 
The wise want love; and those who love want wisdom. 
— P. B. Shelly, “Prometheus Unbound” 


I n Vampire, Traits are the basis of a character— they 
describe, conjure and pin down who and what a 
character really is. They enable you to detail your 
character’s strengths and weaknesses, allow you to translate 
the character into game reality by using dice, and most 
importantly, they help you focus and understand your char¬ 
acter. 

The Traits describe only the general parameters of the 
character. The essence of the character is created through 
the roleplaying and the imagination of the player. Traits in 
Vampire are left intentionally sketchy — at least the num¬ 
ber-crunching part — so you will not concentrate on the 
character sheet too much. What has been only crudely 
established during character creation becomes fleshed out in 
play. Don’t look at your Traits thinking you have a complete 
character. Your roleplaying will create your character, not 
these Traits. 


character, but they can have some very real effects on the 
story as well. Although a player may declare a specialty as a 
guide to roleplaying even if the character does not have a 
rating of four or higher, it will have absolutely no effect on 
rule mechanics. 

A specialty allows the player to reroll 10s on actions 
where the specialty directly applies to the action being 
attempted. She gets to keep the success the 10 originally 
indicated, but may subsequently try again for another success, 
rolling another die for every 10 obtained. 


Clans 


Specialties 


For each Attribute and Ability rated at four or higher, a 
player can select a specialty. Although a general description 
of the Trait is listed below, sometimes there are also particular 
facets of a Trait that a character is capable of performing with 
additional proficiency — your character may be able to drive 
very well, but he may be especially good at off-road maneu¬ 
vers. Most players select specialties simply to flesh out a 


We are Siamese, if you please. 

We are Siamese if you don’t please. 

— the cats, Lady and the Tramp 

The following seven clans are the body and soul of the 
Camarilla. They are by no means the only vampire clans in 
existence; however, these seven are the only clans that 
actively support the Camarilla and are thus part of the normal 
life and society of the Kindred. A player may choose her 
character’s lineage from one of these seven, or she may 
choose to be Caitiff— a vampire with no clan. 




Chapter Seven: Traits © 125 


































ski/ 7/w 


The Brujah clan is almost completely composed of 
rebels of one kind or another, forever searching for the 
ultimate expression of their individuality. The Brujah 
are punks, skinheads, bikers, death-rockers, freaks, so¬ 
cialists and anarchists. They tend to be stubborn, 
highly aggressive, ruthless, sensitive to slights, and 
extremely vengeful. They are the most uncontrollable 
of all the Kindred. 

These malcontents tend to be fanatical in their 
disparate beliefs — the only thing that unites them is ' 
their desire to overthrow the social system, be it 
vampiric or mortal, and replace it with one of their 
own making (or with nothing at all). Many 
bullhcaded crusaders of the worst sort, devoted to 
their cause until they become blind to any 
other shades of the truth. 

Though the Brujah are incred 
ibly fractious, they aid each other 
in times of need, regardless of past 
disputes and antagonisms. If the 
Brujah call is made, others will 
respond, but the gathered host 
will be enraged if they think 
the call was unwarranted. 

The clan is poorly orga¬ 
nized and only occasionally 
holds informal meetings. In¬ 
deed, Brujah rely on their 
chaotic behavior to gain the 
results they desire. Other Kin¬ 
dred allow them their 
eccentricities; indeed, certain 
activities that would get other 
Kindred extinguished earn them 
only the remark, “Oh, a Brujah. 

Insolent outbursts and fevered rav 
ings are to be expected from the Brujah. 

The other Kindred have simply learned 
to provide the Brujah an amount of leeway 
which would be given to no other vampire 


Nickname: Rabble 

Appearance: Brujah tend to dress in whatever 
style is the most outrageous of the period, though some 
dress in a way that conflicts with the rest of the clan so 
as to be the “most" rebellious. Leather coats, spiked 
hair, chains and black boots are common today, as are 
the various garbs of antiquity, espe- 
dally those of the Renaissance. 
willit They may also dress and assume 
l ^ e attitu< ^ es street hoods, 
v\v\ 1 neo-Nazis, or even Deadheads. 


Ilaven: Brujah live 


M wherever they choose, fre 
quently kicking whatever 


unlucky individuals lived 


there before them. By 
habit they move about 
quite a bit, never stay 



126 © VAMPIRE: The Masquerade 

































ing in one place for longer than a month. They typically 
possess many different “safe houses” where they can 
hide in times of turmoil. A new tactic of some Brujah 
is to move in with suburban families, Dominating them 
into submission. The Brujah “hang out” with the family 
for a few weeks, and then move on when they get bored. 
Certain Brujah “recruit" the rebellious teenagers in the 
households just before they move on. > 

Background: Brujah naturally prefer rebels when 
they choose their progeny. Only rarely is a neonate 
guided through the process. Typically, new Brujah are 
left to their own devices, summoned and aided only at 
the whim of the sire. Often the sire remains anony¬ 
mous, so as to avoid the wrath of a strict prince. 

Often a sire will create more than one childe at a 
time, forming a brood. Brujah don’t always seek the 
permission of the prince when they create progeny, so 
the chances of the childer's survival are greater if there 
is a group of them. It is a strategy of numbers — the 
more progeny created, the more likely some will sur¬ 
vive. 

Character Creation: Brujah often have crimi¬ 
nal or punk concepts, but many of them are intellectuals 
as well. They normally have very aggressive Demean¬ 
ors and very extreme Natures. Physical Attributes are 
primary, as are Skills. Brujah commonly have Con¬ 
tacts, Allies and Herd as their Background Traits. 

Clan Disciplines: Celerity, Potence, Presence 

Weaknesses: The members of this clan fall into 
frenzies far more readily than other vampires. However, 
the Brujah flatly deny this; indeed, they become ex¬ 
ceedingly hostile (even to the point of frenzy) if the 
subject is raised. The difficulty for frenzy rolls is always 
two higher than the number listed. 

Organization: This clan is poorly organized and 
rarely meets formally. However, its membership sup¬ 
ports the anarchs more than any other clan. Indeed, it 
lies at the movement’s core. 


Stereotypes: 


n 


Quote: "All creatures of sentience deserve to 
be free — it is our bom right. When we overthrow 
this decadent system that attempts to rule us , we can 
overthrow the system that rules the mortals as well. 
We shall be the saviors of the Earth." 


• Nosferatu — They are rejected un¬ 
justly because of how they look. We 
are the only ones who respect them 
despite their bestiality. 

• Tremere—Our archrivals. None are 
worse than these manipulators. 

• Ventrue — These contemptible, 
conniving politicians are hypocrites 
of the highest degree. 

• Gangrel—They know how to fight, 
that’s for sure. 

• Toreador — Effete bastards. They 
would make decent allies save for 
their addiction to the human vices. 

• Malkavian — Some make fine com¬ 
patriots, though they’re all weirdos. 


i i i MtMPiPFi LLL~ 

The Masquerade " 

K Nature: CAVALl£fc Generation: 1 3H% ' 

r. D fut u ur &A'JO ha>ca: 

■kk: Uea: flAOJAH Concept: RevocunWAM 




Chapter Seven: Traits Q 127 










































dangrel 


T he Gangrel are wanderers, rarely staying in 
one place for any length of time. In this, 
they differ greatly from most Kindred, who 
tend to find a haven and cling to it. There are no 
established leaders of the clan; on the whole, Gangrel are 





^ X 




xk**a\-X 


unconcerned with such things. Withdrawn, quiet and 
solemn, they certainly keep their cards close to their 
chests. 

This is a clan of survivors — vampires capable of 
making it on their own. They do not despise civiliza¬ 
tion or the society of other Kindred — they simply do 
not require it. They are known for their lack of concern 
when crossing the lands of the Lupines (werewolves), 
for it is said they have friends among the shapechangers. 


The Gangrel are themselves very capable 
shapeshifters, which may explain their ability to cross 
the wild areas unmolested. There are no reports of them 
being able to transform into anything other than wolves 
and bats, but there are old tales of Gangrel elders 
who could achieve a mist form. Perhaps 
, because of this Protean Discipline, their 
features often resemble those of animals; 
M indeed, some of the oldest Gangrel barely 
If resemble human beings anymore. 

P ' J The Gangrel are closely affiliated 
with the Gypsies; in fact, if the stories are 
'T to be believed, the Gypsies are the mortal 
descendants of the Antediluvian who 
founded the Gangrel line. They are under 
J his protection, and any Kindred who harms 



^ or Embraces one 

of them will answer to him. Re¬ 
gardless of whether this is true or not, Kindred 
are loath to harm Gypsies. Members of the Gangrel 
clan are expected, through long-standing tradition, to 
aid the Gypsies whenever necessary. It has been known 
for Gangrel to be aided by the Gypsies as well. Certain 
Gangrel have adopted much from the Gypsy culture, 
including mannerisms, linguistic elements, and even 
dress. 

Nickname: Outlanders 

Appearance: The members of this clan often 
have animalistic features, especially if they have the 
Protean Discipline. They are usually quite rustic in 
dress and mannerisms. 


128 © VAMPIRE: The Masquerade 

































Haven: Gangrel are nomadic by nature and almost 
never create permanent dwellings. Though they may 
live within a single city, they will usually not create 
havens for themselves, but will instead sleep in a 
different place each day. They are often found in parks, 
zoos or semi-wooded areas in the city. Most of them are 
able to meld with the earth and do so each dawn to 
escape the sun. 

Background: Gangrel always pick their progeny 

very carefully, seeking those who are survivors. How¬ 
ever, once they Embrace these mortals, they abandon 
them, leaving the childer to make their own way in the 
world. Though sires may watch from a distance, they 
almost never interfere. When the time is right, they 
present themselves to their fledglings and teach them 
the ways of the clan. 

Character Creation: Gangrel often have drifter 
or Working Joe concepts. TheirNatures and Demean¬ 
ors tend to be quite similar. Physical Attributes are 
primary, as are Talent Abilities. Normal Background 
Traits are Allies (the Gypsies) and Mentor (their sires). 

Clan Disciplines: Animalism, Fortitude, Protean 

Weaknesses: Gangrel become increasingly ani¬ 
mal-like each time they frenzy — the player of a 
Gangrel character must pick a new animal feature each 
and every time the character does so. As Gangrel age, 
they increasingly resemble that which they truly are — 
the Beast. These features tend to negatively affect the 
character’s social skills. For every five animal features 
gained, the player must lower one of the character’s 
Social Attributes by one. 

Organization: The Gangrel do not really con¬ 
sider themselves a clan. They almost never have clan 
meetings and rarely attend Camarilla councils. How¬ 
ever, they do tend to enjoy each other’s company more 
than that of other Kindred and can often be found 
together. 


" 4 

Stereotypes: 

• Nosferatu—K indred of strong spirit; 
we have much in common with 
them. 

• Tremere—Though they do not real¬ 
ize it, we are enemies. They follow 
the wrong path and seek to destroy 

us all. 

• Ventrue — Every sect must have 
leaders; every leader must serve the 
sect. Our leaders are neither worse 
nor better than most. 

• Toreador — We hold them in con¬ 
tempt because they have earned 
nothing better. They must learn to 
serve instead of take. 

• Brujah — Their virtue is pure, but 
their vision is cloudy. 

• Malkavian — They are reservoirs of 
immense power, but even they do 
not know how to tap it. 


The Masquerade- 

tofcvrvoR Gcacntfoa: 1‘5+k 

Dmumt U>JCR Nmr 

Ok C~ccpe HiPf»e 


Quote: "The city is not our home. It is simply 
the only place where we are allowed to exist for long. 
Our people have become ill and deranged because 
we have lived in this purgatory so long and have 
grown dependent on the tainted blood of the mor¬ 
tals." 










































w 




he Malkavians are insane, one and all. From 
madness, however, comes wisdom, and from 
■ — -ii wisdom comes power. The Malkavians are 

J true creatures of chaos. However, the Malkavians are also 

w \s3By vk. known to be clowns and pranksters. As with all things 

connected with them, not everything makes sense. 

' * This clan is infamous for its destruc- 

k r\ • tive and nihilistic members. 

ISJIM \ A Malkavians have a reputation 

’ ” * * for sadistic behavior and for 

_,. holding little grasp of the hu- 

S. fly manity they still retain. In 

y ^ ' j truth, such Malkavians are a 

\\ I J minority. The members of this 

/ / clan regularly surprise the Kin- 

Pf ' A / / / dred; often they do not seem 

\ j / / insane. Some Kindred believe 

W / // the Malkavians have an unde- 

/ sullied by a few truly psychotic mem- 

Cfaj, UM/ bers. However, remember that sometimes 

/ j the most normal-seeming people have the 

/least grasp on reality. 

(li~ The Malkavians have a time-honored tradi- 

tion of playing practical jokes upon Kindred and 
kine alike. The nature of these “pranks" can vary 
V* wildly, ranging from the harmlessly fun to the poten- 
—f ^ tially lethal. The Malkavians, when they interact with one 
another at all, tend to award prestige within the clan on the 
/■ basis of these pranks. Many Malkavians solemnly believe that 
the Jyhad is a joke created by the founder of their line. 

The Malkavians are very picky about whom they Embrace. Typically, only those 
on the verge of insanity are chosen. The members of this clan search long and hard 
for those who have seen so much truth that they have descended into the pits of chaos, 
and thus have unique perspectives on reality. Indeed, if the progeny-to-be is sane, the 


MaLkMan 


L 



130 © VAMPIRE: The Masquerade 






























sire will make the Embrace and Becoming as difficult as 
possible, seeking to drive the mortal mad in the process. 

Nickname: Kooks 

Appearance: The members of this clan have 
different looks and live vastly differing lifestyles. 

Haven: Malkavians live anywhere they feel com¬ 
fortable. Many of them seek out hospitals and asylums 
to reside in. Some are even assumed to be inmates by 
the staff. 

Background: The members of this clan only 

select those who are close to death as neonates, or those 
who are so insane that existence as a vampire is of little 
consequence. They believe all mortals should have a 
chance to live out their natural lives. 

Character Creation: Malkavians can have any 

sort of concept — the weirder the better. They may 
have a variety of different Demeanors, which are rarely 
indicative of their true Natures. Mental Attributes are 
primary, as are Talent Abilities. Malkavians can have 
nearly any Background Trait. 

Clan Disciplines: Auspex, Dominate, Obfuscate 

Weaknesses: All members of this clan have 
some sort of Derangement. In fact, characters begin the 
game with one. The player may choose any Derange¬ 
ment (see Chapter Eight), but the character will never 
be able to completely overcome it, no matter how much 
Willpower is spent. The touch of madness is always 
upon the members of this line. 

Organization: Many Malkavians probably do 
not understand that they are a clan, and the rest are busy 
denying that they are Malkavians. 


Quote: “Madness you say! Do you fear me? 
Are you afraid of what I might do, of what I might 
say ? What a fascinating reaction. Don’t you find 
it somewhat encumbering?" 


Stereotypes: j 

• Nosferatu — They are the most amus¬ 
ing of all the clans and perhaps the most 
honest, for they so obviously are what 
die others try so hard to avoid. 

• Tremere — They perceive what we 
perceive, but hide from it. They still 
strive to avoid diat which is inevitable. 
Nature is frill of cycles. 

• Ventrue — They are the most fun to 
play games with, for they take it all so 
very seriously. 

• Gangrel —■ They are different from the 
rest, as are we, but they are even more 
lonely. 

• Toreador — Such gleeful hedonists — 
it is not a life they live, but an everlast¬ 
ing death. But if they should ever 
comprehend that, dieir party would 
end. 

• Brujah — They have a vision, but in 
their fanaticism they are as blind as the 
rest. 


MMBIREl 

The Masquerade 


rr: *J€*rc* 
riMr »Cv***r 
! MORAVIAN 


: wfv«oTic 

CCX**T>.AM 


Mental 

I_ 9*000 PmifKai_ 

_ ••••«» iMtaianKf _ 


iWI □ 

Hun -| □ 
4 □ 
UUnU 4 □ 

• * - □ 

□ 



Chapter Seven: Traits 






























































































The Nosferatu do stay in contact with one another, 
and have developed a unique subculture among the 
Kindred. They play host to one another with the most 
elaborate politeness and gentility. They share the 
information they gamer among themselves, and as a 
result are probably the best-informed of the Kindred. 

[Nickname: Sewer Rats 

Appearance: The changes that the curse has 

wrought upon the members of this clan are the most 
dominant of any bloodline. They sport huge fangs, 
their skin is coarse and wrinkled, and they typically 
have no hair (except in all the wrong places). 

Haven: The Nosferatu most often live under¬ 
ground, either in dank cellars or within the city sewer 
system. When they do live above ground, they frequent 
abandoned houses or graveyards. 

Background: They tend to choose their fledg¬ 
lings from the castoffs and failures of society: the 
homeless, the mentally ill and the hopelessly antisocial. 

Character Creation: Most Nosferatu have lower- 
class concepts, and tend to have a strong contrast 
between their Natures and Demeanors. Physical At¬ 
tributes are primary, as are Talents. 

Clan Disciplines: Animalism, Obfuscate, Po- 
tence 

Weaknesses: Nosferatu are so ugly that they 
have an Appearance of zero. Simply cross the entire 
Attribute off the character sheet. Nosferatu fail any 
action that involves their Appearance (they really are 
hideous). 

Organization: They tend to look out for them¬ 
selves and mingle little with others. They are united in 
spirit, with an established network, but almost never 
have formal clan meetings of any sort. 


Stereotypes: 


Quote: "1 don't look for trouble, but if it 
comes, I hide from it. Damn right, pretty boy. You 
may call me chicken, but I've known a lot of 
Kindred over the years who got smart just a few 
seconds too late. It's not like we can’t die, it’s just 
that it don’t come natural any more." 


n 


• Tremere—Shady characters; they’re 
up to something. 

• Ventrue — Too damn proper; 
something’s stuck up their.... 

• Gangrel— Good hlokes; they know 
who they are. 

• Toreador — Empty-headed whelps 
who should be spanked. 

• Brujah — Nice enough fellas, once 
you get past the crap. 

• Malkavian — Creepy, ain’t they? 
Don’t even trust 'em. 


MmbireL 


The Masquerade 

Nature CWWD&COM Grocntio.: 12,1, 1 

D«u«r Ditteras. „rca: 

CUk nkkfcrato Co.tr*: CMIuPr 

|Nt>UST*iAl-lST 

■ Altribwtes» - 

Sodal Hcatal 

_**000 C W hl_0*000 Pmrpuon_.0*000 

_*0000 00*0* Im«U«mc t _ _*0*00 

_ ooooo ooooo W*»_0***0 


_ 0**00 KAM* 

_ ooooo l*~«t 

OOOOO b«_ 


_ **ooo SeM<CcMir4_ 



Chapter Seven: Traits 0 133 












































T he members of this clan are known for their 
hedonism, though that is a misinterpreta¬ 
tion of what they truly are. They are proud 
and regal Kindred, highly excitable, and they cultivate 
expensive tastes — but hedonism is going a bit too far. 
Artists are always so misunderstood. 

The Toreador are the most sophisticated of the 


beauty, though in many cases the search for beauty is 
overwhelmed by the search for pleasure, and the Torea¬ 
dor becomes little more than a sensualist. 

Like all true artists, they search for a truth beyond 
an existence they fear to be meaningless. It is that 
struggle for truth, and ultimately salvation, that has 
inspired them with what they consider to be their 


clans. They are con¬ 
cerned with beauty in 
k a way no mortal can 
fathom. They use 
the rarefied senses 
Hi and tastes given to 
them by the Em- 
Pffll/J brace to become as 
fll A consumed and im- 
ffljill | passioned as 
IN \ possible. Ideally, 
1 Vft' \ to a Toreador, 
\ nothing mat- 

\ ters as 

much as 


w 



mission — protectors of the genius of the human race. 
They are truly in love with the vigor and passion of the 
mortals, and never tire of marveling at their creations. 

The clan as a whole considers its members conser¬ 
vationists; their protectorate consists of the world’s 
greatest artists. They specifically seek out those whom 
they consider to be the most talented and grant them 
the boon of immortality, thus preserving their genius 
against the ravages of aging and death. They constantly 
search for new talent and spend a great deal of time 
deciding whom to preserve and whom to leave to their 
fate. Among the Toreador are some of the greatest 
musicians and artists who ever lived. 

The greatest weakness of the Toreador is their 
sensitivity to beauty. They so reflexively surround 
themselves with elegance and luxury that they often 
lose themselves in the endless pursuit of vice after 
vice. Some among this clan become con- 
,4 cemed with nothing but their own continued 

( / pleasure — the reputation of the entire 
1 clan is affected by their excesses. 

/y/ Nickname: Degenerates 

jLa' / Appearance: The members of this 

ijw // clan are usually good-looking. They 
always dress in the very latest fashions 
3=1 from the most expensive stores. Of all the 

Kindred, only the Toreador manage (or 
f \ \ bother) to keep up with the ever-changing 
\\ panoply of human fashion. 
























Haven: They often live in luxury condos or apart¬ 
ments near the center of the city, as close to the action 
as possible. 

Background: They pride themselves on only 
selecting the most exemplary members of human soci¬ 
ety for initiation into their clan. Most members were 
artists or musicians, and many continue their artistic 
pursuits in undeath. 

Character Creation: Toreador often have en¬ 
tertainer or dilettante concepts. They have flamboyant 
Demeanors, but may have very unique Natures. Social 
Attributes are primary, as are Skills. Normal Back¬ 
ground Traits include Fame, Resources and Retainers. 

Clan Disciplines: Auspex, Celerity, Presence 

Weaknesses: The members of this clan are as 
much prisoners of their artistic vision and sensitivity as 
they are its beneficiaries. They are often overcome by 
the beauty they see around them, and become immobi¬ 
lized with fascination. Such things as paintings, neon 
signs, or even sunrises can captivate them. It requires 
a successful Willpower roll to break the fascination 
quickly; otherwise, the Toreador will stand, awed and 
helpless, for minutes or even hours. This trait explains 
why Toreador so often fall in love with mortals. 

Organization: The members of this clan meet 
frequently, though these gatherings are more social 
occasions than councils. In times of great urgency, they 
become united and ferociously active, but typically 
they are too apathetic to be much of a force. 


Quote: “I remember my first bve, a beautiful 
woman with a silver laugh. For nine years we were 
constant companions, but in the end I had to let her 
go. She begged me to take her but I could not. You 
may call me cruel, but in the end I realized she was 
not a true artist, but an imitator. She was unwor¬ 
thy. I don't think 1 have ever recovered.” 


Stereotypes: 

• Nosferatu— These loathsome beasts 
ought to have been expelled from 
the Camarilla long ago. They hate 
all beauty and despise us for ours. 

• Tremere — Honesty is not a word we 
associate with this clan, but we re¬ 
spect them for their dedication. 

• Ventrue — The patricians of our 
kind, the Ventrue are the only ones 
with the refinement to appreciate 
art, though not as we do. 

• Gangrel — We don’t claim to under¬ 
stand them. Are they Kindred at all? 

• Brujah — They have little respect 
for the accomplishments of civiliza¬ 
tion, but they do understand the 
virtue of change. 

• Malkavian — Though chaos can be 
beautiful, it would be a difficult life. 


iVAMRIRE- 


T5 



The Masquerade ' 

N Mtnn: /\*cHir£cr Oeatratloa: ftH, 

DcaKoaor &Au.4vT Haven: 

CIue TortCADo* Caveat: FctroKi 


Haven: 

CaaKcpt: 

#tr*r 


•••••ooooo 

□□□□□□□□□□ 


iwi □ 
Hurt .1 □ 

Won! -1 □ 

WtaunAd 4 □ 

MaJd -2 □ 

CrfeU -5 □ 


□□□□□□□□□□ 


Atmtmin VV) AMinn IW' CXk 
































































































these “ornaments” are rumored to be potent mystical 
talismans. 

Haven. The Tremere clan operates a chantry in 
almost every city where it has members. All those of the 
Tremere clan are welcome in any chantry. Those who 
live on their own have a wide variety of accommoda¬ 
tions. 

Background: They choose the most aggressive 
and ambitious people as their neonates, preferring 
males. They carefully train and nurture them for years, 
calling them “apprentices.” 

Character Creation: Tremete usually have pro¬ 
fessional and highly educated concepts and theirNatures 
and Demeanors tend to be archetypes connected with 
power or science. Mental Attributes are primary, as are 
Knowledge Abilities. They often have the Mentor 
Background Trait. 

Clan Disciplines: Auspex, Dominate, 

Thaumaturgy 

Weaknesses: Tremere neonates must all drink 
from the blood of the seven elders of the clan when they 
are created. This means that all Tremere are at least one 
step toward being Blood Bound to the clan, and there¬ 
fore must watch their step very carefully when around 
their leaders. 

Organization: The Tremere are tightly orga¬ 
nized and very hierarchical. The younger members are 
expected to obey the older ones without question, but 
this is not as strong a tenet as it once was. 




Quote: “We must survive Gehenna and es¬ 
tablish the tenets of the new world order once the 
horror is overcome. If we are to succeed, we must 
control the other clans. No more time can be 
wasted. If they cannot be convinced to aid us, they 
must be forced." 


Stereotypes: 

• Nosteratu — These creatures may 
make useful servants, but they are 
too noxious to tolerate for long. 

• Ventrue — Too fractious to be truly 
effective; nonetheless, they are our 
chief rivals for control of the 
Camarilla. 

• Gangrel — Noble Kindred, in their 
own way. 

• Toreador—Idle hedonists. They do 
not understand that Gehenna will 
end their way of life forever. 

• Brujah — Ignorant revolutionaries 
who don’t even comprehend what it 
is that they oppose. They respect 

only power. 

• Malkavian — So often they seem 
normal, but all their lineage carry 
their strange curse. They are occa¬ 
sionally useful. 



“ 4 □ 

hJ .1 □ 

SU—j 4 □ 

4 □ 




Chapter Seven: Traits 0 137 











































Bnttiit 


Id-fashioned and tradition-bound, the 
Ventrue are sophisticated and genteel. 
They believe in good taste above all else 
and work hard to make their lives comfortable. They 
are most frequently the leaders in the Camarilla, and 
are cautious, honorable, social and elegant Kindred. 

The Ventrue fancy themselves a clan of the mod¬ 
em world, and deny that they live in the past. This may 
be true of the most powerful members of the clan, 
but many are unable to give up the habits and 
dress of the time when they were Embraced. 
The attitudes and beliefs of one’s mortal days 
are never forgotten by a Ventrue. 

They are most often found among the up¬ 
per crust of the mortal world. Their 
sophistication serves them in good stead among 
the elite of mortal society, and it allows them to 
control many of the more powerful members of 
the city. Because of the relative ease in which 
they fit in among such company, the Ventrue 
often have a monopoly on political control of 
the city. If something goes wrong, it is often 
to the Ventrue that the other Kindred turn 
to for aid. 


There is a strong Ventrue tradition 
that any member of the line may find safe 
refuge with any other member of the line, 
and cannot be refused. Thus many Ventrue 
aid their fellow clan members before the need 




























11 if 11 If 11 8 11 11 11 11 If 11 <1 if 




arises for this tradition to be invoked. Harboring a 
fugitive in one’s haven can be detrimental to one’s 
welfare. 


They are very proud of their leadership of vampire 
society, and will always insist that they were the founders 
of the Camarilla. They will do nearly anything to retain 
their grip on the politics of the cities and the Camarilla, 
and are exceedingly protective of their reputations. 


[Nickname: Blue Bloods 


Appearance: The Ventrue do not change their 
ways easily, so they often dress in very old-fashioned 
styles — lace and ruffles, top hats and evening coats. 
Younger members still dress very well — preppy would 
best describe it. 


Haven: They tend to make their homes in man¬ 
sions, often their mortal dwellings. 


Background: Typically they select older and 
more experienced people as neonates, usually members 
of the upper class. Sometimes they will only Embrace 
their own mortal descendants. 


Stereotypes: 

• Nosferatu — Frightful creatures, 
but they can’t help being what they 

are. 


T5 


• Tremere — Good chaps, support 
the Camarilla 100%, but they have 
uncertain motivations. 


• Gangrel — They are somewhat un¬ 
couth, but can be trusted. 


• Toreador —Tasteful and creative, if 
a bit unrestrained. 


• Brujah —Bullies and rebels all. They 
are uncontrollable and untamable. 


Malkavian — They are not half as 
crazy as they pretend to be. 


Character Creation: Ventrue tend to have up¬ 
per class concepts. Mental Attributes are primary, as are 
Knowledge Abilities. Resources and Influence are com¬ 
mon Background Traits. 


Clan Disciplines: Dominate, Fortitude, Presence 

Weaknesses: Ventrue have exacting and rar¬ 
efied tastes, even when it comes to blood. The player 
must pick a restriction on the type of blood her charac¬ 
ter can feed upon, e.g. only young men, no animals, 
only virgins, etc. The character will feed on no other 
type of blood, not even if she is starving or under duress. 

Organization: Though the Ventrue clan meets 
often, their councils are sarcastically called “debating 
societies” because of the amount of talk and lack of 
action. The Ventrue consider this the only civilized 
way to get anything done. 


Quote: "The best way to get even with one's 
enemies is to outlive them. Because we are reason¬ 
able and above such petty concerns as vengeance, 
we are the leaders among our kind. Our colleagues 
do little to support the Camarilla, so we must bear 
the burden alone.” 



I 



T 


I 


I 


I 




Chapter Seven: Traits © 139 







































mm 


Generations Chart 




Trait Max Rating 

Blood Pool Size 

Blood Points/Turn 

Third 

10 

? 

? 

Fourth 

9 

50 

10 

Fifth 

8 

40 

8 

Sixth 

7 

30 

6 

Seventh 

6 

20 

5 

Eighth 

5 

15 

3 

Ninth 

5 

14 

2 

Tenth 

5 

13 

1 

Eleventh 

5 

12 

1 

Twelfth 

5 

11 

1 

Thirteenth + 

5 

10 

1 

Trait Max Rating: This indicates the highest Trait rating a vampire can have. This is especially important when it 
comes to Disciplines. Note that it is impossible for player characters to have more than a five rating in any Trait, at least 
at the beginning of the chronicle. 

Blood Pool Size: Ancient vampires are capable of storing more blood (or its energy) in their system than younger ones. 

Blood Points/Tum: This describes how many Blood Points a vampire can use in a single turn for either extra dice or 
levels of healing. 


Personality Archetypes 


As far as we can discern , ihe sole purpose of human existence 
is 10 kindle a light of meaning in the darkness of mere being. 

— C.G. Jung 

We humans roleplay on an intrinsic basis. Every mo¬ 
ment of our lives is spent playing a role. Our being is made 
up of many layers of personalities, some of which we pretend 
to be, others of which we present naturally. 

Personality Archetypes are a way of defining these 
personalities. They describe the eternal roles that are a 
collective characteristic of our identities and that we all share 
in common. The psychologist Carl Jung invented the con¬ 
cept of Archetypes as a way to describe the primordial 
concepts residing in the universal unconscious of humanity. 
He never tried to give names to them, as he believed one 
really couldn’t describe such universal symbols with words. 
However, in order to incorporate the concept into Vampire, 
we have done exactly this, so remember to take what we say 
with a grain of salt. 

Archetypes encompass not only personalities, but places 
and things as well. They are a way for the Storyteller to get 
the players to understand the characters and setting, and to 
relate them to their own lives. Archetypes help us make 
sense out of things, and help the Storyteller bring the story 
home. 


Lr 


Characters do not, in fact, fit into such neat and tidy 
categories. Archetypes are the molds for an infinite number 
of different personalities, and should not be seen as absolute 
standards. They are fundamental patterns, yet each indi¬ 
vidual varies from the pattern in many ways. These personality 
Archetypes are examples of the variety of personalities that 
can found; they are intended to guide, not to restrict. 

The key to the use of Archetypes is the interaction 
between the character’s Nature and Demeanor. The Nature 
is the true personality of the character, that which she is but 
may not reveal to others. Most people do not wish others to 
know them intimately, and they therefore create facades 
behind which they can hide their true selves — false fronts. 
A character’s Demeanor may be as consistent as her At¬ 
tributes, or it may change from minute to minute. An 
extraordinarily open, honest or simple-minded individual 
will have the same Demeanor and Nature. 

Archetypes have a practical impact on the game, for 
each Archetype provides a different way to regain Willpower 
points. The Nature of the character is thus vital in regaining 
Willpower. The procedure works like this: the player notices 
her character may be able to regain Willpower due to her 
actions or the situation — this varies from Archetype to 
Archetype. She asks the Storyteller if she can regain 
Willpower, and the Storyteller either accepts or rejects the 


140 0 VAMPIRE: The Masquerade 














































request. If the Storyteller deems the request to be valid, he 
awards anything from one to three Willpower points, de¬ 
pending on the nature of the character's actions. The 
Storyteller shouldn’t reward a character if he thinks the 
player was performing the actions in order to regain Will¬ 
power and was not really roleplaying. For more details on 
how this works, see the Willpower section in this chapter, pg. 
176. Details on adding to your permanent Willpower total 
are in Chapter Eight, pg. 184. 

The Storyteller should encourage his players to develop 
their own Archetypes to describe their characters’ Natures or 
Demeanors, thus giving them an opportunity to create truly 
unique personalities. 

Architect 

Your sense of purpose goes beyond your own needs; you 
try to create something of lasting value for those who will 
come after you. People need many things, and you gain 
satisfaction by providing whatever you can. You are the type 
of person who makes an effort to build something of value: to 
found a town, create a company or in some way leave a lasting 
legacy. Many American pioneers were Architects by Nature. 

— Regain Willpower whenever you create or establish 
something of importance or lasting value. 

Bon Vivant 

Life is pointless, shallow and meaningless — so have as 
good a time as possible. Rome may bum, but you shall drink 
wine and sing songs. A hedonist, sensualist, sybarite and 
party animal, the words austere, self-denial and self-disci¬ 
pline have no place in your life. You much prefer the concept 
of instant gratification. Still, you don’t mind a little hard 
work as long as a good time awaits you upon completion. 
Most Bon Vivants have low Self-Control, for they so dearly 
love excess. 

— Regain Willpower whenever you have a truly good 
time and can fully express your exultation (or perhaps even 
more points if you enjoy an especially fun night). 

Bravo 

You are known as a bully, a ruffian and a tough, and 
delight in tormenting the weak. Things must always go your 
way, and you do not tolerate those who cross you. Power and 
might are all you respect; indeed, you heed only those who 
can prove their power to you. 

You see nothing wrong with forcing your will upon 
others. There is nothing you like better than to persecute, 
antagonize, heckle and intimidate those for whom you have 
contempt — and of them there are many. The emotions of 
kindness and pity are not completely foreign to you, but you 
hide from your own sense of weakness through cruelty to 
others. While most Bravos despise the weak, a few become 
their protectors. 

— Regain Willpower whenever you intimidate or physi¬ 
cally force another person to do what you wish. 


Chapter Seven: Traits © 141 




































Caregiver 

You always try to help those around you, struggling to 
make a difference in the needs and sorrows of the unfortu¬ 
nate. People around you depend on your stability and 
strength to keep them steady and centered. You are the one 
people turn to when they have a problem. 

— Regain Willpower whenever you successfully protect 
or nurture someone else. It can be as small as a smile of 
support or a shoulder to lean on at an appropriate moment. 
You must help the other person in some way, though he need 
not acknowledge it openly. 

Child 

You are still immature in personality and temperament: 
a kid who never grew up. Though you can (hopefully) care 
for yourself, you prefer the security of being watched over by 
others. Often you seek out someone to look out for you — a 
caretaker of sorts. Some see you as a spoiled brat, while others 
see you as an innocent cherub unaffected by the evils of the 
world. This is a very common archetype for Kindred who 
were created when they were young and subsequently ma¬ 
tured mentally, but not emotionally. 

— Regain Willpower whenever someone does some¬ 
thing to help you with no apparent gain for herself. 


Conformist 

You are a follower. Taking charge is just not your style. 
It is easy for you to adapt, attune, adjust, comply and recon¬ 
cile yourself to whatever new situation you find yourself in. 
You (lit to the brightest star, the person whom you feel to be 
the best, throwing your lot in with her. It is both difficult and 
distasteful for you to go against the flow or rebel. You hate 
inconsistency and instability, and know that by supporting a 
strong leader, you help prevent chaos from occurring. All 
stable groups need some kind of Conformist. 

— Regain Willpower whenever your group (the brood) 
accomplishes something because of your support and aid. 

Conniver 

What's the sense of working hard when you can get 
something for nothing? Why drudge when, just by talking, 
you can get what you want? You always try to find the easy 
way out, the fast track to success and wealth. Some people 
might call what you do swindling or even outright theft, but 
you know that you only do what everyone else does; you just 
do it better. Additionally, it’s a game, and you get great 
pleasure out of outwitting someone. Connivers play many 
roles, so you may be a thief, a swindler, a street waif, an 
entrepreneur, a con man or just a finagler. 

— Regain Willpower whenever you are able to get your 
way by tricking another person into doing as you wish. 






VAMPIRE: The Masquerade 

























Curmudgeon 

You are an irascible, churlish person at heart, taking 
everything seriously and finding little humor in life (though 
you may have a wickedly barbed wit). Cynicism is your 
middle name; it is the tool with which you judge everything 
in life. You have a very well-defined understanding of how 
things really work, especially when they involve the circus of 
human endeavor. Long ago the foolish actions of others 
ceased to surprise you. 

— Regain Willpower whenever someone does some¬ 
thing stupid, just like you predicted. You must predict it 
either out loud to the other characters or in private to the 
Storyteller. 

Deviant 

There are always people who don’t fit in, and you are 
such a miscreant. Your beliefs, motivations and sense of 
propriety are the complete antithesis of the status quo. You 
are not so much an aimless rebel as an independent thinker 
who does not belong in the society in which you were raised. 
You don’t give a damn about other people's morality, but you 
do adhere to your own strange code of conduct. Deviants are 
typically irreverent, and some have truly bizarre tastes and 
desires. 

— Regain Willpower whenever you are able to thumb 
your nose at society and its precepts without retaliation (most 
often vampiric society rather than mortal). 

Director 

You despise chaos and disorder, and tend to take control 
and organize things in order to suppress anarchy. You like to 
be in charge, live to organize and habitually strive to make 
things work smoothly. You trust your own judgment implic¬ 
itly and tend to think of things in black-and-white terms: 
“This won't work,” “You're either for me or against me,” 
“There are two ways todo this— my way and the wrong way.” 

— Regain Willpower when you are allowed to lead a 
group and accomplish some significant task. 

Fanatic 

You are consumed by a cause; it is the primary force in 
your life, for good or ill. Every ounce of blood and passion you 
possess is directed toward it; in fact, you may feel very guilty 
about spending time on anything else. You will let nothing 
stand in your way — nothing that you cannot overcome, in 
any case. You and those around you may suffer, but your cause 
is everything — the end justifies the means. Before the game 
begins, make sure you describe your cause, and define how it 
may affect your behavior. 

—You regain Willpower whenever you accomplish an 
act which furthers your cause. 


Gallant 

You are as flamboyant as you are amoral; some see you as 
a rogue, a Don Juan, a rake, a paramour or just a lounge lizard 
— but you see yourself as all of the above. A consummate 
actor who loves to make as big a show of things as possible, 
nothing attracts your attention more than an appreciative 
audience. You love people and you love to impress them even 
more. Though you may indeed be a superior lover, you enjoy 
the chase almost as much as you enjoy the act. Gallants vary 
widely in temperament and ambition, holding in common 
little more than their love of attention. 

— Regain Willpower whenever you manage to dazzle or 
impress another person. The Storyteller is always the judge, 
even when characters are involved. 

Jester 

You are the fool, idiot, quipster, clown or comic, forever 
making fun of both yourself and others. You constantly seek 
the humor in any situation, and strive always to battle the 
tides of depression inside yourself. You hate sorrow and pain, 
and constantly try to take others’ minds off the dark side of 
life. Sometimes you’ll do nearly anything to forget pain 
exists. Your particular brand of humor might not always 
impress your friends, but it makes you feel better. Some 
Jesters manage to escape pain and are truly happy, but most 
never find release. 

— Regain Willpower when you raise the spirits of those 
around you through the device of humor, especially when you 
are able to escape your own pain in the process 

Judge 

As a facilitator, moderator, arbitrator, conciliator and 
peacemaker, you always seek to make things better. You 
pride yourself on your rationality, your judgment and your 
ability to deduce a reasonable explanation when given the 
facts. You struggle to promote truth, but you understand how 
difficult it is to ascertain. You respect justice, for that is the 
way in which truth can reign. 

In your view, people are resources, albeit ones that are 
most difficult to manage and employ. You hate dissension 
and arguments, and shy away from dogmatism. Sometimes 
Judges make good leaders, though a lack of vision can 
sometimes cause them to maintain the status quo instead of 
searching for a better way. 

— Regain Willpower when you are able to successfully 
separate the truth from a web of lies or can convince disputing 
individuals to agree with your judgments. 


J 


































Ill* 


Loner 

You are the type of person who is always alone, even in 
the midst of a crowd. You are the wanderer, hunter and lone 
wolf. Though others might think of you as lonely, forsaken, 
isolated or remote, in truth you prefer your own company to 
that of others. There are many different reasons why this 
might be so: you don’t understand people, you understand 
people too well, people dislike you, people like you too much, 
or you are simply lost in your own thoughts. Your reasons arc 
your own. 

— When you manage to accomplish some significant 
task on your own, without the aid of others, yet which still 
aids the group in some way, you regain Willpower based on 
the significance of the achievement. 

Martyr 

All possess the martyr instinct, but few act upon it. Even 
fewer live the life of a Martyr, but you are such a one. Your 
desire for self-sacrifice stems either from a low self-esteem, a 
feeling of a lack of control, or a profoundly developed sense 
of love. You are able to endure long-lasting and severe 
suffering because of your beliefs and ideals. 

At worst, a Martyr expects sympathy and attention 
because of his or her suffering, and may even feign or 
exaggerate pain or deprivation. At best, a Martyr will choose 
to suffer injury or even the Final Death rather than renounce 
his religion, beliefs, principles, cause or friends. 

— Regain Willpower when you sacrifice yourself in a 
real and immediate way for your beliefs or another individual. 


Rebel 

You are a malcontent, iconoclast and free-thinking 
recalcitrant. You are so independent-minded and free-willed 
that you are unwilling to join any particular cause or move¬ 
ment. You are just yourself and only desire the freedom to be 
yourself. You do not make a good follower and aren’t usually 
a very good leader either (unless your followers are willing to 
go wherever you lead). You tend to be insubordinate to 
authority to the point of stupidity. 

— Regain Willpower whenever your rebellion against 
the status quo turns out to be for the best. 

Survivor 

No matter what, you always manage to survive. You can 
endure, pull through, recover from, outlast and outlive nearly 
any circumstance. When the going gets tough, you get going. 
You never say die, and never give up — never. Nothing 
angers you as much as a person who doesn’t struggle to make 
things better, or who surrenders to the nameless forces of the 
universe. 

— Regain Willpower whenever you survive a difficult 
situation through your own cunning and perseverance. 

Traditionalist 

You are an orthodox, conservative and extremely tradi¬ 
tional individual. What was good enough for you when you 
were young is good enough for you now. You almost never 

































































Specialties: Smooth, Eloquent, Outgoing, Captivating, 
Charming, Regal, Genial, Well-Mannered, Urbane, Sophis¬ 
ticated, Rustic, Gracious 

• Poor: Others avoid being around you. 

• • Average: You are likable. 

• • • Good: People trust and confide in you. 

•••• Exceptional: You have something which 

draws people to you. 

• • • • • Outstanding: You could lead a nation. 

Manipulation 

This Trait measures your aptitude for active self-expres¬ 
sion, such as when you want to get someone else to do 
something. It is important when you attempt to influence or 
manipulate another person directly. You use Manipulation 
to trick, fool, bluff, outmaneuver and out-talk another. 
While you may be effective at manipulating people whom 
you have just met, those who already know you are rarely 
fooled. 

Manipulation is used in all rolls where you are attempt¬ 
ing to influence or convince another person overtly. Whether 
they like you or not is of no consequence (though it can affect 
the difficulty of what you are trying). 

If you fail a Manipulation action and the other person 
realizes what you were trying to do (you botch for instance), 
she may well be angered. People are manipulated all the time 
and usually they ignore it. However, if it is brought to their 
attention, it can be a very disturbing thought. Manipulation 
can net great results, but it is risky to perform openly. 
Characters with high Manipulation are not well-trusted by 
those who know them best. 

Specialties: Glib, Expressive, Cunning, Persuasive, 
Smooth, Silver-Tongued, Bravado, Ingratiating, Eloquent, 
Blarney, Double-Talker, Sophist, Witty 

• Poor: You express yourself in as few words as 
possible. 

• • Average: Others might believe you. 

• • • Good: You’d make a good lawyer. 

• • • • Exceptional: You should run for office. 

• • • • • Outstanding: You could sell ice to an Eskimo. 

Appearance 

This Trait describes your Appearance in terms of your 
attractiveness and force of presence. You do not necessarily 
need beauty to have a high Appearance, you only need looks 
that somehow attract others to you. Appearance is not just 
your static, model beauty, it's the appeal of the way you move 
and talk, your animation and expressiveness. It is a measure 
of how interesting and attractive you seem to others. 

Appearance is vital in any social situation where words 
are not exchanged. It is more important than you might 
think offhand; the impressions you get of another are heavily 
affected by that person’s looks, no matter how open-minded 
you are. You may not like to admit it, but it’s true. 

More than simply being a Trait you use to make rolls, 
Appearance is often used by the Storyteller to roughly judge 



0 VAMPIRE: The Masquerade 



































how others usually react to you when you first meet. Titus it 
can affect all other Social rolls you make with that person (in 
some cases, your rating determines the maximum number of 
successes from a Social action that can actually be applied, 
making it impossible for an ugly person to achieve anything 
other than minimal success). 

Specialties: Bold Demeanor, Alluring, Captivating, Sexy, 
Luminous, Honest Face, Imposing, Dignified, Pleasing, Hand- 
some, Beautiful, Gorgeous, Look of the Eagles 

• Poor: You tend to attract the hostility of 
others. 

• • Average: You are easily ignored, for you fit in 

so well with the crowd. 

• • • Good: You have a pleasing appearance, and 

people treat you well. 

• • • • Exceptional: You are good-looking enough 

to be a model and are given respect and 
attention because of it. 

• •••• Outstanding: First reactions are either that of 

awe, intense jealousy or complete solicitude. 

Dlental 

The Mental Traits represent your character’s total men¬ 
tal capacity, including such things as memory, perception 
and the ability to learn and think. 

Perception 

This Trait indicates how aware you are of the environ¬ 
ment around you. While sometimes this is a conscious 
action, such as when you are searching for something, it more 
often works intuitively — you simply notice something. At 
base, Perception is a sensitivity to the world, an open-eyed 
quality common among children (for whom the world is a 
boundless and mysterious place) and seldom present among 
the most jaded. 

Perception is used to see if you have the insight to 
understand or be aware of a certain fact or concept. It can 
help indicate how alert you are to ambushes, the subtext of a 
politician’s speech, and the subtleties of color in a painting. 

Specialties: Insightful, Attentive, Patient, Probing, Keen- 
Eyed, Intuitive, Visionary, Astute, Apprehensive 

• Poor: You are blind to anything but the 
obvious. 

•• Average: You are unaware of the subtle 

interactions that occur around you. 

• • • Good: You are aware of moods and textures. 

• ••• Exceptional: You are constantly alert to the 

nuances of life. 

• •••• Outstanding: You can see a needle in a 

haystack. 

Intelligence 

Your Intelligence represents both your memory and your 
ability to learn and think. It is important for Abilities that 
require complex thought processes. Some describe it as a 
person’s quickness of mind or judgment, but it is more than 


that—it is the facility for understanding, and the capacity for 
reasoning and evaluation. Intelligence is a rating of an 
individual’s depth and flexibility of thought. 

Common sense, street savvy and wisdom are not compo¬ 
nents of the Intelligence Attribute; these are facets of a 
character that are portrayed by the player. However, low 
Intelligence can indicate a character who lacks the capacity 
to understand complicated thoughts, and who is a very slow 
learner — he might simply see things in terms of black and 
white, and won’t understand that things are really in shades 
of gray. 

Characters with high Intelligence, on the other hand, 
are sophisticated thinkers capable of decoding many differ¬ 
ent levels of an argument or a problem. They have a 
discerning judgment and are well able to tell the truth from 
lies, at least when they have the time to think things over. 
Intelligence caters to carefully thought-out judgments rather 
than snap decisions, which is the realm of Wits. 

Specialties: Discerning, Creative, Knowledgeable, Prag¬ 
matic, Astute, Brilliant, Bookworm, Clear Thinker 


• 

Poor: IQ 80 

• • 

Average: IQ 100 

• • • 

Good: IQ 120 

• • • • 

Exceptional: IQ 140 


Outstanding: IQ 160+ 

Wits 

The Wits Attribute describes your ability to react quickly 

and correctly 

to new situations, as well as your overall 


sharpness of mind and cleverness. In the simplest of terms, 
it is a measure of how quickly you think. A more complex 
view understands Wits as a shrewdness, sagacity and capacity 
for understanding problems in the most basic terms. 

Those with low Wits are occasionally unable to take 
appropriate action because of surprise (like a deer caught in 
the headlights). A low Wits can indicate that you are more 
easily tricked and fooled than most people, for you arc a 
gullible and unsophisticated student of human nature. If you 
have high Wits, you are able to react quickly to new situa¬ 
tions and are seldom caught off guard by sudden changes in 
events. Whatever else happens, you are able to keep your 
Wits about you. 

Specialties: Clever, Shrewd, Sharp, Practical, Wily, 
Level-Headed, Creative 

• Poor: You send money to televangelists. 

•• Average: You know when to bet or fold in 

poker. 

• • • Good: You are capable of handling L.A. rush 

hours (without shooting anyone). 

• • • • Exceptional: You could be a stand-up comic. 

• • • • • Outstanding: You have a supercomputer for a 

brain — it’s fast. 


1 I I I II II I 1 II I II 

© 147 


Chapter Seven: Traits 











































































Dodge 

The most effective way to win a fight is not to be struck. 
Becoming proficient in the Dodge Talent is a very wise 
choice. Your rating in this area describes your ability to avoid 
both melee and missile attacks, which includes diving for 
cover and ducking punches. 

• Novice: You hit the ground if someone 
screams “Duck!". 

•• Practiced: You have no problem finding 

cover in a firefight. 

• • • Competent: You’re always the last one out in 

dodgeball. 

• • • • Expert: A lucky shot may land once in a blue 

moon. 

• • • • • Master: You can nearly sidestep gunshots. 

Possessed By: Criminals, Street Fighters, Military Per¬ 
sonnel, Bouncers, Boxers 

Specialties: Leap, Sidestep, Duck, Cover, Dive 


Empathy 

You understand and can sympathize with the emotions 
of others, and are thus able to respond to them appropriately. 
You can often discern the motives behind someone's actions 
by simply listening to them. You can also detect when you are 
being told lies. Empathy has a down side, however—because 
you are so open to the feelings of others you often feel the 
same emotions as those around you. 

• Novice: People tell you their problems at 
parties. 

• • Practiced: Occasionally you get sympathetic 

pains from others. 

••• Competent: You have an amazing insight 
into others’ motivations. 

• • • • Expert: No lies ever get past your scrutiny. 

• •••• Master: You often finish other people's 

sentences. 

Possessed by: Actors, Mediums, Above-Average Sales¬ 
men, Pick-Up Artists 

Specialties: Emotions, Truths, Spirits, Personalities, 
Backgrounds 


Intimidation 


The art of intimidation comes in many forms, ranging 
from a subtle suggestion to outright physical damage. Each 
method of intimidation has its time and place. You under¬ 
stand the science of being overbearing, and know how to use 
it to get what you want. People with high Intimidation 
ratings seem to radiate an aura of authority. 

• Novice: Six-year-olds give you the right of 
way. 

• • Practiced: You win an occasional staredown. 

• • • Competent: Your gaze is very unsettling. 

V. 


































Expert: You would be an above-average drill 
sergeant. 

Master: You can make vicious animals turn 
tail and run. 


Leadership 

You can get people to follow your lead and obey your 
orders by exerting authority and by example. Leadership isn’t 
so much knowing the techniques of getting people to follow 
you as it is being the type of person people will follow. 
Leadership is often used in conjunction with Charisma. 

• Novice: You could coach a Little League 

team. 

• • Practiced: Your voice is a dominant one and 

you can demand silence. 

• • • Competent: You are an effective leader in 

times of strife. 

• • • • Expert: You attract followers without really 

trying. 

• • • • • Master: You are a Napoleon, a Churchill — 

ora Hitler... 

Possessed by: Politicians, Military Officers, Gang Lead¬ 
ers, Executives, Police Officers 

Specialties: Commands, Orate, Compelling, Friendly, 
Noble, Military 

Streetwise 

The streets are a major source of information and money, 
as well as big-time trouble. Streetwise has a variety of uses. 
First and foremost, Streetwise allows you to blend in with the 
local scene without drawing attention to yourself. Gossip, 
felony theft and street slang are also imparted by using this 
talent. 

• Novice: You know who sells drugs. 

•• Practiced: You are considered cool by the 

populace. 

• • • Competent: Member of a prominent gang 

• • • • Expert: You have spent most of your life on 

the streets. 

• • • • • Master: If you don't know it, it hasn’t been 

said. 

Possessed by: Gang Members, Winos, Reporters, Home¬ 
less People, Detectives 

Specialties: Picking Pockets, Chugs, Fencing, SlangTerms 

Subterfuge 

You know how to conceal your own motives; moreover, 
you know how to decipher the motives of others and how to 
use those motives against them. The secrets and intrigues of 
others interest you, and you work at understanding their 
weaknesses. A command of this skill makes you the ultimate 
conversationalist, or the ultimate spy. 


Masquerade 




































• Novice: A few white lies never hurt anyone. 

• • Practiced: You can pick up in a nightclub. 

• • • Competent: You could be a criminal lawyer. 

• ••• Expert: Amway salesmen have nothing on 

you. 

• • • • • Master: Perry Mason wishes he had it so good. 
Possessed by: Lawyers, Con Men, Casanovas, Politicians 
Specialties: Finding Weaknesses, Seduction, Little White Lies 

Other Talents 

Search, Guile, Intrigue, Expression, Painting, Sculpture 


Skills 


Skills are all the Abilities that are learned through 
apprenticeships or rigorous training. If you try to use a Skill 
but have no rating in it, the difficulty goes up by one. You are 
simply untrained in the techniques of that Skill, and thus 
have a harder time accomplishing the task than someone 
who has at least some idea of what he is doing. 

Animal Ken 

Animals do not behave in the same way that humans do 
under the same circumstances. The ability to understand the 
actions of animals can come in quite handy. Those charac¬ 
ters skilled in Animal Ken can not only predict the actions 
of animals, but can use this knowledge to calm or enrage 
them. Animal Ken is also the skill used to train animals. 

• Novice: You can befriend a domesticated 
animal. 

• • Practiced: You can housebreak a puppy. 

• • • Competent: You could train a seeing-eye 

dog. 

•••• Expert: You could train a circus animal. 

• • • • • Master: You could domesticate a wild animal. 

Possessed by: Animal Trainers, Zookeepers, Nature Lov¬ 
ers, Masters 

Specialties: Dogs, Cats, Horses, Parrots, Farm Animals 

Drive 

You can drive a car, and perhaps other vehicles as well. 
Simply because you have a Drive skill does not mean that you 
have a familiarity with all land vehicles. Your target number 
may be raised or lowered depending on your general experi¬ 
ence with a particular automobile. 

• Novice: You can drive an automatic 
automobile. 

• • Practiced: You can operate a manual/shift 

transmission. 

• • • Competent: Commercial trucker 

• • • • Expert: Formula One car driver 

• • • • • Master: Evel Kneivil 

Possessed by: Truckers, Race Car Drivers, nearly every¬ 
one bom in the 20th century 

Specialties: Curves, Sudden Stops, Stick Shifts 


Etiquette 

You understand the small nuances of social life, and are 
able to conduct yourself in a manner that is both unobtrusive 
and gracious. You understand how to get along well with 
mortal society. Your specialty is the culture with which you 
are most familiar. You use Etiquette during actions such as 
dancing, seduction, and haggling. Etiquette is also used when 
engaging in diplomacy. 

• Novice: You know when to shut up. 

• • Practiced: You know not to wear paisley at a 

black-tie dinner. 

• • • Competent: You know which spoon to eat 

soup with (not that you can still eat...). 

• • • • Expert: You could get along with just about 

anybody. 

• • • • • Master: You could prevent World War Ill. 

Possessed by: Diplomats, the Idle Rich, Executives 

Specialties: Business, High Society, Street Culture 

Firearms 

Skill in Firearms means that you have a broad knowledge 
of all guns, from a simple .22 to an Ingram Mac-10 machine 
gun. Firearms does not include the ability to operate heavy 
machinery such as tank guns and other artillery weapons. 
However, skill in Firearms also includes the ability to repair 
them. 

• Novice: You’ve had one or two lessons at the 

gun store. 

• • Practiced: You do all right at a firing range. 

• • • Competent: Y ou can pull off a few gun tricks. 

• • • • Expert: You’re cool and steady, even under 

pressure. 

••••• Master: “Do you feel lucky? Well, do ya 

punk?" 

Possessed by: Gang Members, Police, Criminals, Sol¬ 
diers, Hunters 

Specialties: Rifles, Handguns, Pistols, Machine Guns, 
Sprays 

Melee 

The ability to fight with a weapon is a valuable skill in 
the Gothic-Punk environment. Proficiency in this skill 
allows you to use hand-held weapons. Knives, sai, saps, tonfas 
and swords are examples of the types of weapons covered 
under the Melee skill. This skill is almost archaic nowadays 
because of society’s dependence on firearms, but keep in 
mind that a wooden stake or silver spear is a melee weapon... 

• Novice: You have seen a knife being used. 

•• Practiced: You’ve taken a six-week course in 

fencing 

• • • Competent: Average street thug 

• • • • Expert: Any weapon is deadly in your grasp. 

• •••• Master: Bruce Lee with a pair of nunchuka 


Chapter Seven: Traits 








































II III (I Li 1 H 0 I II 0 II 



Possessed by: Police, Fencers, Kendo Enthusiasts, Thugs, 
Gang Members 

Specialties: Swords, Axes, Rapiers, Knives, Clubs, Dis¬ 
arms 

Music 

You can create and play music; you know how to play 
one instrument for every rating point you have. Of course, 
the higher your rating, the better you are at playing your 
instruments, especially the first instruments you learned. 
This is the ability to create music — the higher your rating, 
the greater your musical ability. You should decide what 
instruments you play. 

• Novice: With effort, you can play a few 

simple chords. 

• • Practiced: You could play rhythm guitar in a 

garage band. 

• • • Competent: You could make a decent living 

playing the club circuit. 

• • • • Expert: You could play lead guitar on a 30- 

country tour. 

• • • • • Master: Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart 

Possessed by: Rock Musicians, Disk Jockeys, Singers, 

Conductors 

Specialties: Guitar, Composition, Lyrics, Tuba, Impro¬ 
vised Solos 

Repair 

You are able to repair simple or complex devices of all 
sorts. This includes doors, cars, and even computers. Mastery 
in this skill means you are a jack-of-all-tradcs. This skill 
covers everything from simple carpentry to mechanics. Given 
the proper tools, you can fix almost anything. 

• Novice: You can assemble ready-made kits. 

•• Practiced: With proper time you can wire a 

house. 

• • • Competent: You save quite a few dollars in 

mechanics’ fees. 

•••• Expert: You are able to repair personal 

computers within minutes. 

• • • • • Master: If it’s broke, you can fix it. 

Possessed by: Handymen, Carpenters, Electricians, Me¬ 
chanics 

Specialties: Wood, Computers, Electronics, Engines, 
Automobiles, Electricity 

Security 

You know the techniques and are proficient with the 
tools used for such activities as picking locks, hotwiring cars, 
setting and deactivating burglar alarms, and opening up safes 
or vaults, as well as many other fonns of breaking and 


entering. Many individuals who possess the Security Skill do 
not use it to conduct criminal activities, but rather use it to 
prevent such from occurring or to deduce how they were 
accomplished after the fact. 

• Novice: You can pick a simple lock. 

• • Practiced: You can hotwire a car. 

• • • Competent: You can disable a house alarm. 

•••• Expert: You can crack a safe. 

• • • • • Master: Fort Knox isn’t safe from you. 

Possessed by: Criminals, Locksmiths, Police Officers, 

Detectives, Security Specialists 

Specialties: Electronics, Speed, Silently, Pick Locks, 
Hotwire, Burglar Alarms, Safes, Vaults 

Stealth 

Stealth is the ability to sneak about or hide without 
being seen or heard, and is often rolled against another 
character's Perception. Stealth is of extreme importance 
when vampires engage in the Hunt. 

• Novice: You can hide in the dark. 

• • Practiced: You can hide in the shadows. 

• • • Competent: You are an accomplished hunter. 

•••• Expert: You could walk silently over two 

inches of dry leaves. 

• • • • • Master: Ninja clan leader 

Possessed by: Criminals, Spies, Reporters 

Specialties: Prowl, Hide, Lurk, Shadows, Crowds, Crawl¬ 
ing 

Survival 

The wilderness is a dangerous place, at least for those 
who do not understand it. The skill of Survival includes 
seeking shelter, finding a direct route through and relative 
safety in the wilderness, and tracking. When you use Stealth 
in the wilderness, you cannot roll more dice for your Stealth 
rating than you have in Survival. 

• Novice: You can survive a five-mile hike. 

•• Practiced: You are familiar with the 

wilderness. 

• • • Competent: You know how to brew natural 

medicines. 

• ••• Expert: You are at home in the wild. 

••••• Master: You could find an oasis in Death 

Valley. 

Possessed by: Tribesmen, Hunters, Park Rangers, Hik¬ 
ers, Native Americans 

Specialties: Tracking, Arctic, Jungle, Hunting 

Other Skills 

Piloting, Cooking, Boating, Painting 




i i r 


152 0 VAMPIRE: The Masquerade 





































Knowledges 


Knowledges include all of the Abilities that require the 
rigorous application of the mind, not the body, so nothing but 
Mental Traits can be used to modify Knowledge rolls. Though 
the ratings discuss Knowledges in terms of college degrees, 
school is not the only way to gain Knowledges — it is simply 
the most common. These are scholastic Abilities for the most 
part, but self-study or tutoring is also possible. 

If you do not have a Knowledge, you cannot even 
attempt a roll that involves it. There are exceptions, how¬ 
ever, such as when the Storyteller rules that the roll only 
involves trivial information that anyone has a chance of 
knowing. 

Bureaucracy 

This Knowledge includes the ability to bribe city offi¬ 
cials and make your way through the political system. The 
Knowledge also includes an ability to operate a bureaucracy, 
which of course includes at least a rudimentary sense of 
organization. In fact, this Knowledge can be seen as the 
preeminent organizational ability in the game. 

• Student: You have good organizational ability. 

•• College: You understand power structures 

(who is really in control). 

••• Masters: You can perform stalling tactics 
indefinitely. 

•••• Doctorate: You can perform high 
administrative duties. 

• • • • • Scholar: You could manage to get a meeting 

with the U.S. President. 

Possessed by: Lawyers, Politicians, Journalists, Execu¬ 
tives, Bureaucrats 

Specialties: Negotiation, Intrigue, Bribery, Diplomacy, 
Thwart, Delay, Bypassing the System, Bluffing 

Computer 

You understand how to operate and program computers. 
You may also be able to design your own system. If you wish 
to break into a computer system, you need this Knowledge. 

• Student: You can boot up a video game. 

•• College: You made at least a B in Data 

Processing 101. 

• • • Masters: You arc a competent programmer, 

and can design your own software. 

• • • • Doctorate: You make a living scamming Ma 

Bell. 

• •••• Scholar: Why aren’t you playing Cyberpurrf< 

2020 ™ ? 

Possessed by: Programmers, Data Processors, Gamers, 
Students, Hackers 

Specialties: Hacking, Virus Programs, Retrieving Data 



































Finance 

You are knowledgeable about the values of many differ¬ 
ent things and can properly evaluate the worth of many 
different objects. With your practiced eye, you can judge the 
value of almost any item with a fair degree of accuracy. 
Finance is often used in connection with other Abilities to 
ensure a fair price. 

• Student: You are able to perform basic 
accounting and can accurately keep the 
ledgers of a business. 

• • College: Having either gone to a school of 

management, or somehow gained practical 
experience, you understand higher 
management. 

••• Masters: You could be an international 
banker. 

•••• Doctorate: You can get many times your 
outlay on almost any investment. 

••••• Scholar: You are an economic genius and 
can make money do nearly anything. 

Possessed by: Accountants, Managers, Businessmen, 
Economists, Drug Dealers 

Specialties: Accounting, Corporations, Leveraged 
Buyouts, Fencing, Investing 

Investigation 

You are trained to notice all sorts of details others might 
miss, and at high levels may function as a detective. This 
Knowledge also reflects a character’s ability to do research, 
both in libraries and through interviews. 

• Student: Amateur detective 

• • College: Police officer 

• • • Masters: Private detective 

•••• Doctorate: FBI, CIA, KGB, MI 5, Interpol 

agents 

• • • • • Scholar: Sherlock Holmes 

Possessed by: Detectives, Insurance Investigators, Re¬ 
porters, FBI Agents, Intelligence Agents 

Specialties: Search, Prowl, Tail, Detective Work 

Law 

The law is not a thing to trifle with and those with 
knowledge of the law are well able to use it to their advantage. 
If you ever want to get out of jail, this Ability is essential. 

• Student: Practical knowledge, police officer 

• • College: Prelaw, beginning lawyer 

• • • Masters: Lawyer, full partner 

• • • • Doctorate: Judge 

• • • • • Scholar: Supreme Court J ustice 

Possessed by: Police, Lawyers, Judges, Detectives, Crimi¬ 
nals, TV Viewers, Legislators. 

Specialties: Courts, Contract, Litigation, Criminal, Po¬ 
lice Procedure 


154 © VAMPIRE: The Masquerade 


Rtf'* 



































Linguistics 

It is assumed that you can speak your natural language, 
but you must purchase any other languages that you wish your 
character to speak. For each level of Linguistics, your 
character may fluently speak another language. However, 
Linguistics also gives a character an understanding of the 
structure of language, which is in turn the basis of thought. 
With this Ability, you can identify accents or decipher word 
puzzles. 

• Student: One additional language 

• • College: Two additional languages 

• • • Masters: Three additional languages 

• • • • Doctorate: Four additional languages 

Scholar: Five additional languages 

Possessed by: Travelers, Scholars, Diplomats, Interpret¬ 
ers 

Specialties: Curse Words, Technical, Diplomatic, Po¬ 
litical 

/Hedicine 

Medicine is the study of the human body and the 
techniques used to cure its ills. While a vampire’s body is 
different. Medicine can be used to treat its most serious 
wounds as well. It includes knowledge of the structure and 
functions of the body, the use of medicine, and the diagnosis 
and treatment of disease. 

• Student: You know the basics of setting bones 
and preventing shock. 

•• College: You have paramedic-quality training. 

• • • Masters: You arc a doctor and can diagnose 

and treat diseases. 

• • • • Doctorate: You can perform surgery. 

• •••• Scholar: You arc a specialist of great renown. 

Possessed by: Doctors, Paramedics 

Specialties: Pharmacy, Paramedics, Emergency Care, 
Disease, Neurosurgery 

Occult 

You are knowledgeable in the occult, particularly in 
vampire lore. This understanding of the more sinister side of 
the world includes knowledge of curses, voodoo, magic and 
mysticism, and contains much that is only speculation and 
fantasy. This Knowledge is of the utmost interest to many 
vampires and pursuit of this Knowledge may indeed become 
a major facet of your chronicle. Afourorfive rating indicates 
a deep understanding of vampires and other aspects of the 
occult (mostly what is patently false). 

• Student: You’ve dabbled, but aren’t in the 
know. 

• • College: You’restartingtoknowwhat’sgoing 


• • • Masters: "There are things out there, really.” 

• • • • Doctorate: You know a few arcane secrets. 

• • • • • Scholar. Fully initiated in many of the great 

mysteries. You don't need your sire to tell you 
what’s going on! 

Possessed by: Weirdos, New Agers, Occultists, Scholars, 
the curious 

Specialties: Vampires, Witches, Mystical powers 

Politics 

This Knowledge provides a familiarity with the politics 
of the day, including the people who are in charge and how 
they got there. This can be an essential Ability when 
attempting to deal with mortal authorities in any way. This 
Ability has some influence on being a capable politician 
yourself, as long familiarity with a subject can sometimes give 
one ideas... 

• Student: Protester or casual observer 

• • College: Campaign workcrorpoliticalscience 

major 

• • • Masters: Campaign manager or speech writer 

• • • • Doctorate: Politician 

••••• Scholar. Machiavelli 

Possessed by: Lobbyists, Politicians, Lawyers, Protesters 

Specialties: Neighborhood, City, Congressional, Elec¬ 
tions, Nihilism, Dogma, Radical 

Science 

You have at least a basic understanding of physics, 
chemistry, botany, biology, geology and astronomy. Your 
knowledge deals more with the useful applications of science. 

• Student: You can make smoke bombs with a 
chemistry set. 

• • College: You understand the major theories 

and applications. 

• • • Masters: You could teach high school science. 

•••• Doctorate: You might win a Nobel Prize 

someday. 

• • • • • Scholar Albert Einstein 

Possessed by: Engineers, Researchers, Inventors, Tech¬ 
nicians, Pilots 

Specialties: Biology, Physics, Chemistry, Astronomy, 
Relativity, Nuclear Physics 

Other Knowledges 

Psychology, Art History, Philosophy, Theater, Journal¬ 
ism, Military Science, Geography, History, Theology, specific 
area of knowledge/trivia 





Chapter Seven: Traits 0 155 






































.... V If p V if II if if II <1 \I <1 if if 

Disciplines 


A />retty man came to me, never seen eyes so blue, 

You know I could not run away 
It seemed we'd seen each other in a dream; 

Seemed like he knew me, he looked right through me. 

— Heart, “Magic Man” 

Disciplines are the supernatural powers all vampires 
possess to some degree or another, powers which separate 
them from mortals. A strong human can lift as much as a 
strong vampire; however, if the vampire also possesses the 
Discipline Potence, her effective power is increased dramati¬ 
cally. 

The origin of these “mystical” powers is a mystery to 
almost all vampires. Normally, Kindred simply accept the 
Disciplines as yet another indication of how they are superior 
to all other creatures that walk the earth. Whatever their 
source, Disciplines are integral to a vampire’s existence. 

There are 10 Disciplines described here which charac¬ 
ters may possess. Like all other Traits in Vampire, Disciplines 
are normally rated from one to five. Extremely powerful 
vampires may well possess abilities beyond the scope of these 
Disciplines, but these powers are unique to the individual in 
question and may be defined at the Storyteller’s whim. The 
rating a vampire has in a particular Discipline should be 
noted on the character sheet, where the names of these 
powers may be written in. 

Characters begin the chronicle with three points in 
their Clan Disciplines— those powers most often associated 
with the clan to which the character belongs. However, 
additional Disciplines may be gained by spending “freebie" 
points during character creation. 

Animalism 

Animalism allows empathy with and power over the 
animal world, as well as the animal within, and embodies the 
Beast which lurks within the soul of every Cainite. Those 
with Animalism can understand and soothe the passions of 
animals and control the actions of such creatures by touching 
the heart of the beast within them all. Vampires lacking this 
Discipline or the Skill of Animal Ken can seem offensive to 
animals, as beasts are distinctly uncomfortable around the 
undead and will do all they can to move away. 

As the Storyteller, give each animal the characters 
encounter a unique personality and manner of speech. Even¬ 
tually the animal may befriend the characters, so the better 
you can portray it in the beginning, the longer the animal will 
seem interesting to the player. Remember that animals may 
be simple-minded and take things quite literally. 

L_ 



The Gangrel clan, the masters of Animalism, have 
named these powers in ways which reflect their feelings 
toward their animal brethren. 

• Sweet Whispers 

While most animals are hardly intelligent enough to 
carry on a lengthy discourse on any subject, with this Disci¬ 
pline you can attempt a limited form of empathic 
communication and can make specific requests of creatures. 
Such intercourse takes place mentally — there is no need for 
you to hiss or bark to communicate your ideas to an animal. 
You need only look into the animal’s eyes to initiate the 
conversation. Eye contact must be maintained throughout. If 
it is broken, you will have to reestablish eye contact in order 
to speak with the animal once again. Of course, there is no 
guarantee that a given animal will either desire to talk at all 
or deal honestly if it does. 

After establishing eye contact, you are able to issue 
complex commands to a single animal, which it will follow to 
the best of its ability. However, the command must be 
couched in terms of a request, and the animal must be coaxed 
into it (in other words, you need to roleplay through it). 

The “favor” cannot be too complex for the intellect of 
the animal to comprehend. For instance, a mouse would be 
incapable of distinguishing between people, while a dog 
wouldn't know what a phone is. Certainly no animal could 
be told to attack the person “who strikes me with the intent 
to harm.” 

These commands can be deeply implanted, however, so 
that they will affect the animal for some time. For instance, 
you could instruct a cat to come and get you when anyone 
enters the cellar, and the cat will continue to do so for days 
or even weeks. 

System: No roll is necessary to talk with an animal, but 
the player must make a Manipulation + Animal Ken roll to 
get it to do favors (difficulty 6). This difficulty can be 
adjusted by circumstances and roleplaying skill. Depending 
on the nature of the character’s inner soul, the approach of 
the conversation with the animal will differ — it is not 
completely up to the player to decide, and depends heavily on 
the character's Nature. The approach taken might be that of 
intimidation, teasing, cajoling, rationality, emotional plead¬ 
ing or practically anything. Interactions must be roleplayed 
through, but the player should understand that he does not 
simply play the character, but the Beast within instead. 

•• The Beckoning 

The essence of the animal has grown strong in you, and 
now animals respond when you call to them. You are now 
able to summon nearly any species of animal, drawing them 



156 0 VAMPIRE: The Masquerade 
































a 0 o 11 ii ii o ii o o 

to you. The character must actually sing in the voice of the 
animals to be summoned — howling like a wolf or squawking 
like a bird. 

The primary limitation is that you may not call animals 
of different species. Only one summons may be active at a 
time and there is no way to cancel a call after it has been 
made. Thus, you had better get it right the first time. 

Animals called in this way are under no immediate 
obligation to heed your commands, though they are often 
friendly and inquisitive with regard to your call. 

System: The player must roll Chansma + Survival to 
determine how well the call is received by the intended 
targets (difficulty is normally 6) and consult the table below. 

The only animals that might respond are those within 
hearing distance of the song. 

The summons may be very complicated, though the 
Storyteller will assign a higher difficulty if the player gets too 
carried away. For instance, a vampire could simply call out all 
the rats of the sewers (difficulty 6), all rats with white fur 
(difficulty 7), or even summon the specific rat that had the 
audacity to bite her (difficulty 8). 


1 success 

One animal responds 

2 successes 

A quarter of the animals who hear The 
Beckoning respond 

3 successes 

Half of the animals respond 

4 successes 

Most of the animals respond 

5 successes 

All of the animals respond 

••• Song 

of Serenity 


This power allows you to expel the savagery from an 
animal or mortal, causing the target to become passive and 
listless. Simply by touching the individual you wish to affect 
and singing a song of comfort and solace to the Beast within, 
you can take from him that which gives him the fire of 
individuality and creativity. 

When the Beast has been removed from an individual, 
he loses the will to fight or struggle. He cannot use or regain 
Willpower, nor can he resist any sort of attack upon him. 
Kindred are immune to this power. 

Mortals and creatures who lack a Beast are prone to 
accept nearly anything which occurs to them in this state as 
completely normal and natural, evincing no reaction to it. 
Later they might wonder why they had no reaction, but often 
they avoid thinking about the situation at all. 

System: The player must roll Manipulation + Empathy 
(difficulty 7) and must collect as many successes as the target 
has Willpower (five for most animals). This is an extended 
roll. Any failure indicates that the vampire must start over 
from the beginning, while any botch indicates that he will 
never again be able to steal that creature’s Beast. 



i i i 1 i—r 



Chapter Seven: Traits © 






























r *«» Sharing of Spirits 

By staring into the eyes of an animal, your spirit or 
conscious mind moves within the animal and possesses it. 
This allows you to control the actions of the animal as if you 
were that animal. Your body becomes unconscious and 
remains motionless during this time, exactly as if you were in 
torpor. 

System: The player must roll Charisma + Animal Ken 
(difficulty 8) as the character looks into the animal's eyes 
(only animals with eyes can be possessed). The number of 
successes obtained determines the free will and powers the 
character still retains while possessing the animal. Less than 
three successes means the player must use Willpower points 
to take any action which directly violates the instincts of the 
animal in question. 

1 success Cannot use Disciplines 

2 successes Can use Auspex 

3 successes Can also use Presence 

4 successes Can also use Dominate 

5 successes Can also use Thaumaturgy 
The character will behave much like the animal if less 
than five successes are obtained — her spirit is clouded with 
the needs and impulses of the animal body. Sometimes she 
will begin to think and feel like that animal, even after the 
connection has been broken. Tire player behaves like the 
animal she was, retaining many of its instincts for a time. This 
will continue until seven Willpower points are spent to resist 
and overcome specific effects. 

At the end of any particularly exciting incident, the 
player should roll Wits + Empathy (difficulty 8) for the 
character to retain her own mind. Failure indicates that the 
character's mind returns to her own body, but still thinks in 
purely animal terms. A botch sends the character into a 
frenzy. 

When employing this power, it is possible for a vampire 
to travel about during the day, albeit in the body of an animal. 
However, she must be awake to do so, and therefore the 
player must successfully make a roll to stay awake (see 
Chapter Nine). 

.Drawing out the Beast 

You have attained a deep understanding of the mysteries 
of man’s wild cousins. Armed with this knowledge, you are 
better able to deal with the Beast within. When the Beast 
becomes too powerful to control, you can transfer the feral 
urges to another creature. 

Effectively, you induce frenzy in another animal, man or 
vampire as a means of avoiding it yourself. The recipient of 
this vast, savage energy must be something that is fit for the 
burden; only beings with a Humanity score of 7 or less are wild 
enough to provide a home for your Beast. 


This unfortunate creature actually receives your Beast, 
and thus your personality will be apparent in the nature of the 
frenzy the victim undergoes. The frenzy will progress just as 
if you were the creature in that state. 

System: To use this power, the vampire must be in 
frenzy, or close to it, and roll Manipulation + Animal Ken 
(difficulty 8). The player needs to announce his preferred 
target prior to rolling. It must be someone within eyesight. 
Refer to the table for the results: 

1 success The character transfers the Beast, but 


3 successes 


1 success The character transfers the Beast, but 

releases it upon a friend 

2 successes The character is stunned by the effort 

and may not act next turn, but transfers 
the Beast. 

3 successes The character is completely successful. 

If the attempt fails, the intensity of the frenzy actually 

increases, for as the character relaxes in expectation of 
relieving himself of the savage desires of the Beast, the Beast 
takes that opportunity to dig deeper. The frenzy will last at 
twice as long and be twice as hard to shrug off; it will also be 
many times more severe than normal. A botch on this roll is 
even more catastrophic. The heightened frenzy is so extreme 
that not even the expenditure of Willpower points will 
effectively curb its duration or effects. 

If the character leaves the target’s presence before the 
frenzy concludes, he will lose his Beast, perhaps permanently. 
While no longer vulnerable to frenzy, the character will not 
be able to use or regain Willpower and will become increas¬ 
ingly lethargic. To recover the Beast, he must find the person 
who now possesses it (who probably won’t be enjoying herself 
much) and retrap the Beast. He must behave in ways that will 
make the Beast want to return since, unfortunately, the Beast 
does not always wish to do so. 


Auspex 


L 


This Discipline is one of extrasensory awareness, empa¬ 
thy and perception. Those with this Discipline tend to be 
strongly affected by environmental phenomena, especially 
beauty. Loud noises can be very disturbing. Nearly all 
Auspex powers require some type of Perception roll to 
determine how much is learned and understood. 

• Heightened Senses 

You can sharpen all five of your senses to an extraordi¬ 
nary degree. This is done at will, and lasts as long as you 
choose. This allows you to double your normal ranges of 
hearing and sight, in terms of both distance and the condi¬ 
tions in which those senses are effective. Your other senses 
become equally useful; with increased olfactory sensitivity, 
you can track even if there are no tracks left, and you can 
identify almost any object by touch alone. 

There is a drawback, though, as loud noises or bright 
lights can disturb you while in this state. You may even 
become “blind” in that particular sense for a short period of 


158 0 VAMPIRE: The Masquerade 

































time (depending on the degree of noise or glare, it could be 
days). Thus, if you are exposed to sunlight while employing 
Heightened Senses, you may be blinded for a week, even after 
the aggravated damage sustained is healed. 

You are also occasionally alerted to impending danger 
with unsettling premonitions. These premonitions are typi¬ 
cally confusing, but can be invaluable. 

System: Though this power comes into play largely 
through Storyteller description, certain circumstances re¬ 
quire the use of dice. The Storyteller secretly rolls a character's 
unmodified Auspex rating whenever danger might be sensed. 
The difficulty varies according to the circumstances (and 
whim). For instance, a warning that a gun has been pointed 
at the back of the character’s head may only require a five, 
while the sudden realization that the prince is scheming 
against her at the next table may require a nine. 

••Aura Perception 

You can see the auras of other beings, the colors of which 
indicate their moods, identities and levels of hostility. This 
power also allows you to recognize other vampires (they have 
pale auras). 

Even the most shallow, transparent person usually has 
several different colors composing his aura. The aura may 
shift between the different colors in a predictable cycle, or it 
might shift completely at random. The colors change along 
with the current emotional state of the character, and be¬ 
cause people so often have mixed feelings, the aura is often 
mixed in color. 

System: The player must make a Perception + Empathy 
roll (difficulty 8). The Storyteller may wish to make this roll 
so that the player doesn’t know if he failed or botched. Each 
success indicates how much of the aura is seen and can be 
understood (see the chart below). A botch indicates a mis¬ 
leading interpretation. 

1 success Can only distinguish the shade (pale or 

bright) 

2 successes Can distinguish color as well 

3 successes Patterns can be recognized 

4 successes Subtle shifts can be detected 

5 successes Can identify mixtures of color and pat¬ 

tern 

See the Aura Colors chart for examples of some of the 
predominant colors that can be found and what emotions 
they represent. 

An aura may be looked at only once with clear vision. If 
the character attempts to look at it again, any failure should 
be considered a botch, as it is very easy to imagine seeing what 
one wants to see when it comes to auras. 

••• The Spirit's Touch 

With this power you may pick up an object and gain 
impressions of one of the individuals who last held it. This 


Aura Colors 


Condition 

Aura Colors 

Afraid 

Orange 

Aggressive 

Purple 

Angry 

Red 

Bitter 

Brown 

Calm 

Light Blue 

Compassionate 

Pink 

Conservative 

Lavender 

Depressed 

Gray 

Desirous or Lustful 

Deep Red 

Distrustful 

Light Green 

Enraged 

Crimson 

Envious 

Dark Green 

Excited 

Violet 

Generous 

Rose 

Happy 

Vermilion 

Hateful 

Black 

Idealistic 

Yellow 

Innocent 

White 

Love 

Blue 

Obsessed 

Green 

Sad 

Silver 

Spiritual 

Gold 

Suspicious 

Dark Blue 

A Vampire 

Appropriate color is pale 

Confused 

Mottled, shifting colors 

Daydreaming 

Sharp flickering colors 

Diabolist 

Black veins in aura 

Frenzied 

Rapidly rippling colors 

Psychotic 

Hypnotic, swirling color 

Magic Use 

Myriad sparkles 


object reading is usually limited to a “snapshot” of the 
tableau, but sometimes such things as the race, sex and even 
aura of the person in question can also be discerned. The 
Spirit's Touch can also reveal how the owner came to possess 
the item, or reveal what went on during the last moments the 
subject held the object. 

System: The player must make a Perception + Empathy 
roll. The difficulty is determined by the age of the impressions 
and the mental and spiritual strength of the person who left 
them. 

The number of successes determines the amount of 
information gained, both in terms of snapshots (images of the 
scene when the object was being held) and the nature of the 
person who was holding the object. Generally one snapshot 
and one aspect of the person's identity (Nature, Demeanor, 
aura, name, sex or age) is received for each success. 




Chapter Seven: Traits © 159 





































•••• Telepathy 

Y ou can probe the surface thoughts of any nearby subject 
and listen to them as you would listen to that person speak. 
Given enough time, you can leam nearly anything about the 
subject. For instance, you might be able to divine the sire of 
another vampire through Telepathy. 

System: The player must make an Intelligence + Sub¬ 
terfuge roll with a difficulty equal to the subject’s Willpower. 
One success must be rolled for each individual item of 
information plucked and level of consciousness pierced. 

The vampire mind cannot normally be read, but a 
Willpower point may be spent to make the effort. After the 
point is spent, Intelligence + Subterfuge is rolled as normal. 

The Storyteller should describe the mind of the subject 
by using a series of adjectives akin to a stream of conscious¬ 
ness. This forces the player to deduce for herself what is going 
on in that mind. For example, you might say, “Sullen 
sorrow... Where is Damien? Worry... Can’t wait he hears 
thisone! Anticipation..." As is apparent, it can be somewhat 
difficult to understand what is going on inside the psyche, 
especially in the minds of the deranged. 


Psychic Projection 


You arc able to expand your consciousness to such a 
degree that you can separate your mind from your body. 
While in this state you can travel without the use of your 
body, journeying nearly anywhere on Earth. However, as 
your astral self reaches the outermost point of the Moon’s 
orbit, you will encounter what has been referred to as the 
Limit of the Lunar Sphere — an impassable barrier. 

The physical body left behind lies as motionless as if it 
were in torpor. Your mind stays with the astral self, and you 
have no way of knowing what is going on around or in your 
body. Indeed, for all you know, your body is in flames. 

A silver cord, a diaphanous line grounding your con¬ 
sciousness to your body, connects your astral self to your real 
body. If this cord is severed during an astral mishap, you 
become completely lost and fully enter the astral plane, the 
realm of ghosts and shades. Finding one’s body again requires 
an arduous and terrifying journey. 

System: Each time the character journeys in astral form, 
the player must spend a Willpower point and make a Percep¬ 
tion + Occult roll (difficulty varies depending on the 
complexity of the trip) to determine how well the character 
fares on the journey. Essentially, this determines whether or 
not he finds his destination. 

Another roll must be made each time the character 
decides on a new destination. Failure indicates the character 
is lost (though he can find his way back by retracing his route 
via the silver cord), and a botch indicates the silver cord has 
snapped. 



























Travel at speeds of up to 500 miles per hour is possible in 
astral form. Also, a character’s astral self is naked — no 
physical objects may accompany the character, though there 
are rumors of magical artifacts capable of astral travel. 

Interaction with the physical world is impossible unless 
the character spends a point of Willpower (though Aura 
Perception and Telepathy can be used freely). This allows the 
character to manifest in a ghost-like form for one turn. 
However, the character can view events around himself that 
occur in the physical world, and can generally do so without 
fear of detection, although characters with the Auspex Dis¬ 
cipline may have premonitions that someone is nearby. 

When two characters encounter one another, or if one 
encounters a being native to the astral world such as a ghost 
(who is often tied to one location), they may interact as if 
both were on the physical world. Speech, contact and even 
combat are possible. Since it is impossible to actually harm 
another astral character, the goal of conflict is always to cut 
the opponent’s silver cord (use Willpower points as the 
equivalent of Health Levels; when they are all lost, the cord 
is severed). The Physical Attributes are not, of course, 
effective, so Social or Mental Traits must take their place. 
Specifically, Wits replaces Dexterity, Manipulation replaces 
Strength, and Intelligence replaces Stamina. 

While vampires do not actually travel in the spirit world 
while in this form, they can sometimes interact with it. 
Ghosts and Lupines traveling in the spirit world can sense 
them, and attempt to harm them. It is said that those who 
know the way may journey to Arcadia, otherwise known as 
Faerieland, by traveling through astral space, though that 
may also require a higher Auspex rating. 


Dominate 


Celerity 


This Discipline explains the superior quickness of vam¬ 
pires. A rating in Celerity allows a vampire to move extremely 
quickly in times of stress and take multiple actions in a single 
turn. While anyone can decide to split their Dice Pool during 
a single turn, a character with Celerity can perform extra 
actions without penalty. 

One extra action is allowed per point of Celerity, and the 
vampire may use his entire Dice Pool for each one. One 
Blood Point must be spent every turn the character uses 
Celerity, even if he does not take all the actions allowed. For 
instance, if a vampire has a Celerity rating of 4, and wishes to 
take three actions in a single turn, he will still need to spend 
a Blood Point. 


This Discipline reflects the mystical ability of vampires 
to influence the minds and actions of others. Dominate is an 
aspect of the power of the mind and the will. It affects the 
judgment and mental functioning of the target, not the 
emotions. 

Dominate always requires eye contact with the subject 
in order for it to be employed, and is thus sometimes known 
as the Piercing Gaze. It can therefore be used on only one 
subject at a time. It is one of the most powerful Disciplines, 
but can be exacting and difficult to employ. Orders and 
suggestions must always be given verbally to those who have 
been Dominated. The extent to which control over a subject 
is possible is delineated with each power below. 

Those with the Dominate Discipline tend to be people 
who like control. Over time, those who rely upon it may 
become overtly manipulative and controlling. At the 
Storyteller’sdiscretion, characters with high Dominate scores 
may be unable to spend experience points to increase Abili¬ 
ties such as Empathy. 

There are some mortals known as “neutrals” who cannot 
be Dominated in any fashion, but only one in a million has 
this power. Additionally, the Inquisition knows certain ritu¬ 
als to render a mortal immune. The best of the witch-hunters 
are neutrals or are protected by such rituals. 

Restrictions: It is impossible to Dominate another vam¬ 
pire who is of stronger Blood — the character must be of an 
equal or earlier generation than the subject for Dominate to 
be effective. Vampires may resist any attempt at Domination 
by spending a Willpower point for each success gained in the 
Dominate roll. The subject is then immune to attempts at 
Domination for the rest of the scene. The target must spend 
the full Willpower; partial expenditures will do no good. 

If a botch result is ever received on a Dominate roll, the 
target is rendered immune to future attempts by the same 
vampire for the rest of the story. 

• Command the Wearied Wind 

You are able to give a one-word command to another; 
the command must be obeyed instantly. This command must 
be a simple and concise word with only one meaning—jump, 
sit, stand, laugh, cry, run, hop, blink, smile, frown, cough. If 
the word is at all ambiguous, the subject will react with 
temporary confusion. You may include the word in a sen¬ 
tence, and only stress the command word slightly, thus 
concealing from others what you are doing. 

System: The character must make a Manipulation + 
Intimidation roll (difficulty of the target’s Willpower). More 
successes force the target to act with greater vigor. 




Chapter Seven: Traits 0 161 
































• _ • 


•• Mesmerize 

You can implant a suggestion into the unconscious mind 
of a subject. This requires intense concentration and the 
careful and precise use of instructions for the intent of your 
orders to be carried out properly. You may cause the 
mesmerization to take effect immediately, or you can desig¬ 
nate the events which will trigger it. 

You must maintain eye contact for as long as it takes to 
complete your command (roleplay it out, if you have the 
inclination); however, very complicated suggestions can be 
made. Careful wording is essential, as the target will uncon¬ 
sciously attempt to pervert the spirit of the suggestion as 
much as possible. 

You may give exact commands to another person, like 
“climb up that ladder" or "pretend that you’re a dog,” or the 
control can last longer and be much more subtle. Maintain¬ 
ing eye contact is no longer necessary after the initial 
suggestion is given. 

The suggestion cannot force the subject to do something 
against her innate Nature, and only one suggestion may be 
implanted in a subject at a time. 

System: The player must roll Manipulation + Leader¬ 


•••• Conditioning 

Over time, an individual can be Conditioned so that she 
is thereafter unable to resist your Domination and is also 
more resistant to the Domination of others. Kindred often 
Condition their servants to ensure loyal retainers. The 
procedure works based on the fact that mortals who have 
been Dominated repeatedly have a harder time resisting 
future attempts. 

Conditioning is not something that is effective on the 
drop of a hat. It takes time to carefully cultivate the subject's 
mind for the kind of control you will exercise. Fully condi¬ 
tioning a subject can take weeks or even months. 

Conditioned retainers have very little imagination, and 
tend to obey the orders given them quite literally. The 
conditioning actually destroys some of their free will, turning 
them into automatons. 

System: The player must roll Charisma + Leadership 
(difficulty is the target’s Willpower). Conditioning is an 
extended action. The Storyteller will determine in secret 
how many successes are required, and keep track of how many 
are gained. Typically between five to 10 times the subject’s 
Self-Control is required. The player will only know ifatarget 


ship (difficulty is the Willpower of the target). The number 
of successes determines how well the suggestion is implanted. 
With less than three successes, the subject cannot be forced 
to do anything which seems strange to her. The subject might 
walk outside, but is unlikely to pretend to be a chicken. With 
less than five successes, the suggestion is effective unless 
heeding it would endanger the subject. A businessman won’t 
pick a fight with someone, but a bouncer will in a heartbeat. 
At five successes, nearly any sort of command can be made. 

••• The Forgetful Mind 

With this power, you can steal, create and remove 
memories from a subject. This is an effective technique for 
causing people to forget that you drank their blood or that 
they even met you. A lot of mischief can be caused with this 
power, as it is possible to steal nearly any memory from a 
subject. The power is not always completely effective. For 
instance, the target might know someone bit her on the neck, 
but think it was a lover. 

Sometimes a memory will return years later, confound¬ 
ing and frightening the subject. 

System: The player rolls Wits + Subterfuge (difficulty is 
the Willpower rating of the target) and then consults the 
following table to see how much may be done to the subject’s 
memory. 

1 success Memory loss lasts but a day 

2 successes May remove, but not alter memory. 

3 successes May make si ight alterations to memory. 

4 successes May alter or remove entire scene from 
subject's memory. 

5 successes Whole periods of subject’s life may be 
reconstructed. 


is successfully Conditioned through roleplaying. 

The subject becomes so completely Dominated that the 
vampire’s presence, let alone eye contact, is no longer re¬ 
quired to maintain absolute control. He does exactly as he 
is told as long as he is within earshot of his master. No 
command roll is necessary unless the subject cannot see the 
vampire at all. Even if a command roll is failed, the subject 
is still likely to carry out part of the orders given. Addition¬ 
ally, others will find the subject more difficult to Dominate, 
as Conditioning raises others' difficulties by two (to a maxi¬ 
mum of 10). 

. Possession 

With this power you can take complete control of 
another person’s mind and body. By actually entering the 
other person's mind, you may control her actions in a very 
precise manner. The subject is an automaton, completely 
incapable of independent action. While controlling the 
subject’s mind, your body is as motionless as if it were in 
torpor. 

You may not Possess other Kindred. Such control over 
other vampires is only possible through a Blood Bond. 

System: In order to Possess another individual, a char¬ 
acter must completely strip away the target’s Willpower. The 
two square off in an opposed roll; the subject rolls Willpower, 
while the Possessor rolls Charisma + Intimidation (difficulty 
7 for both). For every success the attacker obtains over the 
other’s total successes, the target loses a point of Willpower. 
A victory by the subject does nothing but prolong the 
struggle, for each success provides her with that many extra 
dice to roll on the next turn. A botch by the attacker, 
however, makes the subject permanently immune to a 
character's Dominate attempts. 



162 0 VAMPIRE: The Masquerade 































Fortitude 


Fortitude describes a type of supernatural toughness and 
vigor which allows Kindred extra advantages in resisting the 
harm to which their kind is especially vulnerable. All 
vampires have a powerful constitution, and are able to shrug 
off the injury inflicted by guns and weapons of all sorts. 
However, most are very susceptible to sunlight and fire, and 
are easily harmed by them. Those with Fortitude are not 
easily bowed by even these elemental forces, and are even 
more resistant to "normal" injuries 

System: Fortitude provides the ability to resist sunlight 
and fire to those who possess it. For each level of Fortitude 
a character possesses, he may roll one die to soak damage from 
fire and sunlight. Fortitude is also added to a character’s 
ability to soak other wounds (see Chapter Eight, pg. 190). 


Obfuscate 


Kindred with this Discipline excel at hiding among and 
away from crowds. When they do not wish to be seen, others, 
especially mortals, rarely notice them even if they stand right 
in front of a crowd. Though this Discipline affects others’ 
minds and does not actually render the users invisible, the 
end result is much the same — Kindred employing Obfuscate 
simply can’t be seen. However, surveillance devices still 
track the character normally. 

Unless the vampire purposely makes herself seen, she 
can remain obscure indefinitely. At higher ratings, a vampire 
may slowly fade from the view of those around simply by not 
thinking about remaining in sight. 

Auspex and Obfuscate are opposed to one another. 
When Obfuscate is used against a Kindred who possesses a 
higher Auspex score than a character’s Obfuscate score, the 
character is unable to conceal himself from the searcher. 
However, if the hider’s score is higher, then the Kindred is 
fooled normally. 

While mortals normally have no ability to divine the 
location of Kindred with this Discipline, the Storyteller may 
rule that those with psychic powers may be able to see the 
vampire directly. Furthermore, children, especially those 
who retain their own unique perspective on the universe and 
have not hilly accepted the reality imposed by their parents, 
are often able to sec through Obfuscate. 

• Cloak of Shadows 

Your ability to conceal yourself is not yet fully devel¬ 
oped, so you need some sort of cover in order to hide yourself 
effectively (or at least you must be in a position that eyes 
easily pass over anyway). Most often, such cover is the 
shadows of an alley or a recessed door frame, but this power 
also works if you can interpose a tree or lamppost (no matter 
how narrow) between yourself and the ones from whom you 
hide. 


. ; v•; 



.V 

if 

-i’ 


.«*» 

e' 


Chapter Seven: Traits © 163 



































Once under cover, you must remain completely motion¬ 
less in order to remain obscured. If you move, if a light is 
turned on which would illuminate you, or if a viewer moves 
to an angle at which you are directly in his line of sight, the 
Cloak of Shadows fails. 

System: No roll needs to be made, since the Obfuscate 
succeeds once the criteria have been met. However, those 
with Auspex higher than the character’s Obfuscate will see 
right through the shadows. 

•• Unseen Presence 

Your powers of remaining unseen have become so po¬ 
tent that you can effectively cause yourself to disappear 
indefinitely and remain hidden even if you walk around. 

You are completely ignored unless someone specifically 
looks for you. People will move about in ways that cause them 
to avoid you and will even take actions to remove themselves 
from your vicinity. Their unconscious minds will do nearly 
anything to prevent their conscious minds from realizing that 
you are there. 

System: No roll is normally required; however, if the 
character speaks or engages in violent physical activity (e.g. 
combat), she will probably draw attention to herself. The 
Storyteller may ask for a Wits + Stealth roll to determine how 
well the character remains unseen. At least three successes 
are required to allow her to speak and still not be seen. 

••• Mask of the Thousand Faces 

This potent ability does not hide you from the gaze of 
others, but makes you appear as someone other than who you 
truly are. Your appearance does not actually change — you 
simply make people think they see someone else. 

System: The player must roll Manipulation + Acting 
(difficulty 7) to determine how well the character assumes his 
mask. Refer to the chart to see how successful the attempt is. 


1 success 

People could still pick you out of a 
police lineup. 

2 successes 

The character looks somewhat differ¬ 
ent; subjects describe him differently. 

3 successes 

The desired look is successfully broad¬ 
cast. 

4 successes 

Appearance, movement and actions are 
completely different. 

5 successes 

The character can even appear as some¬ 
one of the opposite sex. 


•••• Vanish from Mind's Eye 

Your power has advanced to such a degree that you may 
actually disappear from plain view. Even if you are standing 
face to face with a mortal, you may exercise this power and 
simply vanish. Those who witness such a disappearing act, 
especially mortals, are normally stunned with indecision for 
a turn. One member of a large group might be able to react 

L 




but this is the exception. Moreover, mortals with low 
strength of will may actually forget that they every saw you at 
all. 

System: The player must roll Charisma + Stealth (diffi¬ 
culty is the Wits + Alertness of the target). If more than three 
successes are obtained, the vampire completely disappears 
from sight. If the player obtains more successes than the 
target’s Willpower, she completely forgets the vampire’s 
existence, but the vampire must leave her presence immedi¬ 
ately or be remembered. 

••••• Cloak the Gathering 

This incredibly manipulative power allows you to ex¬ 
tend any of your Obfuscate powers to those around you. Not 
only are you concealed, but so is everyone else with you 
whom you wish to conceal. 

If one character compromises the disguise or invisibility, 
then only she is no longer under the protection of your 
powers. However, if you compromise the position, the Cloak 
drops completely and everyone may be seen. 

System: The character can conceal one additional indi¬ 
vidual for every point of Stealth possessed. See the appropriate 
power above to see what must be rolled to determine how 
successfully the power is used. A single roll determines the 
effectiveness for everyone; each character does not roll 
separately. 

Potence 

This Discipline defines the superior strength that vam¬ 
pires possess. This additional physical might allows great 
feats to be accomplished, far beyond what a normal mortal 
would be able to perform. Potence allows vampires to jump 
and leap greater distances, lift greater weights, and inflict 
greater harm upon objects and individuals when they are 
punched or hit. 

System: The character’s rating in Potence provides her 
with automatic successes on nearly any Strength roll — one 
automatic success per rating point. Thus she can succeed at 
most Strength rolls automatically without needing to make 
a roll at all. In melee and brawling combat, the automatic 
successes count on the damage roll. 

Presence 

A vampire with the Presence Discipline is exceptionally 
attractive and appealing to others. People want to be around 
the vampire, to bask in the brilliant light he sheds. He need 
not make any sort of overt or deliberate action, for Presence 
is a natural aspect of one’s personality. Presence is a powerful, 
if subtle, Discipline. 

The Presence Discipline is a power over the emotions of 
people, not their judgment or reason. Orders may not be 
given using Presence; the effect is completely nonverbal. 


164 0 VAMPIRE: The Masauerade 


































Presence causes others to feel things or react in certain ways 
toward the vampire, but direct manipulation of the mind is 
the domain of Dominate. 

Unlike Dominate, it can be used on many people at the 
same time, nor is eye contact required for it to be effective. 
The vampire needs to be clearly in sight of those he wishes to 
affect, however, as his face must be seen clearly. 

Those affected by Presence can use Willpower points to 
resist the effects for a turn, as with Dominate. During this 
time they are able to turn around, thereby escaping the effects 
more permanently. Kindred are usually savvy enough to do 
so, but mortals seldom are. 

• Awe 

When you employ this power, everyone near you be¬ 
comes intensely attracted to you. They will do nearly 
anything to be close to you, although their fascination is not 
so complete that they will endanger themselves. The effects 
last only as long as the subjects are in your presence, but the 
next time they see you, the feelings are likely to be reawakened. 

By carefully using this power, you can have phenomenal 
powers of mass communication. Since Presence uses emotion 
to sway victims, it doesn’t really matter what is said, but you 
can more easily convince people of a certain course of action 
or the nobility of a purpose by using this Discipline. 

System: The player must roll Charisma + Acting (diffi¬ 
culty 7). Those affected can use Willpower points to overcome 
the effect, but must continue spending Willpower every few 
minutes for as long as they remain in the same area as the 
character. However, as soon as a number of Willpower 
equivalent to the number of successes rolled is spent, the Awe 
is completely shaken off, and the subject can’t be affected for 
the rest of the scene. 

The number of successes rolled also determines how 
many people can be affected: 

1 success one person 

2 successes two people 

3 successes six people 

4 successes 20 people 

5 successes everyone in the vampire’s immediate 

vicinity (e.g. an entire auditorium of 
people) 

•• Dread Gaze 

The exhibition of your full vampiric powers can cause 
great fear and loathing in mortals. This is usually accom¬ 
plished by baring teeth and claws while hissing loudly. While 
most vampires can performing this action, you are exception¬ 
ally adept at it, and are capable of driving mortals insane with 
fear, or frightening them into submission or flight with the 
merest snarl. The subjects are cowed by your appearance and 
will do anything to avoid incurring your wrath. 






























System: The player must roll Charisma + Intimidation 
(difficulty is the victim's Wits + 3). Any success indicates 
that the target is cowed, while three or more successes 
indicate that he runs away in fear. Moreover, each success 
reduces the number of dice the victim is allowed to roll the 
next turn by one. 

This roll may be attempted only once per turn, though 
if performed in successive turns, the vampire may collect 
successes as an extended roll in order to completely subjugate 
the target. Eventually the target may lose so many dice that 
he will be unable to do anything but curl up on the ground 
and weep. Failure indicates that the attempt has faltered. All 
collected successes are lost, the victim may act normally 
again and the player must start over next turn. A botch 
indicates the victim is not at all impressed, and any use of 
Presence by the character will not be effective against him 
again this story. 

••• Enhancement 


Entrancement is used to convince another to serve you. 
The subject of Entrancement will be enchanted with you and 
desire to serve your needs. However, unlike a person Pos¬ 
sessed with Dominate powers, the subject of Entrancement 
retains her freedom of action and creativity. This can be both 
good and bad. 

The subject is certainly much more enjoyable to be 
around and tends to remind a vampire of the cruelty of 
control less often, but such a victim can be unpredictable in 
how she will attempt to please the Kindred. Because so much 
freedom of will is maintained, an Entranced person does not 
count as a new Retainer. 


System: The player must roll Appearance + Empathy to 
Entrance a subject (difficulty of the target’s Willpower). The 
number of successes determines how long the victim is 
Entranced. There is no way to extend a period of Entrance¬ 
ment; indeed, once the condition wears off, the victim is 
likely to think ill of the vampire. 

1 success one hour 


2 successes 

3 successes 

4 successes 

5 successes 


one day 
one week 
one month 
one year 


•••• Summon 


With this power, you may call a person from a very great 
distance and that person will come to attend your desires. 
The subject of the Summons may not know exactly why he 
is walking across the room toward the cloaked stranger, but 
the Kindred’s powerful aura will completely entrance the 
subject. 


Vampires have been known to Summon a person from 
halfway around the world; indeed, the subject will use the 
fastest and most direct means of travel to reach his master’s 
side. Such is indeed possible, but in order to Summon a 
person who is out of sight, you must have previously met the 
person. A person who is Summoned knows exactly where to 
find you and will home in on that location flawlessly. If you 
Summon someone from New York to Chicago but subse¬ 
quently depart for Seattle, the subject will arrange for travel 
to Seattle as well. 

The exact time it takes for a subject to fulfill the 
Summons can vary, but the subject will always use the fastest 
available method of travel. Concerns like money limit the 
response time, but if the subject happens to be short of cash 
and can’t afford a plane ticket, he will even hitchhike. The 
Summons must be repeated each day if it takes more than one 
day for the subject to reach the Summoner— each Summons 
roll lasts for 24 hours. 

System: The player must roll Charisma + Subterfuge. 
Normally the difficulty for a Summon roll is five, but if the 
subject is a stranger, the difficulty increases to seven. If the 
Kindred has successfully used the Presence Discipline on the 
subject in the past, then the difficulty is only four, but if the 
target previously resisted the vampire’s Presence attempt it is 
an eight. The number of successes indicates the subject's 
reaction: 


1 success 

Target approaches, but slowly and hesi¬ 
tantly 

2 successes 

Target approaches reluctantly and is 
easily thwarted by obstacles 

3 successes 

Target approaches with reasonable speed 

4 successes 

Target comes with haste, overcoming 
any obstacles in their way 

5 successes 

Target rushes to you, doing anything to 
get to you 


••••• Majesty 

You are almost universally respected and feared. Unless 
mortals or even Kindred stop to consider their feelings about 
you, they are likely to treat you respectfully without con¬ 
scious thought. Indeed, the very sight of you causes jaws to 
drop in awe and even the most courageous to fear you. You 
simply seem so formidable that no one would even consider 
crossing you, let alone making a physical challenge. You will 
not be attacked or harmed in any way for as long as the effects 
of Majesty remain unresisted. 

System: The subject must make a Courage roll (diffi¬ 
culty is the character’s Charisma + Intimidation) if she 
wishes to be rude, crass or even non-servile to the vampire. 
A subject who fails the roll will go to absurd lengths to 
humble herself before the vampire. Kindred may spend a 
point of Willpower to overcome such feelings if the roll is 
failed. 


1 1—D— 




166 


i—i—r 


VAMPIRE: The Masauerade 



































Protean 


This Discipline allows a vampire to transform either her 
entire body or a part of her body into something inhuman. 
The vampire can thus grow claws, turn into a bat, meld into 
the earth or transform into mist. 

A vampire can use most other Disciplines while 
shapeshifted. Thus, a Kindred in animal form may still read 
auras and communicate with animals. Only when a vampire 
is in mist form should additional restrictions be applied. For 
example, eye contact cannot be made, so Dominate powers 
cannot function. Additionally, while personal possessions 
and clothes transform with the character, larger objects will 
not. 

No transformations are possible when a vampire is 
staked through the heart. Some suspect that this is possible 
at higher levels of ability, but it has never been confirmed. 

• Gleam of Red Eyes 

You can see perfectly in normal darkness. Limited vision 
is even possible in absolute darkness (e.g. an underground 
cave where there is no light at all), a fact that perplexes the 
scientific-minded among the Kindred. When this power is 
activated, your eyes glow an eerie red. 

System: No roll need be made, but it takes one full turn 
for the change to occur. 

•• Wolf Claws 

You are able to grow an inch-long claw on each finger. 
These claws make excellent weapons in combat and can be 
used in many attacks. Wounds caused by the claws are 
especially vicious; indeed, the wounds are aggravated and 
cannot be healed normally through the use of Blood Points. 

System: No roll need be made; the transformation is 
automatic and takes but one turn to accomplish. However, 
one Blood Point must be spent each time the claws are grown. 

••• Earth Weld 


One of the most prized powers that a vampire can 
possess, Earth Meld has saved the lives of countless vampires 
through the ages. This power enables you to make the earth 
part of yourself and thus merge with it. Others viewing your 
use of Earth Meld will simply see you sink into the ground. 

You can only sink into earth. It is absolutely impossible 
to meld into earth through another substance. For example, 
while there may be earth underneath it, a linoleum floor 
completely prohibits the use of this power. 

Earth Meld is a great way to find cover when outdoors. 
Being one with the earth prevents contact with sunlight and 
also provides a way to sleep away the centuries. Many ancient 
vampires use Earth Meld to rest in safety, and thereby gain 
strength and power. Some whisper that thousands of An¬ 
cients sleep within the ground and will awaken on the night 
of Gehenna. 

System: No roll is necessary and the transformation is 
automatic, but a Blood Point must be spent. 


Chapter Seven: Traits © 167 



































* 




•••• Shadow of the Beast 

You may transform into either a wolf or a bat. When in 
the form of either creature, you benefit from all of the obvious 
advantages, such as the increased senses of the wolf or the 
bat’s ability to fly. 

System: No roll is required, but the transformation 
requires the expenditure of one Blood Point. It takes three 
turns to complete the transformation (though the Storyteller 
may allow it in one turn with the expenditure of three Blood 
Points). 


Form of Mist 


You possess the vampiric power of legend to transform 
into mist. Your very essence seems to slowly float apart when 
this power is employed. 

Many advantages are gained in mist form. You can float 
in any direction at walking speed, are not affected by physical 
attacks, and can slip through the tiniest of openings with 
ease. Additionally, you take one less die of damage from 
sunlight. 

Contrary to popular opinion, vampires in mist form are 
not particularly vulnerable to powerful winds. Wind, even 
that of hurricane strength, cannot tear a mist form apart. 
However, strong winds can blow the vapor cloud about just 
as any other object can be pushed. Only your Potence should 
be taken into account when determining how stiff a wind you 
can resist. 

System: No roll is required, but the transformation 
requires the expenditure of one Blood Point. It takes three 
turns to complete the transformation (though the Story teller 
may allow it to take place in only one turn with the expen¬ 
diture of three Blood Points). 


Thaumaturgy 


Few Kindred are able to practice the rigorous discipline 
of Thaumaturgy. This is the practice of blood magic, and is 
largely the province of the Trcmere Clan, who created it and 
guard its secrets jealously. 

This magic is directly descended from the theories and 
practices of the Order of Hermes, a medieval order of magi. 
While few humans know aught of blood magic, this art has 
been developed for centuries by the Tremere to take advan¬ 
tage of their vampiric strengths. Tremere Thaumaturgy is 
despised and feared by most mortal wizards. 

Thaumaturgy also allows the wielder to use rituals, as 
well as a number of different paths: the Lure of Flames, 
Movement of the Mind, and Weather Control. These are 
discussed immediately following the treatment of blood 
magic proper. 

• A Taste for Blood 

You possess a variety of simple Perception-based abilities 
that relate to blood. You may determine how much blood is 
left in a Kindred or mortal, how recently a vampire has fed 


168 0 VAMPIRE: The Masquerade 



































and the approximate generation of a vampire. You must 
touch the blood in order to be able to tell anything about it. 

System: The player must roll Perception + Occult (dif¬ 
ficulty 7). The number of successes determines how much 
information is received and how accurate it is. 

•• Blood Rage 

With but a touch, the character can force another 
Kindred to use her blood whether she wants to or not. Thus 
a vampire may find her Strength suddenly increasing and 
have no idea why. Additionally, since the vampire becomes 
more excitable, the difficulties of all frenzy rolls for the rest of 
the scene increase by one. 

System: The player must roll Dexterity + Subterfuge 
against a difficulty of the target’s Willpower. Every success 
forces the target to immediately spend one Blood Point in a 
way the Thaumaturgist desires. 

••• Blood of Potency 

You may perform manipulations of blood which make 
the blood within your body more potent for a short time, 
thereby lowering your effective generation. 

System: Roll Manipulation + Survival (difficulty 8); 
successes must be spent both to decrease the vampire’s 
generation and create a duration in hours. 

•••• Theft of Vitae 

You can mystically transfer blood into your system from 
a distance and even drain the Blood Pools of other creatures 
to add to your own. 

System: The player must roll Intelligence + Medicine 
against a difficulty of six if the blood is stationary (such as in 
a blood bank) or against the target's Willpower if attacking 
another being. The number of successes determines how 
many Blood Points are transferred. The blood to be stolen 
must be within 50 feet and in clear view, and the source of the 
attack will be obvious. 


Rituals 


Cauldron of Blood 


You are capable of manipulating others’ blood. By 
touching another, you are able to boil her blood, not only 
causing incredible physical harm but destroying much of her 
blood as well. This virtually ensures the death of any mortal 
whom you perform this upon, and can inflict great harm upon 
vampires as well. 

System: The player must roll Willpower against a diffi¬ 
culty equal to the number of Blood Points the vampire wishes 
to boil at once + 4 (maximum 10). The victim also takes one 
wound for every point boiled. 


Rituals are meticulously prepared, but powerful, magical 
spells which must be performed under highly specific circum¬ 
stances and according to exacting procedures. All Kindred 
who know Thaumaturgy also have the ability to cast rituals. 
By learning the basic concepts of blood magic, an apprentice 
acquires a familiarity with the magical formulas required to 
cast rituals. 

Each ritual in Vampire is rated in power from one to five 
(or higher). A character must have a Thaumaturgy rating at 
least equal to the power level of the ritual in order to perform 
it successfully. Rituals take at least five minutes per level to 
cast. 

Sometimes material components are required, as stipu¬ 
lated by the ritual itself. These could include such things as 
feathers, wood splinters, mud, herbs, bones, eye of newt and 
frogs’ toes. Blood is used in many rituals. 

At the first level of Thaumaturgy, the vampire automati¬ 
cally gains a single Level One ritual. In order to learn further 
rituals, a character must find a teacher (or scroll) to instruct 
him in the proper procedures and incantations. Learning 
how to perform a ritual properly can take anywhere from only 
a few days (Level One ritual) to many years (Level Five 
ritual). 

Below arc examples of some Level One rituals. If you 
want to include higher-level rituals in your chronicle, you 
will need to create them yourself. 

Defense of Ifie Sacred Haven 

This one-hour ritual ensures that no sunlight may pass 
through any window within 20 feet of where the ritual is 
performed. Sunlight is simply reflected by the windows. This 
ritual functions only as long as the Kindred who performs it 
stays within the area of effect. A drop of blood — the caster's 
own — must be placed on each window in the ritual’s area of 
effect. At least one Blood Point will thus be used. 

Wake with Morning's (Evening's) 
Freshness 

This half-hour ritual must be performed immediately 
before a vampire prepares to sleep through the coming day. 
A period of complete meditation is required. Any interrup¬ 
tion or performance of other activities after the ritual, but 
before sleep, will render the magic ineffective. Tire ritual 
allows the protected Kindred to immediately awaken at any 
sign of danger during the next day. The rule regarding how 
Humanity restricts the number of dice usable during the day 
is waived for the first two turns of action. Thereafter, it is once 
again effective, but no matter what the character’s Humanity 
or condition, he will awaken in time to (hopefully) alleviate 
the danger. Feathers arc required to perform this ritual, and 
they must be burned and the ashes spread over the sleeping 





Chapter Seven: Traits 0 169 



































Communicate with Kindred Sire 

This very practical ritual takes only five minutes. Upon 
completion, the ritual allows a vampire to speak telepathi- 
cally at any distance with his sire. The ritual has been 
modified throughout the years to also allow the vampire to 
speak with any Kindred who has been Blood Bound to the 
caster, or even anyone who has partaken of the caster’s blood 
since the most recent sunset. The communication is two- 
way, but unlike the Auspex power of Telepathy, the vampire 
may not probe the target's mind. The caster need to possess 
an item which once belonged to her sire. 

Deflection of Wooden Doom 

The caster of this hour-long ritual must be completely 
surrounded by a circle of wood. Anything wooden, even 
furniture or wood shavings, will work, but the circle must be 
unbroken. Thereafter, the caster need not fear being staked 
until the sun next sets. Though only the first attempt is 
deflected, any wooden stake that is about to plunge through 
the vampire's heart will instead instantly disintegrate. In 
order to activate the power of the ritual, the stake must have 
actually been ready to penetrate the vampire. A stake merely 
held near the Kindred’s heart will not be affected. A wooden 
splinter must be placed in the caster’s mouth at the end of the 
ritual (if the splinter is taken out, the ritual is nullified). 

Devil's Touch 

This ritual curses a mortal, causing all those around who 
do not have a close emotional tie with the subject to feel a 
distinct dislike for him. They will hate the mortal and will do 
all they can to make the mortal’s life miserable. This effect 
lasts for one night, only disappearing with the first light of 
day. The mortal needs to be present for the ritual to be 
effective, and a penny (or any coin owned by the caster) must 
be placed somewhere upon the mortal’s person (such as in a 
pocket). 

Paths 

The other powers gained by continuing study in the arts 
of Thaumaturgy usually come from one of three paths — the 
Lure of Flames, Movement of the Mind and Weather Con¬ 
trol. These paths must be initially learned from a tutor or text 
during the chronicle, and may not be taken during character 
creation. Experience points are also necessary to acquire and 
progress in these paths; the costs for such are listed in Chapter 
Eight. 

Each time these individual powers are employed, a 
Blood Point must be spent and a Willpower roll must be made 
against a difficulty of the power’s level +3. A failure on the 
roll indicates that the magic fails, but the Willpower point is 
not lost. A botch indicates that the Willpower point is lost 
as well. 
































The Lure of Flames 

The character can create flames. Only small ones are 
possible at low levels of ability, but larger and hotter flames 
can be ignited by those proficient in Thaumaturgy. The 
character can create the flame anywhere within line of sight, 
but must roll Perception + Alertness to properly place it 
unless it is upon his own body. The flames created by this path 
are unnatural and cannot bum objects until they have been 
released by the Kindred. Therefore, a “palm of flame” will not 
bum the vampire’s hand and create an aggravated wound — 
it will only produce light. Additionally, if theThaumaturgist 
ignites his own body, those grappling with him will not suffer. 

1 success Candle 


2 successes 

3 successes 

4 successes 

5 successes 


Palm of flame 
Camp fire 
Bonfire 
Conflagration 


Movement of the Mind 

This path enables the user to mentally control objects’ 
motions. Objects may be lifted, moved, spun in circles, or 
whatever. If this path is practiced on a living creature, the 
subject can attempt to resist; caster and subject match Will¬ 
power in an opposed roll. Objects cannot be moved faster 
than the character can move himself, so objects cannot be 
“thrown" with any great ability. However, objects may be 
manipulated as if by the vampire’s own hands: axes can chop 


Backgrounds 


It was many years ago that I became what I am. 

I was trapped in this life like an innocent lamb. 

Now I can never show my face at noon 

And you'll only see me walking by the light of the moon. 

The brim of my hat hides the eye of a beast 

I’ve the face of a sinner, but the hands of a priest. 

— Sting, “Moon over Bourbon Street” 

These Traits describe the special advantages of your 
character. However, you must choose why and how you came 
to possess these particular Traits. Where did you get your 
Resources? What kind of Contacts do you have? Where does 
all of this Influence come from? Make sense out of your 
Background Traits and integrate them into your character 
concept. 

Rolls can be made using these Traits to obtain informa¬ 
tion, resources or favors. Frequently, these Background 
Traits are used in conjunction with an Attribute, such as 


at people or trees, and guns may be fired, assuming the 
Kindred is advanced enough to lift the object. 

The weight of the object moved is very important: a 
certain rating is necessary to even attempt to move certain 
objects. Once a vampire achieves a rating of three, he is able 
to levitate himself, no matter how much he weighs. Other¬ 
wise, weight restrictions apply. 

1 success one pound 

2 successes 20 pounds 

3 successes 200 pounds 

4 successes 500 pounds 

5 successes 1/2 ton 

Weather Control 

This path allows a character to affect the weather. The 
difficulty of the magic depends on the weather at the time. It 
is very hard (difficulty 9) to pull lightning down from a sunny 
sky, but it’s easy to create fog in London (difficulty 3). 

The player must roll Manipulation + Survival. The 
number of successes determines the strength of the new 
environmental force and how much damage is caused by the 
lightning bolt. 

1 success Fog 

2 successes Rain 


3 successes 

4 successes 

5 successes 


Storm 

Lightning Strike (Roll 10 damage dice, 
difficulty to hit as per firearm range) 


rolling Charisma + Influence to get the police off your back, 
or Wits + Resources to get your parents to write you that one 
last check — as a loan, of course. 

Allies 

Your Allies arc mortals who help and support you — 
they could be family or friends, or even an organization to 
which you are friendly. Allies have their own lives to live, so 
they are not at your beck and call, but they often have 
Influence in the community and access to Contacts or 
Resources. An Ally is ultimately a mortal whom you have 
befriended, and who protects and aids you out of love or 
common interest. 

For each point of Allies that you have, you have one 
Ally. This individual is a person of influence in the city 
where she lives. An Ally could be a police sergeant, an 
advisor to the mayor, or even (if your rating is a 4 or 5) the 
mayor herself. 


J 


Chapter Seven: Traits 
































it W if 




Allies are generally very trustworthy and loyal. How¬ 
ever, it requires time and energy to maintain the alliance, for 
the friends expect the aid of the character in return in time 
of need. Though they likely do not know you are a vampire, 
they may know of some of your powers and thus may come to 
you for favors. This is often a means by which a story can 
begin. 

• One Ally, of moderate influence and power 

• • Two Allies, both of them of moderate power 

• • • Three Allies, one of them quite influential 

• • • • Four Allies, one of them very influential 

• • • • • Five Allies, one of them extremely influential 

Contacts 

You know people from many different walks of life, and 
they comprise a system of information and help that could 
come in very handy some day. 

Your Contacts are not only the people you can manipu¬ 
late or bribe to get information, but friends whom you can 
really count on (Major Contacts) to provide you with accu¬ 
rate information (in their areas of expertise). You should 
describe your Major Contacts as complete characters, either 
as the chronicle progresses or beforehand. You also have a 
numberofMinorContactsspreadthroughout thecity. When 
you wish to get in touch with a Minor Contact, make a roll 
using your Contacts rating against a difficulty of seven. Each 
success means you have gotten in touch with one of your 
Minor Contacts; of course, you will need to bribe or charm 
her into giving you needed information. 

• One Major Contact 

• • Two Major Contacts 

• • • Three Major Contacts 

• • • • Four Major Contacts 


Five Major Contacts 


Fame 


You are widely known among the mortals, perhaps as a 
movie star or writer. This gives you great privileges when you 
travel among the mortals, but it can also attract just a bit too 
much attention. Fame can grant a lot of pull in the mass 
media, allowing you to attempt to manipulate the thoughts 
of the populace. 

Sometimes Fame can seem like more trouble than it is 
worth, causing you to be recognized when you don’t wish to 
be seen. However, there are many circumstances where it 
can come in handy, like getting you into clubs, parties and 
appointments that you otherwise would not have been able 
to attend. You are also harder for your enemies to physically 
dispose of, as you cannot just “disappear.” Sometimes Fame 
will be used with Manipulation in order to make a roll (“See 


172 0 VAMPIRE: The Masquerade 


































if you can convince the doorman to let you in — difficulty of 
8.”), but more often it is simply used as a measure of how well- 
known you are. Each level of Fame subtracts one from the 
difficulty of hunting rolls in heavily populated areas (people 
tend to flock to you). 

• You are known by a select subculture of 

society in the city; e.g. among the elite 

• • Your face is recognized by a majority of the 

populace; local celebrity 

• • • You are fairly famous; your name and face are 

known by many 

• • • • You are quite renowned; everybody knows 

something about you 

• • • • • You are a nationally famous individual — a 

movie star, politician or performer 


Influence 


Generation 


This Trait describes what generation of vampire you are. 
This is crucial in determining the ultimate potential of the 
character. If you do not take Generation, you begin as a 
vampire of the 13th generation. See the Setting chapter for 
more information on generations. 

• TwelfthGeneration: 11 Blood Pool, can spend 

1 Blood Point a turn 

• • Eleventh Generation: 12 Blood Pool, can 

spend 1 Blood Point a turn 

• • • Tenth Generation: 13 Blood Pool, can spend 

1 Blood Point a turn 

• • • • N inth Generation: 14 Blood Pool, can spend 

2 Blood Points a turn 


Eighth Generation: 15 Blood Pool, can spend 
3 Blood Points a turn 


Herd 


You have built a group of mortals from whom you can 
feed without fear. This Herd also helps protect you and can 
be used to perform a number of different services. However, 
the Herd is not as tightly controlled nor as loyal as Retainers, 
and are not as closely connected to you as Allies. Ultimately, 
the Herd describes only the number of Vessels you have 
readily available. Your Herd rating adds dice to your Hunt 
rolls, as described in Chapter Nine. 

• 3 vessels 

• • 7 vessels 

••• 15 vessels 

• • • • 30 vessels 

• • • • • 60 vessels 


Influence reflects your ability to produce results when 
attempting to sway or control the political and social pro¬ 
cesses of the mortal community. It is the ability to compel a 
mortal to take action on your behalf, perhaps because of some 
hold you have over him. This could mean that you have a 
prestigious family, control the police chief, or simply that you 
have gained political office. In short, Influence is how much 
political power you exert upon society, particularly among 
the police and bureaucrats. 

Some rolls might use Influence in place of an Ability, 
especially when you start to interact with any sort of minor 
bureaucrat. 

• Moderately influential; a factor in local 
politics 

• • Well-connected; a factor in city politics 

• • • Position of influence; a factor in state politics 

•••• Broad personal power; a factor in regional 

politics 

• • • • • Vastly influential; a factor in national politics 


Mentor 

This Trait describes one or more elders (your sire?) who 
look after you. Each rating point of Mentor you possess 
describes how powerful your Mentor is in the community of 
the Kindred. Your Mentor could simply be a vampire who has 
learned her way around the city, or an Ancient who has 
garnered huge amounts of power in both the mortal and 
immortal worlds. Your Mentor can advise you, protect you 
from other elders, speak for you to the prince, caution you 
when you intrude on the affairs of other elders, and inform 
you of opportunities for power and advancement. 

Often a Mentor is your sire, though it can be any vampire 
who has taken interest in you. If your Mentor is powerful, it 
might not be a single person, but a group. Thus, a brood could 
be a Mentor, as could the ruling council of a clan. Tremere 
often have the Mentor Background Trait because of the aid 
they receive from their elders. 

A Mentor may expect to receive something in return for 
the aid she provides. Though she may simply enjoy your 
company, in time of need she may call upon her “apprentice.” 
This may begin a number of excellent stories. In general, 
however, you do receive more than you need to give out. 

• Mentor is an ancilla, and of little influence. 

• • Mentor is an elder and is well respected. 

• • • Mentor is a member of the primogen 

• • • • Mentor is a prince and has much power over 

the city. 

••••• Mentor is a Justicar and is extraordinarily 


powerful. 


Chapter Seven: Traits 0 173 






































174 0 VAMPIRE: The Masquerade 




































Conscience 


Tolerant and merciful of heart, even to those who have 
harmed or betrayed you, you find it hard to hold a grudge and 
make every effort to forgive those who have injured or 
betrayed you. 

Conscience is a Trait of self-awareness which enables 
you to evaluate your own conduct. The judgments made by 
Conscience stem from your attitudes, ideals and morals. 
They are internalized prescriptions of self-worth and the 
voice of the real self — not the facade you might present to 
the world. Conscience rolls are made to determine whether 
you feel remorse for immoral acts, and therefore do not lose 
Humanity. 

• Chaste 


Just 

Charitable 


Remorseful 


Self-Control 


You arc a person of great temperance and self-mastery. 
You have the discipline and the self-restraint to prevent 
yourself from doing things your impulses would otherwise 
have you do. This Trait indicates the amount of control you 
have over your feelings, emotions and most importantly, 
actions. 

Self-Control is used to resist going into a frenzy. When 
you use Self-Control, you can never roll more dice than the 
points you currently have in your Blood Pool. Quite simply, 
the hungrier you are, the less easily can you resist. See the 
Frenzy section of the next chapter for more information. 

• Calm 

•• Temperate 

• • • Disciplined 

• • • • Hardened 


Total self-mastery 


Courage 


You are a person of bravery, tenacity, and considerable 
perseverance. Courage is a quality of the mind that enables 
you to stand up in the face of opposition, hardship or danger. 
Courage is used to resist running away in terror from things 
a vampire instinctively fears, such as the sun, fire or a cross 
held by a person with holy powers. See the Terror section of 
the next chapter for more information. 

• Bold 

• • Dauntless 

• • • Steadfast 

• • • • Gallant 

• • • • • Valorous 







































176 0 VAMPIRE: The Masquerade 









































• Weak 

• • Timid 

• • • Unassertive 

• • • • Diffident 

• • • • • Certain 

•••••• Confident 

• •••••• Strong 

• ••••••• Controlled 

• •••••••• Iron-willed 

• ••••••••• Unshakable 

Using Willpower 

Willpower is one of the most active Traits in Vampire, 
simply because there are so many different ways to employ, 
regain and change it. Willpower is such a focus of the game 
that you will be paying a lot of attention to it, so you had 
better understand the following rules. 

• A Willpower point can be used to give you one 
automatic success in an action. Only one point of Willpower 
can be used in this way on a single turn, but it gives you a 
single guaranteed success. In this fashion it is possible to 
succeed automatically in any simple action, simply by con¬ 
centrating. For extended rolls, the extra success can make the 
critical difference between success and failure. There are 
some situations in which the Storyteller may not allow such 
a use of Willpower. Only vampires may use Wilipower in this 
way. 

• On some occasions, the Storyteller may tell you that 
your character does something because of instinct, primal 
urge or gut reaction (“You run away from the window in 
mortal terror as the sunlight streams through."). You can use 
a point of Willpower to avoid this and do as you please. 
However, the feeling might return and another Willpower 
point might be required. Sometimes it will return more times 
than you have Willpower, while other times you may com¬ 
pletely overcome the urge. 

• When one of your Derangements is about to cause you 
to take a course of action you do not prefer, a Willpower point 
can be used to control yourself. However, each time you 
attempt to overcome the Derangement, another Willpower 
point must be spent. Eventually, if enough Willpower points 
are spent, the Derangement is overcome permanently. This 
is the only way Derangements can be overcome, though this 
is not effective on a Malkavian’s initial Derangement. 

Willpower can only be permanently increased by the 
expenditure of experience points, but the Willpower Pool 
can go through enormous changes during a story. Discussed 
below are ail the different ways Willpower can change. 

Recovering Willpower 

A character recovers her Willpower Pool whenever she 
is able to rest or gets a chance to restore her self-confidence. 
It is up to the Storyteller to decide when and how a character 
recovers Willpower. 









































































11 11 11 11 11 11 11 If 11 11 11 If 1 I 11 


Blood Point Chart 


Source 

Blood Pool size 

Vampire 

10 - 50 

Lupine 

25 

Average Human 

10 

Child _ 

6 

Cow 

5 

Dog 

2 

Cat 

1 

Plasma Bag 

1 

Rat 

1/2 

Bird 

1/4 


Health Level for every Blood Point lost). Ifcharactersdonot 
want to risk losing Humanity, they’d better learn to control 
themselves. 

Gaining Blood Pool 

When a vampire drinks the blood of a human or an 
animal, she is able to add blood to her Blood Pool. Up to three 
Blood Points can be drained in one turn. The shorter the 
turn, the less leisurely the character is taking the sustenance. 
Many Kindred drink very slowly so as to eke more pleasure 
out of the experience. It is impossible to take more than three 
Blood Points in three seconds (the shortest an action turn 
gets). 

Once a human is bitten, he no longer resists the attack 
of the vampire and indeed becomes a full partner in the 
ecstasy. Thus, the vampire need not fear the victim once the 
teeth have sunk in. In the cases of exceptionally strong- 
willed individuals (9+ Willpower), resistance may continue, 
but eventually even they are drawn into the seduction of the 
Kiss. Some mortals, given the opportunity, learn to enjoy the 
Kiss and may develop a lust for it. 

If a vampire drinks more than half of a victim’s Blood 
Pool, that person’s life is in serious danger, and some sort of 
treatment is usually necessary to ensure the victim’s survival. 
If more than three-fourths of a victim's blood is taken, 
immediate hospitalization is required or the vessel will surely 
die. 

A wounded character usually has less blood than nor¬ 
mal. Assume that a normal-sized human has one fewer Blood 
Point for every level of wounds. Vampires do not lose blood 
to wounds in this way. Assume humans regain one Blood 
Point a day if they do not have a full supply of blood. While 
some animals may have much more blood than a human by 
volume, it is far less nourishing and therefore is worth less in 
Blood Points. 

Old blood is never as potent as fresh blood, unless it is 
extraordinarily potent, e.g. the blood of an elder, in which 
case it will maintain its vitality for some time. 


If a vampire drinks the blood of an Ancient, each point 
taken may be worth two Blood Points or more. Therefore, it 
is possible to gain a tremendous amount of Blood Points by 
feeding from such creatures. Elders are able to concentrate 
the blood they drink, thereby increasing their effective Blood 
Pools. Each “point" of then Blood Pools is therefore worth 1/ 
10th of their total Blood Pools. 

Essentially, elders have much larger Blood Pools than 
other vampires, although they are not physically larger. They 
are able to contain the blood only because they are able to 
concentrate it. Thus, if another vampire drank that blood, 
she would receive a highly concentrated dose (which often 
has special properties as well). The blood of Lupines is just 
as potent; see the section on werewolves in the Appendix. 

Health 

And he that will this health deny, 

Down among the dead men let him lie. 

— John Dyer, “Toast: Here’s a Health to the King” 
This is a measure of how hale and hearty a character is. 
There arc various levels of injury, and each applies a different 
penalty to the person so injured. A character who is Hurt, 
-1, would have one less die to roll on all her rolls, while a 
character who is Crippled, -5, would have five less dice to roll. 
If that leaves the player with no dice to roll, then the 
character cannot take that action. 


Health Levels 

Bruised: Character is only bruised and has 

no action penalties. 

Hurt: -1 

Character is only mildly hurt; 
movement isn’t hindered. 

Injured: -1 

Minor injuries; little hindrance to 
movement. 

Wounded -2 

Character cannot run, but can still 
walk. 

Mauled: -2 

Character is badly injured and can 
only hobble about. 

Crippled: -5 

Character is severely injured and 
can only crawl. 

Incapacitated: 

Character is completely incapable 
of movement. 


A vampire who is Incapacitated can take no action 
whatsoever. He is immobilized and the only action he can 
perform is to heal himself using Blood Points or swallow 
blood that is offered to him. A mortal who reaches this state 
is very close to death; if she loses one more Health Level, she 
dies. If a vampire sustains an aggravated wound at the 
Incapacitated level, he dies the Final Death as well. 


J 

I ii ii ii i i fi ii 11 1 i i I ii 

Chapter Seven: Traits 0 179 





































































Nothing determines who we will become so much as those 
things we choose to ignore. 

— Sandor McNab 


T h is chapter discusses the different ways a charac - 
ter can change dunng the course of the chronicle. 
It describes many different systems for resolving 
changes to characters, whether the changes in question be 
the accumulation of experience or the accumulation of 
wounds. 

This chapter is subdivided into three sections, each of 
which discusses a number of different systems affecting char¬ 
acter changes. The character development section describes 
how Traits can increase (and decrease). Physical States 
includes systems for injuries, recuperation, and torpor. Mental 
States includes systems for Frenzy, Rotschreck, Degenera¬ 
tion, Derangements and Blood Bonds. 

One of the most exciting things about playing characters 
is seeing them change over time. Watching a character 
develop and grow is like watching a child grow up before your 
eyes. However, in Vampire, development doesn’t always 
mean the character gets better. It often means the character 
slowly and steadily sinks into the abyss. Such is the nature of 
this game. Focus on getting better and surviving the rough 
penods, and try to appreciate the artistic impact of losing your 
Humanity or your mind. 


Character 

Development 

Experience is the child of Thought, and Thought is the child 
of Action. 

— Benjamin Disraeli, Vivian Grey 

We humans are learning machines, and we learn con¬ 
stantly — almost despite ourselves. By acquiring not only 
facts and figures, but new ways of being, we can make 
ourselves into what we want to be. Vampires do not learn as 
easily, for the inertia of their deaths is hard to reverse, but 
their long lives allow them to accumulate a vast treasury of 
knowledge and lore. Change occurs to them as well. As the 
years fly by, it becomes more and more difficult for them to 
add to their knowledge; nonetheless, they do leam. Neo¬ 
nates fear elders not only because of their heightened powers, 
but also because of their wisdom and hard-earned knowledge. 



Chapter Eight: Systems 0 181 

































At the end of every story, the Storyteller awards experi¬ 
ence points to each character, normally giving the same 
amount to each one. The players then simply record how 
many experience points they gained. Experience points can 
be used to increase Traits. The cost for raising Traits varies 
widely; sec the chart for specifics. The cost is almost always 
based on the present rating times a certain number (yes, you 
have to do multiplication). Thus, if the character has an 
Alertness rating of two and the player wants to raise it to 
three, it costs fourcxpcrience points todoso. If the character 
does not have the Trait at all, the cost is listed as a "new" 
Ability or Discipline. A Trait can only be raised by one per 
story — never more. 

When the Virtues increase via experience, Humanity or 
Willpower do not go up as well. Once the chronicle starts, 
they are considered separate Traits (though, of course, one 
Virtue point must be deleted each time a Humanity point is 
lost). 

Roleplay It 

As the Storyteller, you should not let a player simply 
spend her experience points to raise any Trait she wishes — 
lt'sa little more involved than that. The increased Trait must 
be something the character had a chance to learn about 
during the story — either the character achieved great 
success through use of the Trait, or made a big mistake she can 


Trait 

Path 

Willpower 

Virtue 

Attribute 

Thaumaturgy Path 

Clan Discipline 

Other Discipline 


Cost 

7 

10 

current rating 

current rating x 2 
current rating x 2 
current rating x 2 
current rating x 4 
current rating x 4 
current rating x 5 
current rating x 7 


Notes: Characters with no clan, Caitiff, have no 
Clan Disciplines. For them, all Disciplines cost the 
current rating x 6 to raise by one due to their lack of 
specialization. 

Experience Points 

During a story, characters leam many things. Much of 
what they leam is not the type of thing that can be recorded 
on character sheets, but is rather something the players 
simply keep in mind. They may have learned never to leave 
a car door unlocked or never to walk into a dark alley with a 
light behind them. Sometimes, however, what they leam 
can be recorded. 
































leam from. In the case of Willpower, something must have 
occurred that would have actually made the character more 
self-confident. 

You should only allow the changes if they have been or 
can lie woven into the story. At the very least, the changes 
need to make sense in terms of the story and not simply be 
changes the player makes because she wants her character to 
be a certain way. This experience system can be as realistic 
as you make it. The more you force the players to make sense 
of their experiences, the more it will add to character devel¬ 
opment as a whole. 

Awarding Experience 
Points 

Players will love you and hate you for it. Assigning 
experience points requires a careful balance between reward¬ 
ing the players and maintaining game balance. If you follow 
the guidelines below, you probably won’t get into too much 
trouble, but feel free to experiment as you see fit. 

End of Each Chapter 

Give each character one to five experience points at the 
end of every chapter (game session). One point is given 
whether or not the brood succeeds or fails as a function of 
simply being there (remember, we leam despite ourselves 
sometimes). 

One point — Automatic: Each player gets one point 
after every game session. 

One point — Learning Curve: The character would 
have learned something from his experiences during the 
chapter. Ask the player to describe what his character 
learned before you award the point. 

One point — Acting: The player roleplayed well — not 
only entertainingly but appropriately. Award for exceptional 
rolcplaying only; your standards should get increasingly higher. 
In most cases, only award this to the person who did the best 
roleplaying in the troupe. 

One point — Roleplaying: The player acted out her 
character's Nature and Demeanor very well. While some 
players may find it tough to fulfill both roles convincingly, 
those who give the Storyteller a feel for both their facade and 
tme self deserve a reward. 

One point— Heroism: Usually in scant supply among 
Kindred, those rare acts of heroism deserve some reward. 
When a character puts himself at risk for others, such as when 
he suffers multiple aggravated wounds fighting the Lupine 
long enough for the rest of the brood to escape, give him an 
experience point. Don’t let characters take advantage of this, 
however. There is a fine line between heroism and stupidity. 

End of Each Story 

At the end of each story, you can assign each player up 
to one to three additional experience points on top of the one 
to five points earned for completing the final chapter. 


Chapter Eight: Systems 0 










































One point — Success: The brood succeeded in its 
mission or goal. Perhaps it was not a complete success, but at 
least a marginal victory was achieved. 

One point — Danger: The character experienced great 
danger during the story and survived. 

One point — Wisdom: The player (and thus the 
character) exhibited great wits or resourcefulness and came 
up with an idea that enabled the brood to succeed. 

If you want to award even more points so the characters 
develop more quickly, simply invent new categories in which 
you can make awards. They can even vary from story to story, 
and can be based on the specific circumstances of that story. 

Raising Disciplines 

Disciplines are probably the most difficult aspect of a 
character for a player to develop, though it is certainly a high 
priority if the character wishes to indeed live forever — only 
vampiric power provides real and continuous safety. 

Though characters gain Disciplines simply by spending 
experience points, the Storyteller may want to restrict the 
process somewhat more. For instance, if a character wishes 
to learn a new Discipline in which she has no current rating, 
she may have to seek out a tutor or discover a magical amulet 
which awakens her latent Discipline. How this works is up 
to the Storyteller, unless the Storyteller says otherwise, 
players can simply use experience points to purchase Disci¬ 
plines. 

Beyond the Disciplines already described in Chapter 
Seven, elder vampires possess other, mightier powers. These 
can either be invented by the Storyteller or found in supple¬ 
ments to this game. It is possible for characters to gain these 
new Disciplines, but extraordinary measures are required to 
do so — and it is rumored that sometimes the blood of an 
elder must be consumed... 

Gaining Humanity 

Players can raise Humanity as well, but only after pro¬ 
longed and consistent artistic or aesthetically-based behavior. 
A player may spend experience points to raise Humanity only 
after his character has done a "good deed.” The Storyteller, 
as always, is the final adjudicator of when this occurs. 

As the Storyteller, be very strict about how characters 
can regain Humanity. Remember that over the course of the 
chronicle, the characters should slowly lose more and more 
Humanity. Preserving the status quo should be difficult 
enough for a character, and actually gaining Humanity 
should be next to impossible. 

You may wish to make Humanity gain a specific reward 
for a particularly vigorous story in which there was no real or 
practical reward offered or given. Only the rescue of some 
unfortunate or the persistent search for some kernel of truth 
or goodness will be enough to gain new Humanity. Even then 
the gain doesn’t have to be certain; you could require a Virtue 
roll to gain the point. 


184 0 VAMPIRE; The Masquerade 































For instance, a vampire with high Auspex might become 
aware of a mortal in grave danger somewhere in Paris. Acting 
only on a hunch, and with no idea as to the source of the 
danger, the character might go to Paris to look for this 
individual. She eventually finds the mortal and discovers 
that they share an eerie bond. In the end, she learns the 
mortal traces his ancestry to her sire, and that the mortal 
needs protection. By becoming involved with the mortal, she 
gains a new sense of her own Humanity. 

Gaining Willpower 

Characters can buy permanent Willpower with experi¬ 
ence points, but sometimes you may give a player a specific 
chance to raise his Willpower. The opportunity to gain 
Willpower makes a great motivation for stories, especially 
your more bizarre ones. 

Characters can lose permanent Willpower as well. This 
occurs whenever a player botches a Willpower roll. Luckily, 
this occurs only rarely, for Willpower is usually only rolled 
during frenzies, when employing the dangerous forces of 
Thaumaturgy, and m order to resist Domination. 

Backgrounds 

Background Traits never change through the use of 
experience points. Instead, the change happens as a normal 
course of events during the chronicle. Eventually, the 
Storyteller will note the changes and the character’s Traits 
will increase. A player may wish to ask the Storyteller if one 
of her Background Traits should be changed, but this should 
not be done too often. The Storyteller may design a list of 
things characters must accomplish in order to increase a 
Background — the players may or may not be shown the list. 
To gain a new Retainer, for example, a vampire has to find 
the right subject, befriend or Dominate him, and train him in 
the duties she wishes performed. 


Personality 

Development 


<!. 

II; 

HI?* 




Be all that you can be, the greatest challenge of them 
all... Yourself. 

— Advertisement 


A character’s personality can change over the course of 
the chronicle, but for the most pan the changes occur 
through rolcplaying and not by simply changing the charac¬ 
ter sheet. For instance, as time passes, character motivations 
change as well. Deciding when and how a character's 
motivations change can add a great depth to your roleplaying. 
However, when a character’s Demeanor or true Nature 
changes, it should be recorded on the character sheet as well. 
No aspect of personality can ever be changed through the use 
of experience points. 




































M 

A 



/ 


/ 


1 / 


Demeanor 

Though the Demeanor listed on the character sheet is 
simply the way the character most commonly presents her¬ 
self, it is not an absolute standard of behavior. Changing the 
Demeanor of a character may help the player focus on the 
change in personality. A player may change his character's 
Demeanor at any point in the game, but should either tell the 
Storyteller he has done so or make it evident through his 
roleplaying. 

Sometimes the Storyteller might suggest the change 
after watching the way the character is played, simply as a way 
of alerting the player that she has noticed the change in 
personality. Keep in mind that it really isn’t all that impor¬ 
tant. Demeanor is only a tool the player uses to focus and 
direct roleplaying. If a change in Demeanor is called for or 
seems appropriate, the player should feel free to go right 
ahead and change it. 

Nature 

A player may also change her character’s Nature, but 
rules for this are somewhat more restrictive than those for 
changing Demeanor. A character’s Nature is central to who 
and what he is — it is the locus of his being. A change in 
Nature is akin to a change in personality — everything is 
different after it occurs. It should not be decided on the spur 
of the moment, but must be thoroughly considered. The 
Storyteller should force a player to roleplay the change over 
a number of game sessions; a story might even be created 
around this tumultuous transformation. Conversely, some¬ 
times it may simply make sense that the change in personality 
comes about suddenly as a reaction to what has occurred to 
or around the character. Though it is certainly up to the 
Storyteller’s discretion, a change in Nature sometimes results 
in a reshuffling of Virtues, though never a change in the 
ratings of a character’s Humanity or Willpower. 


Rebirth 


Live baby live, noui that the day is over. 

I gotta new sensation, 

In perfect moments impossible to refuse 

Sleep baby sleep, now that the night is over. 

— INXS, “New Sensation” 

Despite the tragedy of their existence, vampires can 
escape their curse and become mortal again. Though exceed¬ 
ingly difficult, it is a major theme of the game and something 
that will direct the ambitions and thoughts of many charac¬ 
ters. 

Truly exquisite moments can be created in roleplaying 
through the search for Rebirth. When characters who have 
searched together for Rebirth finally arrive at the point 
where it is possible, they must decide whether they wish to 
actually become mortal again. 


0 VAMPIRE: The Masquerade 

































Rebirth is never possible to accomplish through the 
rules, but must instead be a primary element of the story and 
a part of the roleplaying. There are a variety of myths and 
legends among the Kindred concerning how Rebirth might 
come about. The dec ision of which myths are true and which 
are false is up to the Storyteller. However, it is legitimate, and 
even perhaps advisable, to make Rebirth impossible if it is not 
the focus of the chronicle. If you do wish to include it, here 
are some ideas on how vampires might achieve Rebirth. 

• If the character manages to kill his sire, and his sire’s 
sire, and his sire’s sire’s sire, he may break free of the curse. 
This is not always the case, however, for sometimes one must 
progress all the way up the bloodline to an Antediluvian or 
possibly even beyond. Why it is possible for some to slay only 
their masters and be freed, while others must go farther along 
the bloodline, is unknown. If there is a logic to it, it has not 
yet been discovered. 

• If a character sacrifices herself for another person and 
dies in the attempt, it is possible that the character’s death 
may be that of a mortal. The sacrifice is so great that in death 
the vampire is restored to mortal form. In situations where a 
character has recently died, this can be just the thing to shine 
new light on the situation. This sort of “poetic justice" might 
not be appropriate in some chronicles. 

• There are a number of complicated rituals that can be 
enacted to end the curse and rescue a character from the 
Damned. These rituals must be researched, the “ingredients" 
found, and the proper time and place decided. If one factor 
is wrong, the ritual could end in the death of the character, 
not salvation. 

• It is said that at the final point of the Golconda ritual, 
it is possible to choose to be mortal, rather than attain 
Golconda itself. Many elders deny this, but as it is unlikely 
they have reached Golconda, it is difficult to decide whether 
they know the truth. 

Diablerie 

Do unto others as they've done to you 

But what the hell is this world commg to? 

— Mctallica, “Fight Fire With Fire" 

It is possible for vampires to gamer immense powers, 
advancing even in the potency of their blood, and approach¬ 
ing the quintessential power of Caine. In fact, the lure of just 
such power created and now fuels the eternal conflict be¬ 
tween the Kindred — the great Jyhad. It is the lust for this 
power that causes neonates to slay their sires, and it is the fear 
of this lust that causes elders to persecute their fledglings. 

The process through which a vampire kills another in 
order to rise in power is called diablerie, or the Amaranth. 
The Amaranth is a legendary undying flower, a treasure 
beyond price, and according to legend was given to an elder 
a week before he was attacked. “Diabolist” is the epithet for 
one who hunts his own kin for their blood. 





' m 




































When a Kindred drinks from another until all her blood 
is drained away, and continues to drink until she is extin¬ 
guished (she has lost all Health Levels) the very essence of 
the vessel is transferred. Not only is the vessel killed, but the 
vessel's life-force is passed along to the slayer. 

If the vessel was a vampire, and was of an earlier genera¬ 
tion than the vampire who drank the blood, the slayer’s 
effective generation is lowered by one. This provides many 
benefits: it allows her to raise traits over five (if the new 
generation is seventh or lower), to Dominate a larger number 
of the Kindred (one can only Dominate vampires of a later 
generation) and possess and use a larger Blood Pool (see 
Chapter Seven for more details). If the vessel’s generation 
was more than three earlier than the character, it may be 
possible for more than one Diabolist to drink and thereby 
reduce a generation. 

If a character wishes to continue drinking the blood of a 
vampiric vessel, even after all the blood is drained, he must 
roll Strength against a difficulty of nine. Each success 
indicates that the target loses one Health Level. No blood is 
actually drained, but instead the very spirit of the vampire is 
taken from the body. Once all the vessel’s Health Levels 
have been taken, she dies the Final Death, and her life-force 
is passed along to the character. If the vessel was not of an 
earlier generation, this does not mean very much. Such 
cannot be done with mortals, for their life-forces have already 
been extinguished by the time they lose all their Blood 
Points. 

Each time a player character does this, the Storyteller 
should require a Humanity roll of some sort, especially if the 
one whom he has slain displayed any sort of good or noble 
tendencies. 

Note: The blood of many elders is extremely potent. It 
can often be used for a variety of purposes. It is said that this 
blood is occasionally able to grant temporary empowerment 
in one or more Disciplines when it is imbibed by a lesser 
vampire. Though only one character can gain the benefit of 
the lowered effective generation, the other characters in¬ 
volved can still use that blood (perhaps even preserving some 
of it in vials) to invigorate themselves in other ways. 

Golconda 

Should the whole frame of nature round him break, 

In ruin and confusion hurled. 

He, unconcerned, would hear the mighty crack, 

And stand secure amidst a falling world. 

— Horace, “Odes” 

The theme of Vampire often centers around the Hero’s 
Journey — the quest to discover who one really is. It is the 
journey of Prometheus, the Greek hero who brought us fire. 


At the point where a character overcomes her sin and 
approaches the end of her quest, two things can happen. 
Either she becomes mortal once again, or she becomes a new 
kind of vampire: one that no longer feels the urge to frenzy, 
the need to feed, or the desire to sin so strongly. 

Golconda is a state of being wherein the character 
manages to control her frenzies and restrain the Beast. All 
Kindred of clear mind seek this state unless they want a total 
release from their undeath. Golconda is not an easy state of 
being to attain, but for many it is the only goal worth 
achieving. It is not a reconnection to one’s mortality. Infect, 
the opposite is true — Golconda is an acceptance and hence 
a control over one’s bestiality. Golconda is the final accep¬ 
tance of one's curse and the subsequent power over it. 

Basic to Golconda is the act of remorse. This is not 
necessarily any sort of religious repentance, but rather a more 
personal and immediate realization of the sins one has 
committed. The character must make some sort of penance, 
such as donating to a charity, aiding someone in need, or in 
some cases even punishing herself. The worse the sins, the 
more she needs to do. 

Storytellers should almost never allow a character to 
reach Golconda. Only if she does a superb job of trying to 
make things right, and experiences profound remorse for her 
actions, should she even have a chance. As the Storyteller, 
ask yourself whether the character truly feels remorse and 
compassion. How well has the player roleplayed through the 
whole process of grief and regret? Golconda should never be 
easily earned. In most cases, it should occur only at the end 
of a chronicle. A new chronicle could begin later on with the 
same character, but with an entirely different concept and 
motif. 

It should take many game sessions to complete the 
process. More than one character can attempt to reach 
Golconda, but it is normally something only a few achieve. 

In some ways, Golconda can be seen as a movement 
within the Kindred, but if it is a movement, it does not have 
much organization. Some who have reached Golconda are 
very evangelistic and encourage others to follow the same 
path to peace. They wish to bring all of the Kindred into the 
sanctity Golconda offers. Some even travel from city to city 
speaking about Golconda, and encourage those who are 
interested to learn more. They do not reveal the secrets of 
Golconda, for each suppl icant must learn of it on his own, but 
they will give hints. 

There is said to be an Antediluvian who has reached 
Golconda and supports those who spread word of it. This 
Ancient's role in the jyhad is said to be one of thwarting the 
others from succeeding in their plots to destroy the Kindred. 
Only those among the Inconnu would know anything of this 
creature. Of course, the critics of the Golconda movement 
decry the whole movement as being but a minor intrigue in 
the great Jyhad. The truth of the matter will perhaps never 
be known until the night of Gehenna. 


0 t 1) ill) (! ft (I ft ft AIM) 0 




188 0 


0 I 1 B 1 I I 


VAMPIRE: The Masquerade 
































Mmmmm 


Quest 

There aren’t really any rules for determining when a 
character reaches Golconda, for this is something that must 
come about as a part of roleplaying. Golconda is a sublime 
and nearly intangible state ofbeing. Thus, it is the Storyteller’s 
responsibility to set the storytelling conditions for when the 
change can occur. The player might not even know her 
character has reached Golconda until the Storyteller starts 
having her make a few rolls differently. 

Golconda is akin to the nature of a quest. The quest is 
not so much a scavenger hunt as a spiritual and mental 
journey into one’s own self. Often the quest for Golconda 
takes one to the astral plane or into the chaos of one's own 
mind. The roleplaying involved can be extremely powerful, 
and should only be attempted after the character has been 
developed over a number of stories and the player has a firm 
grasp of who and what the character is. Golconda is about the 
transformation of a personality, and thus the character must 
have a complete and detailed personality for it to be any fun. 

The quest for Golconda often begins with the charac¬ 
ters’ search for what it is. In the first chapter of the story, the 
Storyteller needs to build a desire for Golconda and increase 
its allure to the players. Slowly the characters should begin 
to realize what it is all about. 

The second stage of the story generally revolves around 
the search for an elder who can tell the characters more about 
Golconda. Normally this is one of the enigmatic members of 
the Inconnu—someone who has already attained Golconda. 
This mentor must be convinced to aid the characters who 
wish to reach Golconda and may require the completion of 
different "tasks” to prove the characters’ worthiness. 

The characters must prove they do indeed feel remorse. 
The tasks are likely to require the characters to make up for 
past deeds, to right old wrongs, or even to go back to the 
families of their past victims and aid them. The roleplaying 
involved dredges up everything that has happened through¬ 
out the chronicle and makes the players relive it. Hopefully, 
this will give them an even greater empathy with their 
characters. 

When the characters have finally proven themselves to 
the mentor (though it is possible only one of the characters 
will prove herself sufficiently), he will initiate the final stage 
of the quest — the ritual. This ceremony can last several 
weeks or several months, and involves many quests into the 
dreams of the supplicant. This stage is known as the Suspire, 
and many stories are told of it. The dreams are said to be 
provoked by draughts of blood from one’s closest compan¬ 
ions, who travel with the supplicant through the world of 
dreams. 

The mentor must oversee the Suspire, and often it takes 
place at his or her haven. No one truly knows what occurs at 
this ritual, for only those who successfully attain Golconda 
live through it, and they never speak of their experience. 
Most of those who do survive join the Inconnu and live out 



I 


I 


If 


1J 


Chapter Eight: Systems 0 



































their lives apart from mortal civilization. (Note: not all of the 
Inconnu have reached Golconda—only a significant minor¬ 
ity.) 

However, despite all the roleplaying involved, there are 
a few practical criteria for reaching Golconda. These are as 
essential as the story and roleplaying elements discussed 
above. First of all, the character’s Humanity rating must be 
a 7 or higher (if it ever falls below a 7, then the character falls 
from Golconda). Second, the character’s Conscience rating 
must be at least a 4. Finally, over the duration of the quest for 
Golconda, the character must spend Willpower points to 
overcome all urges to frenzy, do wrong or waver from the true 
path. Normally at least 15 points must be spent. This reflects 
the determination of the character to reach Golconda and 
the self-affirmation that the quest provokes. 

Benefits of Golconda 

Once Golconda is reached, the character is at peace with 
herself. She no longer exists in a life filled with horror and 
self-pity. She finally masters the Beast within by accepting 
that the Beast is a part of her. 

There is only one major benefit for reaching Golconda, 
but this one is enough. When a vampire reaches Golconda, 
she no longer frenzies, nor is she prone to the Rotschreck. No 
Courage or Self-Control rolls need ever be made for as long 
as she remains in Golconda. 

A lesser benefit is the fact that the character does not 
need to drink blood as often. The character only loses one 
Blood Point per week, rather than one Blood Point per day. 
If the vampire has reached the age where the need for even 
more potent blood arises, the desire is more subdued because 
of Golconda and is easily pushed aside. 

Rumors also exist of Kindred in Golconda utilizing the 
full potential of their vampiric form. Thus, instead of being 
limited by their generations as to what levels of Disciplines 
they may take, characters in Golconda may develop any 
powers through experience. 

Physical States 


These systems discuss the parameters of health and the 
lack of it. Injuries and healing are discussed, as is torpor, the 
deep sleep of vampires. 

Injury 

Remember, Doc. when the will is invoked, the recuperative 
powers of the human body are incredible. 

— FBI Agent Cooper, Twin Peaks 

There are as many different ways a character can sustain 
an injury as there are injuries, but in Vampire injuries are 
described in one way: the Health Trait. A player records 
injuries in terms of Health Levels; each wound causes the loss 
of one Health Level. Simply check off Health Levels as the 


































character loses them, so the last check made is the character's 
current Health Level. As the character regains Health 
Levels, erase the check marks. 

Think of it as a spectrum with Bruised at one end and 
Incapacitated at the other. As a character takes more 
wounds, he travels down the spectrum until he finally reaches 
Incapacitated. When he heals, he simply removes these 
checks one by one, until he is again in perfect health. 

Each success on an opponent's damage roll indicates a 
loss of one Health Level. For two successes, the player checks 
off two Health Levels, starting with Bruised and going down 
to Hurt. If a vampire takes damage beyond simply being 


Incapacitated, he loses a Blood Point for each additional 
wound level. Once he has lost all of his Blood Points, the 
vampire is completely helpless and will die at sunrise unless 
rescued. If the vampire remains at Incapacitated with no 
Blood Points, he will fall into torpor — an extremely deep 
sleep that can last years or even centuries. See the Torpor 
section below for more details. 


Healing 

Vampires arc dead and never recover naturally from 
wounds. They must always use Blood Points to heal them¬ 
selves. One Blood Point will heal one Health Level; this 
always takes one turn to accomplish. 

Normally, a vampire remains still when healing, taking 
no other action, but he can attempt to heal while performing 
other actions. A character must make a Stamina + Survival 
roll toscc if such healing was successful (difficulty 6). Success 
indicates the character heals while engaged in other activi¬ 
ties. A failure indicates that the Health Level is not regained 
and the Blood Point is still lost. A botch causes the character 
to lose another Health Level. 


Aggravated Wounds 

Vampires occasionally suffer wounds so severe they 
cannot simply use Blood Points to heal them. These are 
known as aggravated wounds, and arc commonly created by 
sunlight, fire or the claws and teeth of other undcad. Aggra- 


Mortals' Healing Times 

Health Level Time 

Bruised One Day 

Hurt Three Days 

Injured One Week 

Wounded One Month 

Mauled Three Months 

Crippled Three Months * 

•Not only do mortals have to heal this wound level, 
but they lose one point from one of their Physical At¬ 
tributes as well. Mortals who reach Incapacitated heal at 
the Storyteller’s discretion; some will go into a coma for 
the rest of their lives. 







































1 1) I II II I) 1 

vated wounds require both blood and time to heal. Aggra¬ 
vated wounds can only be soaked by vampires who possess the 
Discipline of Fortitude. 

Aggravated wound levels can only be healed at the rate 
of one per day of rest and a cost of five Blood Points per wound 
level healed. Additional levels can be healed in a night if the 
character spends five additional Blood Points and one Will¬ 
power point per level cured. Aggravated wounds should be 
indicated on the character sheet with an X rather than a 
check. The Storyteller can also deem any injury to be an 
aggravated injury. 

Final Death 

Though vampires are no longer mortal, they still face the 
possibility of final death. It may be tempting to imagine 
vampires as virtual gods, capable of doing nearly anything 
and of withstanding nearly anything, but there are ways to 
kill even vampires. A vampire who dies once again may not 
be brought back to unlife and is said to have suffered the Final 
Death. 

Inflicting aggravated wounds on a severely injured vam¬ 
pire is the most common way in which he can be extinguished. 
If a vampire has no Blood Pool or Health Levels left, and 
sustains an aggravated wound, he is utterly destroyed. Some¬ 
times the Final Death results in the complete and rapid 
disintegration of the body, and within minutes all that is left 
is a pile of ashes. 

Vampires can also be killed if all the blood is sucked from 
them by another of their kind. Deep water pressure, explo¬ 
sions, certain vampiric diseases and decapitation are other 
ways in which a vampire can be extinguished. You will need 
to decide how death can result from these dangers in your 
chronicle, based on the rules given in this section. 

Mortal Death 

When a mortal reaches Incapacitated, she is one Health 
Level away from death. If she is injured one more time, or it 
is impossible to stem the flow of blood from her body, she will 
die. Death is final for mortals unless they are Embraced just 
before they are snatched away to the everlasting. It is possible 
for a vampire to take a newly dead corpse and turn it into a 
vampire if no more than five minutes have passed since 
death. 

Of course, mortals heal differently than vampires. With 
proper medical attention, mortals recover based on the chart 
below. Note that the time given is how long it takes to 
recover that level — other levels must be healed as well. 
Thus, if the mortal takes three months to recover from being 
Mauled, he must still take the time to heal Wounded, Injured 
and so on. 



































Sources of Injury 


1 think of isolation and abstinence , and how each is so cruelly 
dependent upon the other. There are times I cannot stand to resist 
any longer, yet when I do feed, I cannot abide the sight of the blood 
that is upon my hands. 

— Tamalary, Con/essions 

There are many ways to inflict harm upon a vampire. 
Some are common to mortals, and thus readily understand¬ 
able to us, while others are specific to vampires. These 
sources of injury are described below. 

Combat 

Combat wounds are dealt with at length in the Melee 
and Firefight sections of the Drama chapter. Each success on 
a damage roll causes the character to lose one Health Level. 

Falling 

Occasionally, characters will fall, and the fear of that 
occurring is essential to maintaining suspense while players 
make their rolls. Use the chart below to calculate damage. 
Characters, mortal or undead, can make Stamina rolls to try 
to "soak" damage. The difficulty is an eight and each success 
means one fewer Health Level is lost. Each botch means an 
additional Health Level is lost. Fortitude adds to the roll. 


Distance (in feet) 

Five: 

Ten: 

Twenty: 

Thirty: 

Forty: 

Fifty: 

Sixty: 


Injury 

One Health Level 
Two Health Levels 
Three Health Levels 
Four Health Levels 
Five Health Levels 
Six Health Levels 
Seven Health Levels 


...and so on, to a maximum of 10 Health Levels. 

Fire 

Fire is quite hazardous to vampires and they fear it more 
than nearly anything else. Fire always causes aggravated 
damage, and therefore it can kill vampires. Any size flame 
can potentially harm a vampire, but she can resist the effects 
if she possesses Fortitude. The player may roll a number of 
dice equal to the character’s Fortitude rating against the 
difficulties listed below. The player must roll every turn the 
character is in the flames to see if she can resist the damage. 
If the roll is failed, the character takes from one to three 
Health Levels of damage (see the second chart below), while 
if the roll is successful, the character takes one fewer level of 
damage per success than she normally would. If the roll is 
botched, then the character is harmed in some special way — 
perhaps she loses her eyesight or her limbs are maimed. 


Hfefe 

I 

15*5 




































n 


Difficulty 

Heat of Fire 

Three 

Heat of a candle (first degree bums) 

Five 

Heat of a torch (second degree burns) 

Seven 

Heat of a Bunsen Burner (third degree 
bums) 

Nine 

Heat of a chemical fire 

Ten 

Molten metal 

Wounds 

Size of Fire 

One 

Torch; part of body burned 

Two 

Bonfire; half of body burned 

Three 

Raging Inferno; all of body burned 


Sunlight 

Sunlight is one of the few ways to truly kill a vampire. 
Sunlight causes aggravated wounds, and each turn a vampire 
is exposed to sunlight, he is burned. If the character has 
Fortitude, he may roll a number of dice equal to his rating 
each mm to soak the rays. The difficulty depends on the 
intensity of the rays, the time of day and the cloud or smog 
cover. See the chart below for a rough guide to assigning 
difficulties. 

If no successes are rolled, the character takes from one to 
three levels of damage, depending on how much he is 
exposed (see the second chart below). If he succeeds, he takes 
one less level of damage per success. Botches indicate the 
character has actually caught fire and the character must now 
resist both the sunlight and the fire. 

There are some "sun lamps” commercially available that 
produce the ultraviolet light the sun emits. Though these 
lamps are not nearly as deadly as the sun, they can still irritate 
or even harm vampires, though the damage may not be 
aggravated. 


Difficulty 

Rays 

Three 

Indirect rays, heavy cloud cover, or twilight 

Five 

Fully covered with heavy clothing 

Seven 

Through a window 

Nine 

Struck by one small direct ray of sunlight, or 
being outside on a cloudy day 

Ten 

Direct rays from an unobscured sun 

Wounds 

Exposure 

One 

Only part of body exposed (only a hand). 

Two 

Part of body is exposed (wearing a hood). 

Three 

Much of body is exposed (wearing normal 
clothing). 



Extreme Heat 

Extreme heat (200 degrees +) can injure vampires in 
much the same way fire can. Use the same system for 
sustaining and taking damage, but modify it according to the 
situation. Normally heat is not nearly as deadly as fire unless 
it is terrifically intense. 


(r. y. 

- ^ 

Yi \ 


1 1 i - t \ 

y ') 

& 







194 0 VAMPIRE: The Masquerade 




































Deterioration 

Vampires deteriorate through lack of care. If a vampire 
has been staked through the heart and cannot move, she will 
still lose one Blood Point per day. Once all Blood Points have 
been lost, the vampire will begin to lose Health Levels at the 
rate of one per day. Once the vampire reaches Incapacitated, 
she enters torpor. Note that vampires cannot “die" from 
deterioration. 

Disease 

Though vampires can catch and even transmit human 
diseases, they cannot die from them. They may become ill 
and may lose Health Levels, but they cannot die from a 
human disease. Lost Health Levels may even be aggravated, 
but once they are healed the Kindred is cured. In some 
circumstances, the disease will not even affect the vampire, 
in which case he becomes a carrier and transmits the disease 
to those from whom he feeds. However, rumors exist of a 
number ofvampiric diseases capable of killing Kindred within 
days. 

Stakes 

A stake through a vampire’s heart does not cause death, 
but does completely immobilize her. Over time, the vampire 
will deteriorate due to a lack of blood, eventually falling into 
a full torpor. Of course, fire or sunlight may destroy her first. 
It is extremely difficult to aim a stake precisely through the 
heart during melee. At least three successes are required for 
it to transfix such a precisely delineated area. 

Hostile Environment 

Though vampires cannot die from cold, they can suffer 
the effects of frostbite and even become entirely frozen in 
severe temperatures. Cold is especially dangerous because 
vampires do not have any body warmth except in the minutes 
immediately following a feeding, so clothing of any sort is of 
no purpose. Characters need to make rolls after they have 
been outside in the cold for a certain period of time. This 
varies depending on how cold it is, but usually it’s about half 
an hour. They must make Stamina + Fortitude rolls with a 
difficulty starting at three but increasing by one every roll. 
The time between the rolls is determined by the Storyteller, 
but keep in mind that vampires are much more resistant to 
cold than humans. Vampires can bum Blood Points to warm 
themselves, but such activity will not provide lasting heat. 

Torpor 

As demonstrated above, death does not come easily to 
vampires. However, when their injuries grow too great, they 
go into a very deep sleep known as torpor. 

When a vampire becomes injured beyond Incapacitated 
and loses all Blood Points as well, the vampire goes into 
torpor (though if the injury is aggravated, the result is Final 
Death instead). The character is completely immobilized 


and unconscious, though more powerful Kindred (such as the 
Antediluvians) can still use some of their Disciplines in this 
state. 

Additionally, the character loses a rating point from a 
Physical Attribute once torpor is entered. The player must 
choose which Physical Attribute suffers. 

Vampires with 10 Humanity come out of the deep sleep 
within a day or so, while those with less Humanity sleep for 
a few weeb to a few months. The blood of an Ancient can 
sometimes prematurely revive a vampire in torpor. 

Humanity Length of Time 
10 One day 

9 Three days 

8 One week 

7 Two weeb 

6 One month 

5 One year 

4 One decade 

3 Five decades 

2 One century 

1 Five centuries 

0 Millennium + 

While in torpor, a vampire uses Blood Points normally 
at the rate of one per day, but once the blood is gone, no 
Health Levels are lost. 

A character may go into torpor voluntarily. When the 
character goes to sleep, the player simply informs the Story¬ 
teller that the character is entering torpor. Many ancient 
Cainites voluntarily enter this state in a protected place to 
avoid the risk of frenzies or other dangers. Voluntary torpor 
does not require the loss of a Physical Attribute rating point. 

Mental States 

These systems discuss the changes that can overcome a 
character's psyche. They include such conditions as frenzy, 
where the characters allow the Beast within to become the 
Beast without; Rotschreck, where the fear induced by sun¬ 
light and fire becomes an overwhelming passion; and 
Degeneration, where the loss of humanity is considered. 
Also described arc the various Derangements vampires are 
prone to suffer (and which all Malkavians must possess), as 
well as the mystical Blood Bond. 

Frenzy 

Vampires, like mortals, are creatures of instinct. How¬ 
ever, the instincts of the vampire are those of a hunter, not 
a gatherer. Vampires are the ultimate predators and stand at 
the apex of the food chain. They are highly developed killing 
machines — the harbingers of death. 

For vampires to survive in modem society, however, 
they must leam to keep the Beast in check. The instincts of 
violence so essential in the wild serve only to endanger the 


Chapter Eight: Systems 0 195 
































vampire in today’s complex world. The power the Beast’s 
rage provides has its uses, but the blindness it creates far 
outweighs its benefits. 

Vampires struggle to suppress the Beast but, no matter 
how hard they try, they do not always prevail. At times it gets 
loose, and the havoc it creates goes far beyond the horror of 
any mortal rage. Every vampire must constantly struggle to 


These frenzy niles are intentionally loose so that they 
work in whatever way best suits your chronicle. If you want 
a more action-oriented chronicle with characters who can lie 
fairly sure of themselves, you will not want many frenzy rolls. 
On the other hand, if you want the players to be very 
conscious of their characters’ essential weaknesses and you 
want them to roleplay out and face these weaknesses, then be 


restrain this Beast within him. The following rules describe 
when and how it is released upon the world. 

In situations where the Storyteller believes a vampire’s 
instincts might overwhelm her, the player has to make a Self- 
Control roll. If she makes that roll, her character overcomes 


more strict. 

Hunger often provokes the frenzy and can result in the 
death of the vessel as the character drinks it dry. This occurs 
only if the character is hungry (three Blood Points or less), 
and is brought on by the sight, taste or smell of blood. 


the impulse of rage. If she fails, the character descends into A frenzy can also be provoked through anger and can 

a temporary frenzy as the madness of the Beast takes hold. turn into a great vampiric rage. Rage can be ignited by many 
The character is only partially in the player’s control. factors, and these can vary widely from character to charac- 


Provocation 

It is always up to you, the Storyteller, to decide what 
circumstances might provoke a frenzy. You may ignore some 
very blatant factors, but force the players to roll for what they 
consider very minor things. Your interpretation of the nature 


ter. It is most often provoked by humiliation or taunting. 

System 

A vampire does not have to resist the frenzy, but if she 
wishes to do so, she must make a Self-Control roll (difficulty 
varies). It is an extended action, and five successes must be 


of the Gothic-Punk world is reflected in the frenzy rolls you collected before the frenzy is entirely overcome. However, 
ask the players to make. even one success temporarily prevents the frenzy from taking 





































Roleplaying 


A player can decide to use a Willpower point in order to 
control a single action of his character for a single turn. This 
Willpower point provides just enough control to formulate a 
single thought or purpose, and unless other events get in the 
way, the character’s behavior can be guided over the follow¬ 
ing few turns. Just keep in mind that Willpower cannot stop 
the frenzy — it only offers a little control over what form it 
takes. 


number indicated on the chart on the next page. The player 
may not roll more dice than the points the character cur¬ 
rently has in her Blood Pool—hunger invariably overwhelms 
morality. A success indicates the character does not frenzy, 
while a failure indicates she does. A botch indicates a 
Derangement of one type or another at the Storyteller’s 


discretion. 

Provocation Difficulty 

Smell of blood (when hungry) 3 

Sight of blood (when hungry) 4 

Being bullied 4 

Life threatened 4 

Taunted 4 

Provoked into anger 5 

Tastc of blood (when hungry) 5 

Lover in danger 6 

Outright humiliation 7 


During a frenzy, a vampire is capable of nearly any sort 
of immoral, risky and psychotic behavior. While in a frenzy, 
a character must behave with animalistic abandon, concern¬ 
ing himself only with immediate gratification — whether 
that means a berserk attack or stark raving madness depends 
on the stimuli. No logical thought occurs and all reactions 
are instinctive and emotional. 


If blood is available, the character will drink until she 
can drink no more. It is likely the character will kill a vessel, 
for she is consumed by the desire for blood. If no blood is 
nearby, she will rush off in search of it. The character 
becomes enraged and attempts to destroy everything and 
anything in sight. While she will attack her enemies first, if 
her friends get in the way (or there are no enemies nearby), 
she will attack them as well. 


However, while in a frenzy, the character gains some 
benefits as well as the obvious drawbacks. First of all, she may 
ignore a number of Health Level penalties equal to her 
Stamina — she simply does not have to apply that number of 
dice as a penalty. Second, she docs not have to make many 
Willpower rolls, since she is capable of doing nearly any¬ 
thing. The difficulties of all Dominate rolls against a person 
in frenzy are increased by two, and the character is immune 
to the crippling terror of the ROtschreck. 



































As the Storyteller, use this to provoke players into 
roleplaying frenzies more accurately. If a player describes 
actions for his character that go against what you believe to 
be appropriate during a frenzy, allow him to perform them, 
but then announce that he has lost a Willpower point. 
Frenzies are not trivial. 

Duration 

A frenzy can last a variable length of time. It is up to the 
Storyteller to decide when it comes to an end. In some ways, 
a frenzy moves along a simple cycle. When things calm down 
and the tension level falls, the frenzy slowly comes to a halt. 
A frenzy lasts for the duration of the scene. When the scene 
comes to an end, the player may begin to roleplay his 
character normally again. 

A character's friends can help him overcome a frenzy by 
confronting him and speaking with him. They must make 
appropriate Social roll; success allows the character to make 
a Willpower roll (which, if successful, ends the frenzy). 
However, only those who have successfully resisted frenzies 
in the presence of the character, or are emotionally close to 
the character, may attempt this. A botch on the player’s 
Willpower roll could well mean he attacks those who tried to 
help him. 


Rotschreck 


Vampires do not fear much but, being immortal, still fear 
that which can put an end to their existences. The two 
greatest threats a vampire faces are sunlight and fire, and 
these dangers provoke in Kindred a terror which goes beyond 
all normal fear — the Rotschreck. 

System 

Whenever a vampire encounters the sun or fire, the 
Storyteller can call for a Courage roll. This roll can be 
provoked by anything the character tmly fears — most 
commonly the rays of the sun or open flames. At the 
Storyteller’s whim, this roll may sometimes be required when 
a new vampire is first confronted with a holy cross or even a 
stake. 

The difficulty for the Courage roll is usually six, but can 
vary according to circumstances as detailed in the chart 
below, Each success on the roll indicates the number of turns 
the character can stay in the presence of the thing or 
circumstances which he fears. When those turns have 
passed, another Courage roll must be made. A failure 
indicates the character enters the Rotschreck, a frenzy-like 
state, and loses all control. A botch indicates the character 
not only enters the Rotschreck, but gains a Derangement of 



































some sort. The type of Derangements created by a botched 
Courage roll are generally twisted versions of the basic urge 
to flee in terror, escape and get away. 

The player can spend a Willpower point in order to take 
a single action which the character would not otherwise be 
able to do because of the Rotschrcck. 

Effect Difficulty 

Lighting a cigarette 4 

Lighter flame 5 

Sight of a torch 5 

Bonfire 6 

Obscured sunlight 6 

Being burned 7 

Direct sunlight 8 

Trapped in burning building 9 

Roleplaying 

When a character fails a Courage roll, he is incapable of 
taking any action other than panicked flight. If he is trapped 
with no place to run, he will collapse in terror. This reaction 
will last at least a few minutes (longer in some cases) after the 
character reaches cover and is no longer in sight of the sun or 
the fire. 

When the character reaches a safe place, the player may 
make a Willpower roll to regain control (difficulty 8). Each 
success reduces the amount of time needed to recover from a 
base of 10 minutes. 


Degeneration 


Sometimes a character will act immorally, either will¬ 
fully or despite her best intentions (while in a state of frenzy). 
In such cases, the Beast might take a little more control of her 
soul. The character’s conscience reacts to what she has done, 
and this may affect how much of her human nature she loses. 
For a vampire, this actually indicates how much the Beast has 
corrupted her. 

How you as Storyteller control the loss of Humanity is 
one of the most important elements of your role. If you let the 
players get away with anything, the whole fabric of the game 
is destroyed. Conversely, if you’re too strict, the chronicle 
will last about three game sessions. You can play a little 
loosely with these Humanity rules, but never let them fall to 
the wayside. 

Whenever a character takes an action which you believe 
to be questionable (morally speaking), you may decide it is 
serious enough to warrant a loss of Humanity. A Degenera- 











5 



L yai 


mmmMi 
































tion roll is made by rolling Conscience. The difficulty is 
commonly six, though it can vary at the discretion of the 
Storyteller. 

If the player making the roll scores even one success, the 
character does not lose the Humanity point. If he fails the 
roll, or botches, the character loses both a point of Con¬ 
science and Humanity. A botch also indicates the character 
gains a Derangement as a result of the mental trauma in¬ 
volved in the loss of Humanity. 

Remorse 

As the Storyteller, you should always try to warn a player 
before she takes an action that will result in the loss of a 
Humanity point. Players should understand the conse¬ 
quences of what they are doing and be able to savor the 
anticipation if there is a chance they might not be able to do 
anything about it (e.g. they’re in a frenzy). When the players 
get complacent and think they can get away with anything, 
that’s when you should start to warn them. However, be sure 
you never cry wolf— don't warn them and then not call for 
a roll. 

Hierarchy of Sins 

As the character degenerates, many things will be less 
likely to cause further loss of Humanity. Those with high 
Humanity might have to make a Humanity roll for the 
slightest little sins, while those with very low Humanity must 
do something terrible to have to make a roll. In other words, 
be exceptionally strict with the characters with high Human¬ 
ity, but only force those with low Humanity to make 
Degeneration rolls if they commit shockingly evil acts. 

Below is a rough guide to help you decide what actions 
should result in the loss of Humanity. A very bestial person 
would certainly not lose Humanity if he stole something, 
while a highly moral character might. Someone with a 
Humanity of 7 does not have to roll for an action listed beside 
Humanity 10. However, everything on this list would count 
for a vampire with 10 Humanity. 

As a player, you must trust your Storyteller. Regardless 
of a character’s Humanity, it is always the Storyteller’s 
decision as to when you must make a Conscience roll. Even 
when it might not make complete sense according to the 
rules, you may be asked to do so. Humanity is an intrinsic 
aspect of Vampire and a Storyteller calls for certain Human¬ 
ity rolls in order to shape the chronicle in the fashion she 
desires. The Storyteller’s own morality is often reflected in 
the way she calls for Humanity rolls — this is not only 
permissible, but encouraged. 



VAMPIRE: The Masquerade 


































Humanity Minimum Wrongdoing for Humanity roll 

10 Accidental wrongdoing 

9 Purposeful wrongdoing 

8 Purposefully inflicting injury 

7 Theft and robbery 

6 Negligent killing 

5 Wanton destruction 

4 Murder in the heat of passion 

3 Sadism and perversion 

2 Premeditated murder 

1 The most heinous and demented 

acts 

Derangements 

Its motor whirs and colors curl 
Inside your head the monsters whirl. 

— Siouxsie and the Banshees, “Carousel" 

Some Kindred possess or pick up various quirks, neurotic 
tendencies or even psychoses which take a great deal of time 
and effort to overcome. These mental illnesses are known as 
Derangements. 

The effects of a Derangement may present themselves 
in a variety of ways. How and why a Derangement begins, 
in terms of the story, is a joint decision of the player and the 
Storyteller. Normally, it begins soon after a botched frenzy 
roll, but a Derangement can be precipitated by many other 
factors. Malkavians, for instance, begin the chronicle with a 
Derangement of some sort. 

When a character gains a Derangement, the Storyteller 
must determine the type. A die can be rolled to decide what 
Derangement the character gains, but we don’t recommend 
this method. In many circumstances, the more experienced 
players can even create their own unique Derangements. 

Roleplaying Derangements 

These Derangements are not meant to be all-consum- 
ing, forcing the player to roleplay in a tightly constricted way. 
Rather, they arc meant to add some fun and a little bit of 
reality into the game. A character does not have to exhibit 
the Derangement all the time; people can slip in and out of 
madness. It may only surface in particularly tense moments. 
The Derangement docs not have to rule the mind of the 
character — it only need influence it. 

As Storyteller, it is incumbent upon you to make sure 
that things do not get out of hand. Players have two bad 
habits when it comes to Derangements — they either forget 
they have them, or they let them get so out of control that the 
Derangement takes over the story and the game session. 
































202 0 VAMPIRE: The Masquerade 


To stop a player from conveniently forgetting she has a 
Derangement, simply tell her every once in a while that she 
successfully controlled her Derangement, but had to spend a 
Willpower point to do so. 

To prevent a player from getting out of control with a 
Derangement, you’ll sometimes have to use more forceful 
tactics. Take him aside and tell him that while you like his 
sense of drama, he's overplaying it just a bit. If he continues 
to use his Derangement to hog all the attention, change the 
Derangement to one that forces a certain degree of retreat 
from the world, like catatonia. 

Listed below are 10 sample Derangements: 

• Multiple Personalities: You possess a number of dif¬ 
ferent personalities. For the duration of the Derangement, 
you have more than one Nature and, during the story, you 
will switch back and forth between the personalities. Thus 
you behave in radically different ways at different times, and 
regain Willpower points in different ways at different times. 
Naturally, this causes others to distrust and be wary of you. 

• Fantasy: You enter a self-created world of delusions 
in which you are the unappreciated hero. Your desire to be 
good and pure is fulfilled by accomplishing imaginary achieve¬ 
ments which sometimes overlap with reality. 

• Regression: You become childlike, retreating to an 
S earlier time in your life when less was required of you. It is 
) very difficult for you to do anything for yourself. In some ways 


this is a very extreme form of the Child Archetype, and 
Willpower is regained in the way a Child’s is, not according 
to your normal Nature. 

• Perfection: Everything must be perfect in your life. 
All your energy is directed toward preventing anything from 
going wrong. When it does, as it inevitably must, you 
completely flip and must make a Self-Control roll to resist 
frenzy. 

• Overcompensation: You cover up your moral weak¬ 
nesses by playing up one of your moral strengths — to an 
extreme. You believe you are exceptionally moral and 
virtuous in one way or another — that you are honorable, 
loyal, brave, compassionate or self-controlled. Your behav¬ 
ior is thus straitjacketed by your desire. You constantly 
lecture others on their moral weaknesses, and demonstrate 
extreme arrogance about what you believe to be your strengths. 
Of course, when reality reveals the emptiness of your delu¬ 
sion, the embarrassment will be great. You do not believe 
yourself capable of falling into frenzy, and will thus do 
nothing to prevent or avoid situations which might cause it. 

• Obsession: You become obsessed with some interest 
or fetish. You direct all your energy toward some sort of 
perverse ambition, like an obsession for power, a certain 
person, amulets or even blood. You need something to focus 
on and give your life meaning. 

• Paranoia: You are convinced that you arc being 
hunted and that there is no escape. You are obsessed with 









































♦^V~<^ • —j 



those you believe to be chasing you and make all kinds of 
preparations to protect yourself. Under no circumstances 
will you trust anyone; you hold even your closest friends 
under suspicion. 

• Amnesia: To avoid having to think about what you 
have done, you forget a segment of your past — perhaps even 
the experience of becoming a vampire. This can make things 
very interesting for a time. This repression prevents danger¬ 
ous memories from entering the consciousness; you simply 
forget the events ever happened. More than the traumatic 
event can be forgotten, however, and total amnesia is even 
possible. Additionally, in some cases a character may “for¬ 
get” some Abilities, and thus be unable to use them for the 
duration of the Derangement. 

• Manic-depression: You sink into deep and fitful 
depressions, showing no interest in anything which used to 
capture your imagination. You view the world as flat and 
gray, with nothing in it for you. You cannot rouse yourself to 
do anything, though you will go along with others rather than 
use the energy to resist. Conversely, occasional fits of great 
energy grab hold of you, and you will work for hours or even 
days on your projects. During this time you will resist even 
the need for sleep as you bum up blood and Willpower on 
your schemes. 

• Delusions of Grandeur: You imagine that you are far 
better and greater than you really are. Perhaps you believe 
yourself to be a prince or Justicar, or even the mayor or a 


religious leader. By imagining yourself safe from that which 
you fear, you avoid the terror which looms so near. 

Blood Bond 

It’s the jewel of victory 

The chasm of misery 

And once you have bitten the core 

You will always know the flavor 

The split second of divinity. 

— Faith No More, “The Real Thing” 

It is possible to create a Blood Bond with another 
vampire, thereby turning the Bound one into a servant and, 
in some ways, a lover. Blood Bond is spoken of as holding 
Regnancy over another. The one who commands the Bound 
vampire is known as the Regnant, whereas the one who is 
held in Regnancy is commonly known as the Thrall. Usually 
elders are Regnants and neonates are Thralls, but not always. 
An essential strategy in the Jyhad is to hold many in Regnancy, 
for it gives the Regnant powerful and trustworthy retainers. 
For this reason, Blood Bond is sometimes known as Blood 
Oath. Many Kindred are suspicious of one another, for they 
are never sure who are the Thralls of Ancients, and who are 




:| »J 


































Creation of the Bond 

The Blood Bond is created by the exchange of blood 
between two vampires. The Thrall must drink the Regnant’s 
blood three times, on three different occasions (on different 
days). It can be any amount of blood; but a sip, or even a taste 
if the Regnant is an Ancient. Unlike the limitations of the 
Dominate Discipline, it is possible for weaker blood to hold 
Regnancy over more potent blood. Thus, a 1 Oth generation 
Kindred could hold Regnancy over a ninth generation vam¬ 
pire. 

The more times the Thrall drinks blood, the more the 
Bond is reinforced. Most Regents have their Thralls drink 
their blood several times a year to reinforce the bond. Many 
Regnants fear that if the Bond is broken, their Thralls will 
desire revenge. This is perhaps why so many Thralls are fairly 
well-treated by their Regents; after all, any servitude can be 
overcome. Extreme hate can weaken even the Blood Bond. 

Once a vampire has been Blood Bound, he cannot again 
be Bound by another. Kindred can only be Bound to one 
vampire at a time, and are thus safe from it if already Bound. 
However, some vampires know rituals which allow the tie to 
be created with a number of different vampires if the Thrall- 
to-be drinks of their blood at one sitting. In fact, one of the 
most severe punishments of the Camarilla being forced to 
drink the blood of all the Kindred attending a Conclave. 
Usually the feelings produced by such a widespread Bond are 
more diffuse than normal, but they are no less powerful. The 
attachment is to the group and not any one individual. 

All characters are already on their way to being Blood 
Bound, for their sires have already given them at least one 
taste of blood. Thus, if a character partakes of her sire’s blood 
two more times, she will be held in Regnancy. In some cases, 
the character may already be held in Regnancy by her sire. 
Tremere neonates are also one step toward being Bound to 
their clan as a whole. 

Power of the Bond 

Bonding is primarily an emotional power. A Thrall 
views the vampire to whom he is Bound as the central figure 
in his life and is invariably obsessed with her. Though he may 
despise his Regnant, he will do nearly anything to aid her. He 
will do nothing to harm his Regnant and will even attempt 
to protect her from her enemies. It is very likely that the 
Thrall understands what is happening to him, intellectually 
at least, but he is unable to do anything about it. 

The Blood Bond is like falling in love—once it happens, 
a character is caught in its grip until somehow he breaks free. 
The character may know he is in love, and hate what it makes 
him do, but that does not stop him from being in love and it 
doesn’t prevent him from doing the stupid things people in 
love sometimes do. The Blood Bond is possibly the closest 
approximation of that vaunted emotion many vampires ever 
reach. When roleplaying Blood Bond, use this “love” meta¬ 
phor to understand just how deeply and completely the 


204 0 VAMPIRE: The Masquerade 

































character is obsessed with the Regnant. A Regnant with a 
high Conscience rating may return this “love” to some 
degree. 

One of the primary powers a Regnant has over her Thrall 
is the ability to Dominate the Thrall without eye contact. As 
long as the Thrall is able to hear the words of his Regnant, he 
can be Dominated. All difficulties are two higher whenever 
the Thrall makes a roll to resist the Domination of the 
Regnant. 

Blood Bond sometimes (but not always) gives the Regnant 
insight into the moods and feelings of the Thrall, and she may 
even know where the Thrall is from moment to moment, if 
the Blood Bond has been held long enough. 

If a character’s Regnant asks a favor of him, he will 
perform the task if it is at all possible. However, if it requires 
him to risk his life, he does not have to do it. Even love is not 
that blind. Even so, if there is an emergency and the Regnant 
is being attacked, the Thrall’s first instinct is to go to aid her. 
Self-sacrifice is not unknown, especially if the Bond has been 
reinforced over the years. If the Thrall is treated well, the 
Bond is reinforced and it grows stronger—if he is humiliated 
and degraded, the hate that develops will diminish the 
Bond’s influence on the Thrall. 

At the Storyteller's discretion, Willpower may be ex¬ 
pended to temporarily resist the power of the Blood Bond. 
First, the character must accumulate a number of successes on 


a Willpower roll (difficulty 8) equal to the number of times 
he has drunk from his Regnant. Then, depending on the 
circumstances, a Willpower point will eliminate the effects of 
the Bond for a single turn to an entire scene. If the character 
simply wishes to plot against his Regnant, one Willpower 
point will enable him to do so for an entire scene. However, 
if he wants to actively attack his Regnant, it will take at least 
one Willpower per turn, and the player will probably have to 
make an additional Willpower roll each turn just to get the 
nerve to spend that Willpower point. 

It is possible to break a Blood Bond, but it is very difficult. 
It requires not only a massive expenditure of Willpower over 
a long period of time, but also necessitates that the character 
completely avoid his Regnant. If a Thrall does not see the 
Regnant for some time, and does not interact with the object 
of his attachment, the Bond will eventually die away. Some 
types of Natures, such as Child and Fanatic, may never escape 
the Blood Bond, while others, such as Conniver or Loner, 
may do so very easily. The breaking of a character’s Blood 
Bond cannot be achieved through experience points or 
successful rolls; it must be roleplayed. 

It is whispered that the Sabbat knows of ways to break 
the Bond, but it is said one must pledge to the sect before the 
process will be imparted. Whatever the case, those who most 
resent their Bondage and retain the free will to act indepen¬ 
dently flee to the Sabbat — fearing the Black Hand less than 
continued servitude to an elder. 







































That which does not kill us, makes us stronger. 
— Friedrich Wilhelm Niensche 


T here are many actions a player might want to take 
during a turn — jump a fence, seduce a mortal, 
or research werewolves in the library. Though 
you, as the Storyteller, already know the rules (from reading 
Chapter Four), and can probably figure out how to adjudicate 
the player's roll, there are a few techniques and variations on the 
rules that you might be interested in. That’s what this chapter 
is all about — it provides advice on rules systems for resolving 
dramatic actions. Vanous character actions are described, 
including swimming, seduction and research, and interesting 
methods for resolving players’ rolls as well as roleplaying through 
them are provided. 

This chapter is not meant to be all-inclusive. These 
systems are only examples of how to resolve the actions taken 
by the players. Use these as examples and invent your own 
systems for running things if you’d like. Don’t stop the action 
in the middle of a dramatic scene to look up something in this 
chapter — just make up something, perhaps based on a rules 
system which you first encountered herein. 

Only if a roll is truly called for should you use one of the 
systems described in this chapter. If it is a simple roll, none of 
these systems are needed. If you’re not interested in the 
drama created by putting the game into the story, use the 


automatic success rules. Go to the Traits chapter and, just by 
reading about the Trait in question, figure out if the player is 
successful or not without even rolling any dice. You may not 
want to roll dice if you don't have to — they can really get in 
the way. However, there are occasions when rolling dice adds 
tension and suspense, as Lady Luck makes her appearance. 

Even beyond the rolcplaying business, as a general rule, 
have the player make a roll only when there is substantial 
doubt in your mind as to whether the character will succeed 
in her action or not. If you can reasonably assume she will 
succeed, then just let her do it — don’t worry about the rules 
or dice rolls. Use the automatic success rules as often as you 
can; your game will be better as a result. 

When you do start making rolls and have the players do 
the same, make the rolls special and make them different. 
Don’t waste a lot of time on a dice roll that doesn’t do 
anything special for the story, or is uninteresting for you or 
the players. Each time you roll the dice should be a game in 
miniature, with strategy and tactics to master, luck to foul 
things up and opponents to squash. 




Chapter Nine: Drama 



































players to enter it. Don't force the players to animate your 
creation — breathe life into it from the very first moment. 

Time during the story not spent in a scene is called 
downtime. This can be when the players are doing extensive 
research, are traveling, or simply don’t want to bother 
roleplaying through everything second by second. Down¬ 
time is a break from the intensity of the scene. Though 
normally you want to spend as little time as possible m 
downtime (generally it's relatively boring), you shouldn’t 
avoid it altogether. Use downtime to organize players, direct 
the story more precisely, and progress the plot more quickly. 

The story can turn into a scene at almost any time. Often 
it does so quite naturally, without anyone realizing it has 
happened. For instance, while you discuss with the players 
how they intend to make a journey to Chicago, you may 
begin to describe what they see along the way. You have gone 
from downtime to a scene. When you begin roleplaying an 
old man who walks up to them and asks for change, you have 
completely immersed them in the scene. By simply begin¬ 
ning roleplaying without warning, you jump-start the players 
into getting out of the player mode and into their roles, thus 
instantly beginning a scene. 

Turns 

A scene is divided into turns in order to organize and 
structure the arrangement of events. A turn is a variable 
period of time during which characters can do things. It helps 


No one move a muscle as the dead come home. 

— Shrickback, “Nemesis” 

A scene is a moment in a story when the troupe focuses 
on the events at hand and roleplays through them as if they 
were really occurring. This may only require roleplaying and 
a lot of conversation between the players and the Storyteller, 
but may also involve a number of different actions, some 
requiring dice rolls. 

A scene is like a scries of shots taken in a movie in the 
same location and at the same moment in the story. It is the 
real gist of the roleplaying, when the players are actively in 
their roles and are able to describe their characters’ reactions 
to events rather than explain what they intend to do. 

You should do everything you can to make the scenes in 
your story as dramatic, complete and fulfilling as possible. 
The better you can give each scene an exciting start, an 
action-packcd middle and a fulfilling end (or a strategically 
frustrating one), the better your story will be. 

Describe the scene not as a static picture, but as a place 
or time full of life and action. It should have its own existence 
apart from the characters. The gang leader does not simply 
sit at a table—while the characters are watching he calls over 
one of his henchmen and begins to berate him. Create an 
open-ended story in your descriptions and then invite the 



























Action Scenes 


you keep track of what is going on and ensures that each 
player gets the same chance to do something. In one turn, 
each character should be able to do one thing. Additionally, 
each player should be given about the same amount of time 
to describe what she wants her character to do. Each turn, go 
around the table in order of initiative and give each player an 
opportunity to state an action, and then go to the next 
person. When you get to yourself, describe the actions of the 
non-player characters. 

Even if doing so might not make complete sense, you 
should use the turn structure pretty loosely. You might, for 
example, let someone climb a tree while someone else fires a 
gun, even though in normal circumstances climbing a tree 
usually takes a minute, while shooting a gun takes only three 
seconds. Adrenalin (and blood) makes people do amazing 
things, after all. 

Multiple Actions 

A character can perform multiple actions in a turn (such 
as running and shooting a gun), but unless he possesses 
Celerity, he has to divide up his dice. 

To split a Dice Pool between two different actions, the 
character takes the dice from the action with which the 
character has the least skill (the one with the smallest Dice 
Pool) and divides that Pool among all the actions he wishes 
to perform. 


Many scenes are so full of actions and dice rolls they 
require special rules to make sure everything runs smoothly. 
These are times when the adrenalin is racing and the pacing 
is fast. Action scenes are the fights, races and feats of danger 
so common in adventure stories. During an action scene, the 
turns are usually very short, lasting only three seconds or so. 
Most of the systems described in this chapter occur during 
action scenes and use action turns. 

Many different types of actions can occur in an action 
scene, and correlating everything can seem a little tricky. Let 
a character do nearly anything she cares to try, even if you 
assign a difficulty of 10. 

Make sure you carefully describe where everyone is in 
the scene as well as what cover is available and how far it is 
from the characters. Otherwise, you will have to describe the 
scene over again and hear complaints like, “Wait a minute, 
you didn't say anyone was over there!” You may also want 
to describe the environmental conditions and how they 
might affect the scene. Rain, wind and smoke can affect 
many rolls. 

Organizing an 
Action Turn 


If the character moves while taking other actions in a 
turn (such as firing a gun), he may do so simply by taking away 
one die from the pool for every three yards he moves. 
Movement is already considered in the rules for dodging, so 
characters who dive for cover accrue no extra penalty. 

Characters with multiple actions take their first action 
in their normal order of initiative (unless they delay). They 
may take no more than one action at this time. After all 
characters have completed their first (or only) action, char¬ 
acters with more actions may take their second action, again 
in order of initiative. After everyone has taken their second 
action, play proceeds with the third and subsequent actions 
in order of initiative, as above. While characters may delay 
their action, they must take it before the rest of the characters 
move on to their next action, or it is lost. However, 
characters can always use dice to dodge as long as there are 
any dice left in the Pool. 

For example: Jaeger, with a Celerity rating of two, faces 
off against two of the Prince’s ghouls. He announces he will 
punch each once and dodge, all with full Dice Pool. Ghoul 
A must cover two yards before attacking with her stake; 
meanwhile Ghoul B decides to split his Dice Pool so he can 
dodge and attack with his stake. The players determine 
initiative and arrive at the following order. A, Jaeger, and B. 
A moves in, and will have one fewer die for her action. Jaeger 
launches an attack at B, who dodges. Now that all partici¬ 
pants have taken an action, the sequence starts over. A 
attacks, Jaeger dodges and B attacks. Nowonlyjaegerhasan 
action left, and he punches B’s lights out. 


Just as turns organize a scene, so there are different stages 
of each turn. Still, you will probably not need to divide up 
turns unless they are action turns. Though you need not go 
by these stages exactly, look over this list to get ideas about 
how you can organize things when the action gets hot. The 
better you've got it organized, the more smoothly it will go 
and the more fun everyone will have. 

• Describing the Scene 

At the beginning of each turn, you should describe the 
scene from the characters’ perspective. You may want to 
suggest what the characters’ opponents might be about to do, 
but do not actually describe what will happen. Sometimes 
this will be a wrap-up of the last turn, making it clear to all the 
players what occurred. This sort of constant redescription is 
Essential if you want to avoid confusion. 

This is your chance to organize and arrange things so 
that all will go smoothly when the players begin to interact 
with what you have set up. You will want to make your 
description as interesting as possible, leaving open all sorts of 
possibilities for actions to be taken by the characters. 

The players need to roll for initiative to determine the 
order in which their characters will act. In especially compli¬ 
cated situations, you can have the players describe to you 
what they intend to do that turn, starting with the player who 
rolled the lowest initiative. This statement of intent can help 
you clarify in your own mind what is going on, but it slows 
things down, so avoid it if you can. If you wish to be i 


































particularly free-spirited, then eliminate the initiative roll 
altogether and have the players act in whatever order you 
wish. 

e.g. "In the distance you hear sirens, and you see that the 
street punk at the end of the alley seems to have noticed them as 
well. He wins the initiative and sprints towards the fence. What 
are you going to do?" 

• Decision Stage 

Going in reverse order of initiative (if the players made 
initiative rolls), have each player explain what her character 
intends to do and how she intends to go about it. If you did 
not call for initiative rolls, simply go around the table from 
left to right, or in order of character Wits, or using whatever 
consistent method you like. You then decide how you want 
to resolve the action — what kind of roll each player will 
make, the difficulty of the roll, and the number of successes 
needed. You can make the process as simple or as complicated 
as you like. 

e.g. “If you want to catch him before he gets over the fence, 
you need to make a Dexterity + Athletics roll. You need to get six 
successes to catch up with him, but he only needs three more to get 
over the fence." 

• Resolution Stage 

This is when the players roll to see whether their 
characters succeed or fail. The players roll dice to attempt the 
actions they described in the preceding stage. 

At the end of the turn, you need to summarize every¬ 
thing by describing what happened and translating all the 
dice rolls into description, plot and story. Don’t simply say, 
"You manage to hit the bad guy for three Health Levels of 
damage.” Get more graphic and say, “After ducking away to 
the left, you sweep across with your fist and strike him 
alongside the head. Your hand stings, but you've broken his 
nose and wounded him for three Levels.” 

e.g. “ With a great burst of speed and a daring leap over a 
garbage can, you race down the alley after him. Next round you 
will be able to make a grab at him before he gets completely away. 
However, you see a police cruiser pull in around the comer of the 
alley." 


Initiative 


At the beginning of most scenes, you will want to figure 
out who goes first. Rolling for initiative is the best way to 
decide in what order players will take their turns for the 
remainder of the fight. Sometimes it will be obvious who goes 
first, such as when an ambush was set or one person is clearly 
caught by surprise. In combat, however, if you intend to let 
the opponents have a free shot at the characters, you should 
not simply spring it on the players. Let them make Perception 
rolls (hard ones) to see if they notice something just before 
the bad guys open up. Otherwise, you'll have a pack of 
whining jackals on your hands. The difficulty depends on 

























































\) 0 \) 0 \) 0 \) 0 0 0 II 0 0 « 


There are all sorts of other actions that can be made that 
require rolls. Some arc listed here: 



how well the ambush was set (usually 8 or so). The number 
of successes the players score indicates the number of dice 
they can roll on their first actions, usually dodges. 

In a normal situation, each player makes an initiative 
roll, and you do so for each of the opponents. Everyone 
involved makes a Wits + Alertness roll (or you can have them 
roll Wits + Brawl, Melee, Firearms or any appropriate Abil¬ 
ity). The difficulty is usually four—characters with the most 
successes go first and ties go simultaneously. Characters who 
fail act after those who succeeded last. A botch on an 
initiative roll means the character does not get to act that 
turn —his gun jams, he stumbles and cannot punch or 
dodge, etc. 

Taking Actions 

The three basic actions characters can take without 
making rolls include: 

• Yielding: Tire character allows the person with the 
next highest initiative to take his action, thereby yielding her 
turn. She can still take her action at the end of the turn. If 
everyone, including her opponents, yields as well, no one 
does anything that turn. 

• Healing: The character can decide to do nothing but 
use a Blood Point to heal himself. In one turn, one Health 
Level can be restored automatically if no other action is 
taken. A Blood Point can be used to enhance a Physical 
Attribute while the character performs other actions. 

• Moving: The character may move by walking, jogging 
or running. If she walks, she may move seven yards. If she 
jogs, she may move 12 yards + Dexterity. If she runs, she may 
move 20 yards + (3 x Dexterity). No roll is required, but this 
movement is the only action the character can perform in 
that turn. In some situations, it can be hazardous to jog or run, 
and a roll might be required to maintain balance when there 
is glass on the ground or bullets are raining down. If the 
character wants to run away from the conflict or encounter, 
she must dodge unless she is not in the field of fire or hindered 
in any way. 


• Attack: A character may decide to fire his weapon or 
strike someone. The roll made depends on the attack; for 
instance, a Firearms attack requires a Dexterity + Firearms 
roll. 

• Climb a wall: This action requires a Dexterity + 
Athletics roll. 

• Crowd control: A character with the Presence Disci¬ 
pline may use his power to clear away a crowd with the 
appropriate rolls. 

• Dodge: A dodge not only allows a character to avoid 
an attack, but removes him from the line of attack altogether. 
A character can make a dodge roll right after someone tries 
to hit him, thereby (hopefully) avoiding the blow. 

• Get to feet: It takes a turn to get up from the ground 
without having to make a roll. If a character wants to do this 
in addition to her other actions, she would have to take dice 
from her announced action and attempt to score at least one 
success on a Dexterity + Athletics roll (difficulty at least 4). 

• Leadership: A character may give commands to 
followers and have them obeyed with appropriate Charisma 
(or Manipulation) + Leadership rolls. 

•Reload gun: This can be done in a single turn with a 
preloaded clip. 

• Research: A character may try to look up a vital piece 
of information in a book using the Investigation Ability. 
Though this would likely take longer than three seconds, in 
the interests of drama, you may wish to suspend reality a bit. 

• Start a car: This action doesn't require a roll at all, 
unless a character is hotwiring it. 

• Sneak up on enemy: This action requires a Stealth 
roll of some sort. 

• Unjam gun: This action can normally be performed 
in a single turn with a Wits + Firearms roll. 


Dramatic Systems 


The one thing about living in Santa Carla that I never could 
stomach is all the damn vampires. 

— Grandpa, The Lost Boys . 


Described below are a variety of different systems to 
resolve actions, or, to put it simply, a bunch of ways to make 
rolls. If you prefer to roleplay through dramatic scenes, just 
use these systems to get ideas on what sorts of things can 
happen during the scene. 


Remember, these are only examples of how you can do 
things in your chronicle. If you don’t like the way the 
Firefight system works, then change it. Don’t think that 
these rules are written in stone, because they’re not. They 
were written for you to use and abuse as you see fit. 


ii d r 



Chapter Nine: Drama 0 211 

































Physical 

These systems describe physical actions and confronta¬ 
tions — dramatic situations where the Physical Attributes 
predominate. 

Awakening 

Often a character will need to wake up in the middle of 
the day. This is extremely difficult for vampires to do, as they 
are highly nocturnal creatures. When something occurs 
during the day which may require a character to rouse, such 
as a noise or a motion near the bed, a Perception + Auspex 
roll must be made (difficulty 8). Any success indicates the 
character awakens enough to notice what is going on. Fai lure 
indicates she doesn’t wake up, while a botch indicates she 
won’t awaken except under the most dire circumstances. 

Once the character has roused slightly, she can make a 
Humanity roll to see how long she can remain awake. The 
difficulty is normally an eight; each success indicates the 
character can stay awake for one turn. Five successes means 
she awakens completely. No actions can be taken until the 
character is completely awake. A failure means she goes back 
to sleep, but if something else happens which might awaken 
her, she can roll again. A botch means she goes back to sleep 
and nothing will rouse her short of Gehenna. 

Throughout the rest of the time the character stays 
awake, you may require her to make Humanity rolls to see if 
she can remain awake. The difficulty of this roll is also eight, 
but only one success is needed for her to stay up. Failures and 
botches have the same results as they do above. 

Remember, during the day no vampire can use more dice 
than her rating in Humanity. 

Climbing 

Though humans have to use their arms and legs to climb, 
vampires have other means of scaling walls, not the least of 
which is simply to jump to where they want to go. For normal 
climbing, use the system below; otherwise, go to the Jumping 
system. Some powerful vampires can shapeshift into a bat 
and simply fly. 

When a character attempts to climb any sort of surface 
(a tree, cliff or building), ask the player to roll the character's 
Dexterity + Athletics. If the character has the Protean power 
of Claws, an additional die may be rolled. The difficulty 
depends on the sheemess of the climbing surface, the type of 
surface being climbed and, to a lesser extent, the weather 
conditions. Each success indicates the character has climbed 
five feet. Once he accumulates enough successes to get to 
where he wants to go, he can stop rolling. For example, 
Malcolm is trying to climb a 25-foot wall, so he needs five 
successes to get to the top. A failure indicates the character 
is not able to make any progress during the turn. A botch 
indicates the character falls and cannot attempt to climb 
again without expending a Willpower point. 


212 © VAMPIRE; The Masquerade 


































2 Easy climb: a tree with many stout branches 

4 Simple climb: a cliff with many handholds 

6 Straightforward: a tree with thin branches 

8 Treacherous: very few handholds 

10 Extremely difficult: a nearly sheer surface 

Hunting 

Obtaining blood is one of the most important things in 
a vampire’s life. When you don’t wish to roleplay out the 
hunt for food, this system provides a fairly rapid way to 
determ ine how much blood characters get and if there are any 
complications. 

For each hour the player decides to spend hunting, give 
her one die. Using these dice, a roll is made; the difficulty is 
determined by the neighborhood. Remember, the Fame and 
Herd Background Traits make hunting easier. 

Area Difficulty 

Slum neighborhood 4 

Lower class 5 

Downtown 6 

Warehouse district 6 

Suburb 7 

Heavily patrolled 8 

A success indicates the character tracks down prey and 
may feed for one die worth of Blood Points (roll one die; the 
result indicates how many Blood Points the character re¬ 
ceives from her nocturnal prowlings). A failure indicates the 
vampire fails to find a vessel, while a botch of any sort 
indicates a complication. 

After a botch, immediately go into roleplaying mode at 
the point where things start to go wrong. Describe the scene 
and relate to the player what happened up to the point where 
the hunt went awry. The player has to figure out how to get 
out of trouble. 

If you don’t have time for roleplaying, tell the player that 
her character manages to feed. Later on, however, inform the 
player that her character has contracted some sort of loath¬ 
some disease. 

After the feeding begins, a frenzy roll is sometimes 
required to see if the character can resist the urge to gorge on 
the vessel. If the character has three or fewer Blood Points 
when she begins feeding, a frenzy roll is required (using Self- 
Control). See the Frenzy rules in Chapter Eight for more 
details. 

Jumping 

Jumping requires a Strength roll, ora Strength + Athlet¬ 
ics roll if it is a horizontal jump and the character getsa decent 
running start. The difficulty for a jump is almost always a 
three (unless there are difficult weather conditions or there 
is a narrow landing space). The Storyteller calculates how 
many successes are required to make the jump. There are no 
partial successes in jumping; the character either succeeds in 
one roll, or she falls. 


If necessary, you can use the chart below. The number 
of successes required is based on the number of feet that must 
be jumped and whether the character is jumping horizontally 
or vertically (see the chart below). 

Type of Jump Feet per Success 

Vertical (up) 2 

Horizontal (across) 4 

A failure or a botch indicates the character falls, trips or 
for some reason fails. If the roll was merely a failure, you could 
give the character a second chance by having the player make 
a Dexterity + Athletics roll to see if the character can grab 
onto the ledge, etc. However, a botch is always a complete 
failure — the character falls. The wounds inflicted by a fall 
are discussed in the Injuries section of Chapter Eight. 

If the player makes a Perception + Athletics roll before 
the character makes the jump (average difficulty of 6) and 
receives three successes, you can tell him exactly how many 
successes the character will need in order to make the jump. 

Feats of Strength 

Often a character’s Strength is used alone, without an 
Ability, in actions where brute Strength is all that matters, 
though the Discipline of Potence can be added. This system 
works on the same basis as automatic successes. If the 
character's Strength + Potence equals or exceeds the diffi¬ 
culty of the task he is attempting, he does it automatically. 
Only if the difficulty is higher than his Dice Pool must he 
make a toll. Blood Points spent on Strength raise this 
maximum. 

When the character makes the roll, however, it is based 
on Willpower, not Strength. It is a simple roll, so the 
character gets only one chance to make it. The difficulty is 
almost always a nine, though it can vary according to the 
surface conditions, the wieldiness of the object being lifted, 
and Storyteller whim. Each success pushes the character’s 
effective Strength up one step on the chart below (to a 
maximum of five). Thus, if the character had a Strength of 
4, but wanted to flip over a car, she would need three successes 
on the Willpower roll to do it. 

Dice Pool Feats Lift 

1 Crush a beer can 40 lbs 

2 Break a chair 100 lbs 

3 Break down a wooden door 250 lbs 

4 Break a 2’ x 4' board 400 lbs 

5 Break open a metal fire door 650 lbs 

6 Throw a motorcycle 800 lbs 

7 Flip over a small car 900 lbs 

8 Break a three-inch lead pipe 1000 lbs 

9 Punch through a cement wall 1200 lbs 

10 Rip open a steel drum 1500 lbs 

11 Punch through 1" sheet metal 2000 lbs 

12 Break a metal lamp post 3000 lbs 

13 Throw a car 4000 lbs 

14 Throw a van 5000 lbs 

15 Throw a truck 6000 lbs 


i i r 


Chapter Nine: Drama 

























*2i 



r Repair 

Getting something fixed is not always as easy as taking 
it to the garage; sometimes the task has to be performed 
oneself. When a character wishes to fix any sort of mechani¬ 
cal implement, he must roll Dexterity + Repair. The difficulty 
is determined by the complexity of the task (see the chart 
below). Before the job can be considered completed, a 
certain number of successes must be collected, usually be¬ 
tween two and 20. Each roll means that a certain amount of 
time is spent — whatever the demands of the story require. 
A botch indicates that the device is somehow damaged in the 
attempt. 

This system can be fun to use during combat, as one 
character desperately tries to start the car while the others 
hold off the pack of ghouls. 

Job Difficulty # of Successes 

Simple mechanical repair 4 3 

Soldering job 5 2 

Electronic malfunction 5 5 

Fitting in new part 6 10 

Repair stalled car 6 5 

Tough auto repair 7 10 

System overhaul 8 20 

Technical glitch 9 2 


Sneaking 

When a character attempts to hide in shadows or sneak 
up on a guard, she must roll Dexterity + Stealth. The 
difficulty is the guard’s Perception + Alertness. Anyone who 
is on watch or who is actively looking for intruders can be 
considered a guard. 

The character needs to collect a certain number of 
successes in order to make it to where she wants to go. A 
Perception + Stealth roll can be made if the player wants to 
find out how many successes will be needed; the difficulty for 
this is usually seven. Failure of any sort indicates detection. 

Shadowing 

Sometimes a character will want to follow someone. In 
order to be led somewhere interesting, this needs to be done 
as discreetly as possible. That is what shadowing is all about 
— following someone without him knowing the character is 
there. 

There are two components to shadowing— keeping 
track of where the subject is and making sure he doesn’t sec 
his tail. Shadowing can be conducted on foot or in a vehicle. 
Rolls can even be made if someone else is driving, such as a 
taxi driver — “I’m sorry, but I can't remember the address — 
you'll just have to follow my directions. Take a right at the 
comer. No, wait, a left!" 


214 © VAMPIRE; The Masquerade 

































The character attempting to shadow must make a Per¬ 
ception + Investigation (or possibly Streetwise) roll. The 
difficulty is normally a six (though it can vary from five to 
nine depending on the thickness of the crowds, relative 
speeds of vehicles and weather conditions). Each success 
indicates that the character has been followed for a turn. A 
certain number of successes is required to follow the subject 
all the way to where he is going. A failure indicates that the 
character has temporarily lost the subject, but can try again 
next turn. If she gets a second failure, she has lost the subject 
completely and the chase is off (unless she can come up with 
a new approach). A botch indicates that not only does the 
character completely lose the subject, but she is so involved 
in shadowing that she gets into trouble of her own — a gang 
tries to beat her up, she falls into an open manhole, or she has 
a car accident. 

Though the Perception roll is the most important aspect 
of shadowing, a Stealth roll must also be made to see if the 
subject notices he is being followed. Each turn the Percep¬ 
tion roll is made, the Stealth roll must be made as well. The 
player must roll Dexterity + Stealth (or Dexterity + Drive if 
the character is in a vehicle). 

The difficulty is the subject’s Perception + Alertness, 
but it can be modified by +/' 3, depending on the circum¬ 
stances (empty streets or thick crowds, for instance). A single 
success indicates the shadower was not detected, and each 
success also makes it more difficult for the subject to spot the 
shadower, even if he is actively looking. A failure indicates 
the subject becomes suspicious and starts to surreptitiously 
glance over his shoulder (and may make Perception rolls of 
his own; see below). A botch indicates the character com¬ 
pletely reveals herself and the subject now bums he is being 
followed. 

If the subject is alerted somehow (by the shadower’s 
failure on the Dexterity + Stealth roll above), or simply looks 
to see if he is being followed (out of habit perhaps), roll 
Perception + Investigation (or Streetwise). The difficulty is 
the Stealth + 5 of the character who is shadowing. Each 
success on this roll indicates a higher degree of suspicion. 
Successes can be accumulated from turn to turn; see the chart 
below to see how alert the subject is to the fact that he is being 
followed. A failure means nothing out of the ordinary is seen 
and the suspicion value of the subject decreases to zero. A 
botch means the subject is convinced he isn’t being followed 
and no longer looks behind him. 

Successes Suspicion 

1 Hunch 

2 Suspicion 

3 Near-certainty 

4 Positive knowledge 

5 The shadower has been spotted 

Buddy System: Two or more characters can share 

shadowing responsibilities by trading off. However, they 
must have worked/trained together in this technique previ¬ 
ously, or the difficulties of all rolls for the pair are one higher. 


One player shadows for a turn or more, and then trades off V S 
whenever her partnergives the signal. If the pair switches off, < 
the subject can’t accumulate successes for very long, which 
makes it much harder for the subject to spot the shadowers. 

Swimming 

Although total immersion in water is not fatal to vam¬ 
pires, it is not very pleasant. Because vampires do not 
breathe, they cannot drown. However, they can sink. 

Any vampire immersed in water without any means of 
support must roll Dexterity + Athletics; the difficulty is 
determined by the severity of the water conditions. The 
number of successes obtained determines how far the vam¬ 
pire swims (or alternately, how long he stays above water). 
Normally it is five feet or five minutes, but that can vary 
according to the needs of the story. A botch means the 
character loses ground (the current pulls him along or the 
tide pulls him back). 

If a vampire is caught underwater during the day, he can 
be harmed by the sun’s rays — water is little protection (treat 
as if the vampire were outside on a cloudy day). If a vampire 
dives deep enough, the sunlight will not penetrate, but the 
character may well be crushed by the pressure or suffer the 
effects of the cold temperature. Remember also that many sea 
creatures, such as sharks and giant squid, are much less choosy 
about their prey than terrestrial animals, and have been 
known to eat carrion... 

Stunt Driving 

This system is used to determine the outcome of nearly 
any type of automobile chase or maneuver. Dice rolls in 
chases are not only made to see how fast a driver goes, but also 
to see if she stays on the road or not. Each vehicle is rated for 
its maximum safe driving speed, as well as its maneuverabil¬ 
ity. One vehicle is not always as fast as another nor as 
maneuverable, so the details of the chase often depend on the 
make of the vehicle (see the chart below). 

A character can make special maneuvers in order to 
catch or lose another vehicle, such as spinning around a tight 
comer, doing a 180° turn, or wheeling about to block a road. 
Essentially, one character makes a special maneuver and the 
other character must copy that maneuver by making the 
same or an approximate roll. 

The player must roll Dexterity (or perhaps Perception) 

+ Drive. However, the maximum number of dice that can be 
rolled is the Maneuverability rating of the vehicle. The 
difficulty of the maneuver and the speed of the car determine 
the difficulty. You should give each maneuver a basic 
difficulty from two to seven, and then designate a speed at 
which it can be completed at that difficulty. This is most 
often the Safe Speed, but can be much less depending on how 
complicated or tight the maneuver is. The difficulty goes up 
by one for every 10 mph the vehicle exceeds that speed while 
performing the maneuver. The driver decides how fast her 
vehicle performs the maneuver, although she will not always 
be able to slow down enough to avoid a crash or collisio n. ^ 


Chapter Nine: Drama 































Vehicle Safe Speed Max Speed Manuever 

6-wheel truck 60 90 3 

Bus 60 100 3 

18-wheeler 70 110 4 

Sedan 70 120 5 

Mini-van 70 120 6 

Compact 70 130 6 

Sporty compact 100 140 7 

Sport coupe 110 150 8 

Sports car 130 170 9 

Formula One race car 140 240 10 

Pursuit 

This simple system is used when one character attempts 
to run down another. One opponent starts with a certain 
number of successes. This number is either determined by the 
Storyteller (this is the preferred method) or by having the 
pursued character roll Dexterity + Athletics for each turn of 
headstart on the pursuer and add up the number of successes 
achieved. This roll has a difficulty of six. This number of 
successes must be collected by the other character before he 
can catch up. Once he does, he can try to grapple the fleeing 
person (see the Melee rules). The pursuer might only want 
to catch up halfway, just to get a better shot at the fleeing 
character. 

Each character involved must roll Dexterity + Athlet¬ 
ics. Each success means the character travels a little farther. 
A failure indicates the character falters, while a botch means 
he falls and will not be able to roll at all the next turn (he 
needs to get up off the ground). If the pursuer scores more 
successes in a turn than the pursued, he gains on her by that 
number of successes. If the pursued scores more successes in 
a turn than the pursuer, she pulls away by that number of 
successes. If the pursued ever gains a lead of of enough 
successes (7-20, depending on the terrain), she gets away and 
eludes pursuit. 

This system can be modified for use with car chases if the 
standard driving system does not suit your troupe’s needs. 

Stealing 

While illegal, theft and robbery are sometimes elements 
of a Vampire story. On occasion, a vampire has no other 
recourse. There are many different ways to steal, though only 
a few are discussed below. If the character's Humanity is 
above 7, he must make a Humanity roll when he steals 
something, especially if it was from someone who really needs 
whatever was stolen. If the theft is particularly heartless, even 
a character with a Humanity of less than 7 might have to 
make a Humanity roll. 

Shoplifting: The player rolls Dexterity + Streetwise. 
The difficulty depends on the circumstances — a crowded 
store, the size of the item, guards and mirrors. Normally it is 
an eight. Failure indicates the storekeeper notices the 
character taking something, while a botch means she has 


been caught red-handed. The number of successes on the 
shoplifting roll determines the difficulty of the storekeeper’s 
Perception + Alertness roll. One success means the shop¬ 
keeper is highly suspicious, while five successes means he has 
caught the character in the act. 

The player can make a Perception + Streetwise roll to 
see if the character is being watched or not. The difficulty is 
at least an eight, but each success cancels one of the 
storekeeper’s successes. 

Pickpocketing: The player rolls Dexterity + Streetwise. 
The difficulty depends on the circumstances—a thick crowd 
or deep pockets, for example. The number of successes 
determines the difficulty of the target’s Perception + Alert¬ 
ness roll, while a botch indicates the target notices the thief 
in the act and catches him red-handed. The target needs to 
roll higher than the pickpocket’s number of successes. One 
success means she moves away unconsciously (the thief can 
try again); two successes means she turns to look at the 
pickpocket but doesn’t know what’s going on; three successes 
means she catches on. 

Cat Burglary: The troupe should roleplay through this, 
with lots of Stealth and Perception rolls to provide drama. 
Once the cat burglar gets inside, she needs to find what she 
is looking for. You’ll have to judge how slickly the player 
planned the burglary, and then judge the character’s chances 
of getting caught. There is always a chance things might go 
wrong. If more than one person attempts this activity, they 
greatly increase their chances of getting caught; however, it 
can be boring for the other players to wait for one person to 
finish her solo. Roleplay it out, but if people are waiting, 
don’t spend more than a few minutes on it. 

Holdup: The character holds up a store, usually by 
threatening the storekeeper, and then takes whatever he 
wants. A Manipulation + Intimidation roll must be made. 
The difficulty is the storekeeper’s Willpower. Usually some 
sort of gun must be displayed or a demonstration of force 
made for the intimidation to be truly effective. Each success 
indicates the storekeeper is cowed for one minute. A failure 
indicates the storekeeper is angry and might try something, 
while a botch indicates that the storekeeper attempts to trip 
an alarm, call the cops or reach for a hidden firearm. If the 
storekeeper gets killed or even injured as a result of the 
character’s actions, a Humanity roll is in order. 


Social 


She did not seduce, she ravished. 

— George Meredith, Diana of the Crossways 

These systems involve social interaction between people. 
They nearly always require a Charisma, Manipulation or 
Appearance roll. Often these systems are best left unused, 
and roleplaying used instead to determine the success or 
failure of a particular social interaction. 



216 0 VAMPIRE: The Masquerade 


































Seduction 

Seduction is an unnatural means of gaining intimacy 
with another person, because every step is carefully staged 
and real feelings are not shared (they are faked). A seduction 
goes in stages, and unless a person is successful in each stage 
in succession, he will not succeed at all. This system is 
designed to replicate the activities of a dominant person over 
a more submissive one. If the emotions and motives are true, 
then you should ignore this system and roleplay it out. 

Though a vampire can easily use her Dominate and 
Presence Disciplines to seduce a mortal, often she does not 
wish to do so, preferring the hunt to the capture. In many 
cases, depending on the Nature of the character, Willpower 
can be regained if she succeeds in the seduction. Bon 
Vivants, Connivcrs and Gallants often regain Willpower by 
successfully completing a seduction. 

Opening line: The player rolls Appearance + Subter¬ 
fuge. The difficulty is the Wits + 3 of the subject (the player 
gains a bonus of 1-3 dice if it’s a good line, minus 1-3 if it’s a 
stupid one). Each additional success adds an extra die to the 
roll on the next stage. 

Witty exchange: The player rolls Wits + Subterfuge. 
The difficulty is the Intelligence + 3 of the subject. Again, 
give bonuses and penalties for roleplaying. Each additional 
success adds an extra die to the roll on the next stage. 

Conversation: The player rolls Charisma + Empathy. 
The difficulty is the Perception +3 of the subject. Again, 
roleplaying bonuses come into play here. 

Intimacies: At this point, the couple may move to a 
private area and become physically intimate. No roll is 
required, especially when one considers that at this point the 
vampire can drink from the subject. 

Fast Talk 

This system describes a means to browbeat and confuse 
someone into submission. The player must roll Manipula¬ 
tion + Subterfuge, though Charisma or Appearance can 
sometimes be used, as can Acting. The difficulty is the 
target’s Wits + 5. Success indicates that the target becomes 
confused. 

The target may make whatever rolls he wishes; however, 
the fast talk is likely to confuse him too much at some point 
to take the appropriate action. Willpower points can be 
expended to resist the fast talk. Failure indicates that the 
attempt has faltered, and the target can try to get something 
in edgewise—an attempt to explain himself, or perhaps even 
an attempt to fast talk back. This attempt to say something 
back continues until the subject fails or botches. A botch 
indicates that the target doesn’t get confused, only angry. 
Fast talk attempts by the character will never again be 
effective on him. 



<>'. j 'Z* 

i, 




































































Research 

Research will often be the only way for a character to 
proceed to the next stage of a story. He will have to 
investigate matters in a library, newspaper office or through 
computer files in order to obtain needed information. Re¬ 
search is a great way to let a character with high Intelligence 
show off, and takes the focus off fast-paced action. 

The player rolls Intelligence + Investigation (or an 
appropriate Knowledge Ability). The difficulty is based upon 
how obscure the information. 

Difficulty Accessibility of the Information 
2 Generally available 

4 Widely documented 

6 Accessible 

8 Difficult to find 

10 Incredibly well-concealed 

The number of successes determines how much the 
character discovers. One success might mean that only the 
most obvious facts are found, while five successes might mean 
that the full (and maybe truthful) story is uncovered. De¬ 
pending on what the character looks for, 10 or 20 successes 
might be required to find all the available data. 

The player might want to continue the research after 
gaining a partial success. However, continued research takes 
longer than the initial search. Basic research usually takes 
only an hour — that’s the first roll. More in-depth research 
(and a second roll) takes one complete day. If the player 


1 

r to \ 


The number of successes indicates how moved the 
audience is (see the chart below). These successes determine 
the artistic merit or technical verisimilitude of the piece. 
Successes Your Performance Reaction 

1 Mediocre Polite applause 

2 Average Approval 

3 Good Genuine appreciation 

4 Superior Vigorous applause 

5 Exceptional Ecstatic reaction 

6 Superb Immediate sensation 

7 Brilliant Miracle,Magnumopus 

mental 

Trieste, Italy — Gun-toting toughs hijacked a bloodmobile 
near the I tal ian - Y ugos lavian border, stealing hundreds of pints of 
freshly drawn blood — and lawmen blame the robbery on vicious, 
thirst-crazed vampires! 

— Weekly World News, “Vampires Hijack Blood- 

mobile!" 


These dramatic systems deal with the use of the mind 
and the Mental Attributes. They are employed in situations 
where the drama is not so much a factor of the action as it is 
of psychological tension. 


Chapter Nine: Drama 0 219 


































II 


wants a third roll, further research takes a week; a fourth roll 
takes a month, a fifth roll takes a year, and after that use your 
imagination. Therefore, it is easy to see how some research 
projects can take years or even decades to complete. Of 
course, vampires usually have the time. 

If the player wants to reroll (because he failed, but thinks 
there is still information to be found), the research takes 
twice as long as it did the first time, and Perception is the 
governing Attribute instead of Intelligence. Additionally, 
the difficulty will be at least one higher. Again, the number 
of successes determines how much is discovered. 

Composition 

Sometimes a character will want to create an original 
and creative work of art—a painting, song or poem. Though 
this can simply be assumed if the character has the appropri¬ 
ate Abilities, sometimes a roll can make the creative process 
a little more interesting. Have the player roll Intelligence + 
an appropriate Ability (such as Music or Acting). The 
difficulty is chosen by the player, but the higher the difficulty, 
the more complicated and elegant the final product is. Each 
success indicates how original, creative and worthy the art is. 
These successes can help you determine what the reaction is 
to that piece of art — something very important to some 
Kindred (such as the Toreador). 

Recollection 

Vampires live so long that sometimes they have trouble 
recalling particular memories. If a character is trying to 
remember a fact of any sort, you may want to use this system. 
The player must roll Intelligence + the appropriate Ability 
(usually a Knowledge). The difficulty is assigned by the 
Storyteller, but is usually low and rarely over seven. The 
more successes, the more the character remembers. Use the 
following chart as a guideline. A failure indicates nothing 
was learned and a botch indicates that what the character 
remembers isn't true (if the player doesn’t roleplay this 
properly, award her fewer experience points, or have her 
spend a Willpower point for “the strain of recollection"). 

Successes Memory 

1 A hazy idea of what it was about 

2 Most of the facts are recalled (including 
faces) 

3 Names and numbers are recalled 

4 Complete recollection 

5 Eidetic recollection 

Track 

This system is used to track people and things by follow¬ 
ing the physical trails they leave. The player rolls Perception 
+ Survival (or Investigation in the city—but tracks are rarely 
left on sidewalks and pavement). The difficulty is based on 
weather conditions, terrain and the age of the tracks, but 
averages around eight. Each success lowers the difficulty of 


the next roll by one. However, you might intemipt this by 
inserting a tough obstacle with a difficulty of nine, such as 
when the pursued crosses running water. 

The character needs to succeed for a certain number of 
turns; the exact number depends on the length of the trail. 
Each turn is usually about five minutes long. If the character 
misses a roll, she can try again; this time, however, the 
difficulty is one higher. Once it goes above 10, the character 
loses the trail. 

Investment 

Regardless of how easily vampires obtain money, an 
important consideration of security is having money in the 
future as well as the present. The player makes an Intelli¬ 
gence + Finance roll (difficulty of six, unless the economic 
climate is especially good or bad); one success indicates the 
money invested was retained. Five successes indicate that 
the character's Resources rating increases by one. 

Forgery 

This system allows characters to forge documents. Two 
rolls arc required: one to know what type of forms and 
signatures are necessary, and the other to actually sit down 
and forge the papers. The player is only able to roll as many 
dice on the second roll as the number of successes achieved 
on the first roll. It is very difficult to successfully forge 
documents. You may wish to make the second roll yourself 
so the player docs not know exactly how good the forgery is. 

The first roll is made using Intelligence + Bureaucracy 
(in some cases Linguistics is necessary). The difficulty is 
based on the complexity of the document being forged 
(average of 6). A failure means that not enough is known 
about the nature of these papers and some research must be 
performed. Another roll can be made after a period of hours 
or days. A botch indicates the character has no clue of what 
he is doing, and cannot try to make the roll again unless some 
new information is found. 

The second roll is made using Dexterity + Bureaucracy. 
The difficulty varies but is normally a six. Each success 
indicates a higher grade of forgery is accomplished — see the 
chart below for a general idea of relative worth. A failure 
indicates the paperwork isn’t passable at all — it was too 
difficult for the character and he cannot try again. A botch 
indicates some fatal flaw was made, which will be readily seen 
by any official to whom the papers are shown. 

Successes Results 

1 Passable at a casual glance. 

2 Could trick those who have never seen the 
real thing. 

3 Would fool most, but not those familiar 
with the actual thing. 

4 It would take an expert to detect it. 

5 Perfect forgery; no one could tell it was a 
fake. 


220 0 VAMPIRE: The Masquerade 


































-ass 


Search 


Tliis system enables a character to search for something 
in a confined area, like a room. Have the player roll 
Perception + Investigation; the difficulty depends on how 
well concealed the object is (usually between seven and 10). 
Each success indicates more is found. Sometimes a certain 
number of successes are required to find something that is 
well hidden. If you want, a lower number of successes could 
warrant a hint or clue from you indicating where to look, thus 
encouraging roleplaying and a degree of puzzle solving. As 
much as possible, lead the player through the search step by 
step. Have her describe to you where she looks. Don’t let her 
succeed if she doesn't specifically search in the right area, and 
let her succeed automatically if her description is detailed 
enough. 

Cryptology 

This system is used to decipher codes. The player must 
roll Intelligence + Linguistics, or Intelligence + Computer if 
the character is using a computer to help him crack the code. 
The difficulty will normally be quite high (between 8-10, or 
less if the character uses a computer). Each success cracks 
more of the code. Multiple rolls can be made to accumulate 
successes. It takes anywhere from two to 20 successes to fully 
crack a code, depending on how complicated it is. Each 
“turn" can be from one minute to one month, depending on 
the needs of the story, the intricacy of the code, and the use 




of computers. Any failure indicates all collected successes are 
lost and the decoding process must restart from the begin¬ 
ning. A botch indicates total failure; the job can never be 
attempted again, or the character has misdeciphered the 
code. 

To create a code, a character must roll Intelligence + 
Linguistics three times (difficulty 5). The total number of 
successes indicates the number of successes it takes to crack 
the code. 

Safecracking 

A character needs a Security rating of four to even 
attempt to crack a safe. Even then, you should not allow him 
this specialized ability without an explanation of where he 
learned to do such a thing (from his background), or a short 
period of research and eduction. 

The player must make a Perception + Security roll. The 
difficulty is based on the solidity of the safe and the tools the 
character uses. Some safes will be impossible to crack with 
the tools on hand, regardless of the character’s skill. A 
certain number of successes must be accumulated in order to 
open the safe. Failure means the character cannot get the safe 
open and anyone examining it later can tell an attempt was 
made. A botch usually means an alarm has sounded. 


J 






































Combat 


Combat in Vampire attempts to capture the drama of 
violent conflict without downplaying the gnm reality of 
what is going on. We have made every effort to create a 
system true to the dynamics, limitations and viciousness of 
real combat, while still leaving room for the unique elements 
vampires bring to it. 

There are three types of combat, all of which use the 
same basic system, yet have some minor differences. They are 
the firefight, the melee and the brawl. 

• A firefight is any type of armed combat using projectile 
weapons — things like Uzis and sawed-off shotguns. Oppo¬ 
nents normally need to be within sight of each other in order 
to engage in a firefight. 

• Melee refers to fighting with hand weapons — any¬ 
thing from broken bottles to silver axes. Opponents need to 
be within one or two yards in order to engage in melee. 

• A brawl describes a hand-to-hand battle fought with 
bare hands and claws — unanned combat. Opponents need 
to be within touching distance to engage in a brawl. 

The rolls made in combat determine whether or not an 
attack has succeeded, whether the target dodges and how 
much damage the target suffers. Almost all combat turns arc 
around three seconds long, though they will take somewhat 
longer than that to resolve. 


As with all action scenes, combat turns begin with an 
initiative roll. However, because combat can sometimes get 
a little sticky, divide the turn into three stages to make it 
easier to keep track of things — the Initiative, Attack and 
Resolution stages. 

Stage One: Initiative 

This stage organizes the turn, and here characters must 
declare their actions. Characters can take a number of 
different actions — anything from leaping behind a wall to 
trying to shout a warning. Each player must declare what his 
character is doing in as much detail as the Storyteller re¬ 
quires. At this point, everyone needs to decide what weapon 
to use, if any. 

Characters make initiative rolls using Wits + Alertness 
(difficulty 4, though Storytellers can vary it if they so desire). 
The character with the most successes acts first, while those 
characters who rolled fewer successes take their actions in 
descending order of successes. Some characters will act 
simultaneously because they rolled the same number of 
successes. Those who gain no successes at all on this roll go 
last, and those who botch do not get to take actions at all. 


222 0 VAMPIRE: The Masquerade 




































Remember to have the players declare what actions they 
want their characters to take during the combat turn before 
going to the Attack Stage. A character splitting his Dice 
Pool must also declare how many dice to allocate to each 
action. 

Anything a character wants to do happens when it is her 
tum to act. The only exception to this is the dodge, which 
a character can perform at any time, as long as she has dice left 
in her Pool. 

Stage Two: Attack 

The attack is the meat of the combat tum. It is where the 
success or failure of an attack is determined, as well as 
something of its potential impact on the target. 

The Roll: There are three different types of attack rolls; 
the type of combat determines which one to use. 

• For firearms combat, roll Dexterity + Firearms. 

• For melee (with weapons) combat, roll Dexterity + 
Melee. 

• For hand-to-hand (without weapons) combat, roll 
Dexterity + Brawl. 

Tire weapon or attack used by the attacker determines 
the base difficulty of the roll. The number of dice rolled 
might be modified by the gun's rate of fire or the use of a scope, 
but usually the difficulty is only modified by the circum¬ 
stances around the attack. If no successes are obtained, the 
character has failed his attack and no damage is inflicted. If 
a botch is obtained, then not only does the attack fail, but 
something nasty happens; the Storyteller needs to invent 
something truly awful. 

Dodging 

Any time someone attacks the character, he has the 
option of dodging. In fact, a player may announce at any time 
that her character is using an action (or part of it, by dividing 
her Dice Pool) to dodge, simply by declaring “Dodge!” before 
the opponent makes an attack roll. In some cases a dodge 
many not be allowed, such as in confined quarters or in 
situations where the character has been surprised. The 
required roll is Dexterity + Dodge; each success takes away 
one success from the attacker’s roll. 

The difficulty to dodge melee or brawling attacks is a 
base six, plus one for every opponent after the first. 

In firefights, the difficulty depends on the availability of 
nearby cover, behind which a character can dive to avoid 
getting hit. Each success removes one of the opponent's 
successes. A character can even take away successes from 
different opponents, though this means splitting successes 
between them. After such a dodge attempt, the character 
usually ends up behind some sort of cover or, at the very least, 
lying on the ground (if there was no cover to be found). 






Chapter Nine: Drama © 223 



































The difficulty to dodge during firefights is determined by 
how close cover is. 

Difficulty Terrain 

2 By moving back half a step, the character 

is back under full cover. 

4 Full cover within diving distance (one 

yard) 

6 Full cover within running distance 
(three yards) 

7 Partial cover within running distance 
(three yards) 

8 Flat and featureless, no cover (the 
character dives to the ground) 

Stage Three: Resolution 

In this stage, characters determine the damage inflicted 
by their attacks and the Storyteller describes what occurs in 
the turn. It is a mixture of game and story, for though the dice 
never lie, the Storyteller must interpret what luck has de¬ 
creed. 

Damage: Each weapon or attack allows the wielder to 
roll a certain number of dice in order to cause damage 
(difficulty 6). Each success means the target loses one Health 
Level. Additionally, each success made with a firearm (after 
any dodge) adds one die to this damage roll. Melee and 
brawling successes do not add to the damage; however, each 
point of Potence a character possesses adds one automatic 
success to melee and brawling damage. 

Soak: A target may make a roll to see how much damage 
she "soaks up” due to her natural hardiness. The target rolls 
Stamina + Fortitude (difficulty 6); every success reduces the 
damage by one. 

Exception: Damage and soak rolls are the only rolls in 
Vampire which cannot be botched. 


Complications 


A number of factors determine whether an attack hits or 
not. Smart combatants head for cover as soon as bullets start 
flying. Others find that ganging up on one foe in a brawl 
never hurts. The following modifiers allow Storytellers to 
account for many of the variables which affect combat. 

General Complications 

• Changing Actions: If a character changes her 
declared actions after the turn has started, the difficulty for 
the new action increases by one. Generally, the Storyteller 
should only allow the character to change her declared 
action if events have made it impossible. “Yes, I know I said 
my character would jump into the car, but that ghoul just 
blew it up!" 

• Immobilization: If a target is immobilized (e.g. held 
down by someone), but still struggles, the difficulty for the 
attack roll is lowered by two. However, if the target is 


224 0 VAMPIRE: The Masquerade 





























completely immobilized (e.g. is tied up or has a stake through 
the heart), then no roll is required and the attack succeeds 
automatically. 

Firefight Complications 

• Range: Getting close to one’s foe is a good idea if a 
character doesn’t mind taking a few shots in return. The 
range given on the Firearms Chart is the weapon’s medium 
range; the character receives no modifier for shooting at this 
range. Twice that range is the farthest the weapon can shoot. 
Shots within this range have their difficulties increased by 
one. On the other hand, shots made at targets within a yard 
of the attacker are considered “point-blank"; the difficulty of 
a point-blank shot is four. 

• Cover: Intelligent characters use cover to protect 
themselves from enemy fire. Cover increases the difficulty of 
an attack depending on how much of the character’s body is 
still out in the open. However, though it acts to protect 
someone, it can also hamper return fire, and in some rare 
instances it can completely prevent any return fire. For 
instance, ducking out from around a comer to shoot may 
increase the difficulty by one, while watching a shootout 
through the cracks in a battered wall will prevent a character 
from firing back at all. 

Cover Difficulty 

Lying flat +1 

Behind pole +2 

Behind wall +3 

Only head exposed +4 

• Movement: Shooting at a moving target increases the 
difficulty by one (or even more), as does shooting while 
moving at any speed faster than a walk (such as firing out the 
window of a speeding car). 


Firefight Complications 


Complication 

Difficulty 

Dice 

Changing action 

+ 1 

— 

Immobilization 

-2 

— 

Long range 

+ 1 

— 

Point-blank 

4 

— 

Lying flat 

+1 

— 

Behind pole 

+2 

— 

Behind wall 

+3 

— 

Only head exposed 

+4 

— 

Movement 

+ 1 

— 

Aiming 

_ 

+ Perception 

Scope 

— 

+2 

Specific area of target 

+2 

— 

Mutiple shots 

+ 1/cxtra shot 

— 

Full-auto 

+3 

+10 

Three-round burst 

+ 1 

+3 

Spray 

5 +l/yard 

+10 

























































• Aiming: A character may add her Perception rating 
to her Dexterity + Firearms Dice Pool if she spends time 
aiming. However, it takes one turn for each die added, and 
during this time the character can do nothing but aim — it 
takes time and patience to aim. Additionally, the target may 
not be moving at a speed faster than a walk. Shotguns and 
SMGs cannot be aimed. 

If the gun has a scope, the character may add two dice to 
her Pool in addition to the dice added for Perception. The 
scope bonus can only be used once per shot — after the +3 
added in the first round (+2 for the scope and +1 for 
Perception), the character continues aiming as outlined 
above. 

• Targeting: Aiming for a specific location (gun hand, 
the heart, etc.) increases the difficulty by two. 

• Multiple Shots: If a character wants to take more than 
one shot in a turn, he must divide his Dice Pool into two or 
more actions. Also, for every additional shot after the first, 
the difficulty increases by one. Ten is, of course, the maxi¬ 
mum the difficulty can be raised to. A character can only take 
as many shots as allowed by the rate of the firearm. 

This penalty is cumulative. Thus a character adds two 
on the third shot, and three on the fourth. It is not usually 
wise to blindly take off potshots; the recoil always catches up 
with one. Using these rules, it is permissible to fire two or 
more three-round bursts in a single turn, though a character 
can only fire on full-auto once per turn (and must reload to 
do it again). 


k can c 


• Full-Auto: The full-auto option is the most damaging 
attack a fireann can make, as the attacker unloads the full 
contents of a gun’s ammunition clip within a very short time 
span. However, the gun becomes a bucking bronco, difficult 
to control and even harder to aim. 

A character gets 10 additional dice to roll on the attack, 
thus increasing the chance to hit and cause damage. How¬ 
ever, the difficulty is raised by two due to recoil. 

Full-auto fire can only be done when a weapon has more 
than half its clip remaining. Whenever a character uses the 
full-auto option, he uses up the entire clip of the weapon. 
Reloading takes one full action and requires the character's 
full concentration (and Dice Pool). 

• Three-Round Burst: The semi-auto option is the 
middle ground between the full-auto and the single-shot 
options, and has some of the strengths and weaknesses of 
both. A burst gives the attacker three additional dice on the 
attack roll. However, due to the recoil, the difficulty in¬ 
creases by one. 

• Spray: When on full-auto, a character can decide to 
spray across an area instead of focusing on only one foe. A 
spray uses the extra 10 dice given by full-auto fire, but the 
attack has a base difficulty of five, increased by one for every 
yard covered by the spray, in addition to other modifiers. 

The player divides any successes gained on the attack 
roll evenly between all targets in the covered area. However, 
if only one target is in the sprayed area, only half the successes 
affect him. The player then assigns any leftover successes as 


226 0 VAMPIRE: The Masquerade 



































■1 


Firearms Table 







Type 

Difficulty 

Damage Range 

Rate 

Clip 

Conceal 

Example 







P SWM640 (.38 Special) 

6 

4 

12 

3 

6 

P 

Revolver, Hvy. 

7 

6 

35 

2 

6 

J 

Colt Anaconda (.44 magnum) 








4 

20 


17+1 


Pistol, Hvy. 

8 

5 

30 

3 

7+1 

J 

Sig P220 (.45 ACP) 







Rifle 8 

Remington M-700 (.30-06) 

8 

100 

1 



SMG, Small* 

7 

4 

25 

3 

30+1 

J 

Ingram Mac-10 (9mm) 







SMG, Large* 

U* (Z) 

6 

4 

50 


32+1 

m .. 

Assault Rifle* 

7 

7 

150 

3 

42+1 

N 

Steyr-Aug (5.56mm) 







Shotgun 

Ithaca M-37(12-gaugc) 

6 

8 


1 

5-1 T 

Shotgun, Semi-auto 

7 

8 

20 

3 

8+1 

T 

Fianchi Law-12 (12 gauge) 







Crossbow** 


5 

20 

1 

1 

T 


Range: This is the practical range of the gun in yards. A character may fire up to double the listed range; however, that 
is considered a long-range shot. 

Rate: The maximum number of bullets or three-round bursts the gun can fire in a single turn. The rate does not apply 
to full-auto or spray fire. 

Clip: The number of bullets that can be held in one clip or in the barrel. The +1 indicates a bullet can be held in the 
chamber, making the gun ready to fire. 

Concealment: P = can be hidden in a pocket; J = can be hidden inside a jacket; T - can be hidden inside a trenchcoat; 
N = cannot be hidden on one’s person at all. 

* indicates the gun is capable of three-round bursts, full-auto fire and sprays. 

** The crossbow is included with this list for those characters who wish to use one to stake other vampires. However, 
unlike firearms, it does not add successes on the attack roll to the Dice Pool for damage. Additionally, a crossbow takes 
five turns to reload. 


shedcsires. If the attacker rolls fewer successes than thereare . p, ank and Rear Attacks; Jhc dlfficulty of a flanU 

targets, the player may only assign one to a target until they attack B , owcrcd by onCi whi|c thal of a rear attack ls | owcrcd 

are used up. This attack also empties the clip. by (wo 

The difficulty of a dodge roll against a spray is increased . Suke: Altempts to stake a foe through the hcart 

^ two ' require at least three successes (even after any dodge), and 

Melee and Brawling the a,tac ^ must c *° Health Levels of damage to the 

„ ® target. If this happens, an opposing vampire is immobilized, 

complications If tbc attack succeeds, but not well enough to immobilize the 


• Multiple Opponents: If a character is battling foe, damage is still done normally. 


multiple opponents in close combat, that character’s attack 


• Bite: After a bite which does at least one Health Level 


and dodge difficulties arc increased by one per opponent (to 0 f damage to a target, a character may subsequently drain the 


a maximum of 10). 


victim’s blood. A bite causes aggravated wounds, but an 


Chapter Nine: Drama © 227 




































Melee Weapons Table 


Weapon 

Difficulty 

Damage 

Conceal 

Sap 

4 

Strength 

P 

Club 

4 

Strength +1 

T 

Knife 

4 

Strength +1 

7 

Foil 

5 

Strength +3 

T 

Saber 

6 

Strength +4 

T 

Axe 

7 

Strength +5 

N 


attacker can only bite after she successfully grapples the 
target (or has been grappled). 

• Claw: Only those with the Protean Discipline at rating 
two or above can employ this maneuver. Claws cause aggra¬ 
vated wounds. 

• Grapple: An attacker can try to grab a foe, hoping to 
either immobilize him or get a shot at biting into a vein. If 
the attacker scores more successes than the opponent's 
Strength, the attacker can immobilize him. In the next 
round, she can begin to inflict harm. Any character struck by 
this attack loses his attacks for the current turn. 

If the attacker misses altogether (by failing the Dexterity 
+ Brawl roll), she is knocked down and will need to spend an 
action to get to her feet. 

Continuing to grapple during each turn after the first 
requires the combatants to make opposed Strength + Brawl 
rolls. Whoever accumulates more successes may opt to 
immobilize the other. If both score the same number of 
successes, neither gains the upper hand this turn. 

• Body Slam: A character may also try to charge 
forward, hurling his weight into his opponent in an attempt 
to damage her. It is possible to damage oneself with this 
attack, as bodies were not meant to be used as battering rams. 
A character needs three successes to unbalance an opponent 
and does one level of damage to himself for every success less 
than three. 

If the attack succeeds, the opponent is off balance, and 
the difficulties for the rest of her actions for this round are 
increased by two. Also, if the opponent docs not succeed in 
a Dexterity + Athletics roll (difficulty of the successes + 3), 
she falls to the ground. The base damage done by the attacker 
equals his Strength; each success scored on the attack roll 


Brawling Table 


Maneuver 

Accuracy 

Damage 

■ ■■ 

5 

Strength +1 

Punch 

6 

Strength 

Grapple 

6 

Strength 

Claw 

6 

Strength +2 

Kick 

mmm 

Strength +1 

Body slam 

7 

Special; see Options 


VAMPIRE: The Masquerade 









































Armor Chart 

Class Armor Rating 

Penalty 

Class One 

1 

0 

(reinforced clothing) 



Class Two 

2 

1 

(armor T-shirt) 

Class Three 

3 

2 

(vest) 

Class Four 

4 

3 

(flak jacket) 

Class Five 

6 

4 

(full suit) 


above the minimum adds one to this base. If the attackerdoes 
not roll at least three successes, this maneuver fails; he falls 
to the ground and is treated as though he had no dice left in 
his Pool (unless he has Celerity). 


oe7% 
alls ^ 


Armor 


A character with body armor can add dice to her soak 
rolls. Different types of body armor have different armor 
ratings, which are the number of extra dice rolled on a soak 
roll. Certain types of armor restrict body motion, and thus 
penalize the character's Dexterity rolls (any rolls involving 
this Attribute have their difficulties raised by an amount 
equal to the penalty). 



































I —I ■■■» I— I— I- 



230 © VAMPIRE: The Masquerade 






































V II If V if if <1 if if II if if II If 


“We’re not alone,” Ian whispered in her ear, so silently 
only her heightened hearing could pick it up. “You head 
on.” The Malkavian seemed particularly overjoyed, almost 
ecstatic. 

Impulsively, Clarissa looked over her shoulder but saw 
no one. When she looked back, Ian was gone, so she walked 
slowly along. As soon as she heard Ian hiss, “Why do you 
follow us?” she doubled back as fast as she could. 

She saw a black man, apparently in his late 20s, dressed 
in a blue starter jacket, black jeans, sneakers and a baseball 
cap, squaring off against Ian. 

“You’re on my territory, kook. You Licks got no 
business here, and I want you gone,” he said, before realizing 
Clarissa had returned. He maneuvered himself so his back 
rested against a tall tombstone. 

“You rule here?” Clarissa demanded. “What have you 
done with Emily?” 

Dre stared back at her, a befuddled look in his eyes. 
“Who the hell is Emily?" 


but slow. As the characters begin moving through the 
cemetery, Rob announces Ian will constantly keep his para¬ 
noid eyes open for tails. 

As they walk through the graveyard, Clarissa and Ian 
pass by Dre’s resting place — a grand mausoleum for a former 
mayor. Dre, who was quietly preparing himself for the night’s 
hunting, has a chance to hear them as they walk. Rend rolls 
three dice for Dre’s Perception and two more for his Alert¬ 
ness. Mark rules that since he is not expecting anyone, the 
difficulty is an eight. The dice come up 10,8,8,7, 5, so Dre 
has three successes and definitely hears the intruders. 

Rend says she wants to know if Dre recognizes the two as 
he peeps through a crack in the wall. Since Clarissa has a 
point of Status among the undead due to the prestige of her 
sire, Mark lets Rend roll Intelligence + Politics (difficulty 6). 
Rend scores one success, and Mark says Dre recognizes 
Clarissa as a vampire but knows little more about her. 

After they pass, Dre slips out and begins tailing them. 
First he must make a Perception + Investigation roll (diffi¬ 
culty 6). He only has four dice in his pool, but he gets two 
successes and can tail them for two turns (six minutes, since 
that is how long Mark has decided these turns are). Now he 
must roll six dice to see if he can follow them stealthily. Since 
only Ian said he was looking out for tails, Dre’s difficulty is 
only five (Ian’s Perception + Alertness). Still, he only rolls 
one success. 




Chapter Nine: Drama © 231 

































% 

V '>\\\ 

vs 

Now Ian may make a roll to notice Dre. His difficulty is 
seven (Dre’s Stealth + 5), and he has five dice in his pool. He 
rolls two successes and notices the Brujah skulking behind 
them. 

After notifying Clarissa, he ducks behind a tree and uses 
his Obfuscate to melt into the shadows. No roll need be made 
for this. 

The confrontation between the three characters is 
handled purely through roleplaying, and none of the players 
make any rolls. Rend decides Dre has no interest in fighting 
two vampires, so he will just make sure they know the 
graveyard is his and leave it alone in the future. 

As the three travel on, Mark has them all make Percep¬ 
tion + Alertness rolls to see if they can hear Sheriffs 
conversation with Michael. Since Mark does not state a 
difficulty, all the players assume it is six, and each rolls at least 
one success. To sneak up on the discussion, he tells them to 
make Dexterity + Stealth rolls, and again does not mention 
the difficulty. Since they all roll at least one six, Mark rules 
that they have reached theirobservation point quietly enough. 

The players do not need to roll to recognize Sheriff since 
he is such a well-known figure. Additionally, Mark decides 
Clarissa automatically recognizes Michael from Toreador 
parties. Rob says he wants Ian to try and determine if the 
third figure breathes. Mark allows him to make a Perception 
+ Alertness roll (difficulty 8), with three successes needed to 
be sure. Ian rolls two successes on the first turn and one 
during the second, noting that the figure does indeed breathe. 


"Emily. My sire. She came here a week ago and has not 
been seen since. What have you done with her?” Clarissa 
was almost screaming as she advanced on the newcomer, 
the red haze of frenzy shrouding her sight. 


The man immediately saw what Clarissa was going 
through. Nervousness rising in his voice, he said “Nothin’, 
G. I’ve never seen Emily. Nobody ever comes here. Chill 
out!” 


Seeing her start to calm down, he added, “Look, I’ll 
make this one exception. Go ahead and look around for 
your Emily. You’ve got an hour to find her, then you leave. 
OK? Never let it be said Dre was anything but fair. Look 
around to your still heart’s content.” 


Quietly, Ian asked, “How did you know we’re Kindred ? 
You seem nothing but rabble, if not one of the Clanless. 
Maybe you’re something even worse,” he muttered, his 
voice breaking off into a demented titter. 






























































turn as he had planned. Clarissa again rolls three dice for 
damage thanks to the Blood Point she previously spent on 
Strength, and again scores three successes. Michael only 
soaks one and drops down to Wounded, losing two dice on 
future rolls. 

The ghoul pulls a heavy pistol from his shoulder holster 
and looks around for a target just in time to make eye contact 
with lan. Using the Command the Wearied Mind power of 
Dominate, Ian yells “Regurgitate!" He rolls his Manipula¬ 
tion + Intimidation (six dice) against the ghoul’s Willpower 
of 6. He scores three successes, and the ghoul will spend the 
next turn making his suit very messy. 

The next turn begins and everyone makes initiative 
rolls. The turn's order turns out to be Sheriff, Clarissa, Ian, 
Dre and Michael (Mark decides the ghoul will obviously not 
act this turn). Michael will spend Blood Points on his 
Dexterity and Celerity before dodging and then punching 
Clarissa, all the while trying to heal a Health Level. Dre 
again activates his Celerity and will dodge and punch Sheriff. 
Forsaking his better judgment, lan leaves his place of con¬ 
cealment and advances on the ghoul. Clarissa continues 
spending Blood Points on Celerity and punching Michael. 
Finally, Sheriff will spend blood on his Celerity and punch 
Dre several times. 

Sheriff scores three successes on his first attack, but Dre 
rolls an equal number of dodge successes, thus canceling out 


“Let me see it," Sheriff commanded. Michael reached 
into his pocket and pulled out a small bag. From the bag he 
took out a bloodstained ring. With a finger he cleaned the 
ring — Emily's famed ruby ring. He wiped the blood on 
Christian’s tombstone. 

Dre squelched a growl of anger to her left, but Clarissa 
could not hold back her rage. With an amazing burst of 
speed she charged Michael. Before anyone could react, she 
thrust her left foot at his side. It skimmed past his stomach, 
but left him off balance for her next kick, which slammed 
into his groin. 

A red haze began clouding Clarissa’s vision, but from 
the comer of her eye she noticed Dre charge right into 
Sheriff s ham-sized fist. She also thought she heard Ian yell 
something, and then heard sounds of retching from the 
ghoul. Ignoring all this, Clarissa slammed her fist into 
Michael’s cheek and heard a satisfying crunch. Michael 
stumbled to the left, and planted his foot squarely on a 
bouquet left at one of the graves. It skidded out from under 
him, sending him careening into a tombstone. 







































Chapter Nine: Drama 

































f- 



t 


He that wrestles with us strengthens our nerves , and sharpens 
our skill. Our Antagonist is our helper. 

-E. Burke, Reflections 


Antagonists 

Many individuals and organizations will oppose the 
characters throughout the chronicle. These antagonists are 
not necessarily the enemies of the characters, but they always 
have different goals. 

Mortals 

Though individual mortals are weak in comparison to 
Kindred, in numbers they can be deadly antagonists. 

Police Officer 

Most local cops can be found in police cruisers, often 
with a partner. Help is only a radio call away, and one to five 
other patrol cars will arrive within minutes of an emergency 
call. In extreme emergencies, 50 or more police officers can 
be called in to help within 15 minutes. 

Character Creation: Attributes: 7/5/3, Abilities: 15/9/ 
3, Background: 7, Willpower: 5 

Suggested Attributes: Police officers possess a rating of 
two in all Attributes, except for Physical Traits which are 
rated at three. 


Suggested Abilities: Alertness 2, Leadership 1, Brawl 2, 
Streetwise 1, Dodge 2, Security 3, Repair 1, Firearms 3, Drive 

2, Melee 1, Stealth 1, Investigation 2, Bureaucracy 1, Com¬ 
puter 1, Law 2, Police Procedure 3 

Equipment: Light Revolver, Light Automatic Pistol, 
Pump Shotgun, Billy Club, Handcuffs, Radio, Badge, Flash¬ 
light 

Police Detective 

Police detectives are called to the scenes of murders and 
other major crimes. They are the officers who will become 
involved in investigating matters related to Kindred. 

Character Creation: Attributes: 8/5/3, Abilities: 17/9/ 

3, Background: 7, Willpower: 7 

Suggested Attributes: Detectives possess ratings of two 
in all Attributes, except for Perception and Wits, which are 
rated at three. 

Suggested Abilities: Alertness 3, Leadership 2, Brawl 2, 
Streetwise 4, Intimidation 1, Subterfuge 3, Dodge 1, Security 3, 
Repair 1, Firearms 3, Drive 2, Melee 1, Stealth 1, Investigation 

4, Bureaucracy 1, Computer 1, Law 2, Police Procedure 4 

Equipment: Light Revolver, Light Automatic Pistol, 
Handcuffs, Radio, Badge, Flashlight 


L 


236 0 VAMPIRE: The Masquerade 































Government Agent 

These characters can be from the FBI, the NSA, the CIA 
or whatever local government agency is appropriate. They 
will often have a tremendous amount of backup and possess 
considerable authority. The Camarilla severely punishes 
those who kill or even interact with such agents; the risk to 
the Masquerade is too great. 

Character Creation: Attributes: 9/5/4, Abilities: 18/10/ 
6, Background: 7, Willpower: 8 

Suggested Attributes: Agents have ratings of three in 
all Attributes, except for Perception and Intelligence, which 
are rated at least four. 

Suggested Abilities: Alertness 3, Leadership 3, Brawl 3, 
Acting 1, Intimidation 2, Dodge 2, Subterfuge 1, Athletics 
1, Security 3, Firearms 3, Drive 3, Stealth 3, Investigation 4, 
Bureaucracy 2, Politics 1, Computer 1, Law 3, Police Proce¬ 
dure 5 

Equipment: Light Revolver, Fleavy Automatic Pistol, 
Submachine Gun, Radio, Video Camera, Forensics Lab, 
Portable Phone Tap, Portable Lie Detector, Bugs, Class II 
Armor, Mirrorshades 

SWAT Officer 

These officers are specially trained with high-power 
weapons and military tactics. If things ever get out of hand 
with the characters, they will certainly be called in. 

Character Creation: Attributes: 8/5/3, Abilities: 15/9/ 
3, Background: 7, Willpower: 6 

Suggested Attributes: SWAT officers possess ratings of 
two in all Attributes, except for Physical Attributes, which 
are rated at three. 

Suggested Abilities: Alertness3, Leadership 2, Brawl 3, 
Streetwise 1, Dodge 3, Security 3, Repair 2, Firearms 4, Drive 
3, Melee 2, Stealth 2, Intimidation 2, Law 1, Police Proce¬ 
dure 3 

Equipment: Light Automatic Pistol, Submachine Gun, 
Radio, Bullhorn, Class HI Body Armor, Battering Ram, 
Rappelling Equipment, Armored Vehicle 

Witch-Hunter 

Witch-hunters are generally agents of the Inquisition, 
often members of one of the various holy orders, but can be 
any who hunt vampires. A number of priests have become 
involved in the Inquisition through their efforts to tend their 
flocks. They form the network that supports the activities of 
the Inquisition's agents. All that they do, however, is without 
the formal knowledge of the Church. 

Character Creation: Attributes: 8/6/3, Abilities: 21/ 
12/7, Background: 6, Willpower: 9 

Suggested Attributes: Priests have ratings of two in all 
Attributes, except for Charisma and Intelligence, which are 
often rated at four. 
































Suggested Abilities: Alertness 2, Leadership 3, Intimi- 
> dation3, Dodge l,Subterfuge2,Empathy4,Repair(carpentry) 

2, Animal Ken 2, Survival 1, Etiquette 3, Medicine 3, 
Investigation 2, Bureaucracy 2, Politics 2, Linguistics 3, 
Theology 5, Philosophy 4, Art 2, History 2, Teaching 3, 
Occult 3 

Equipment Available: Bible, Silver Cross, Medal of St. 
Ignatius, Relics, Robes 

Minister: Some ministers of other faiths — Christian, 
Jewish and Moslem — may search or hunt for vampires. 

Character Creation: Attributes: 8/5/3, Abilities: 18/9/ 

3, Background: 7, Willpower: 8 

Suggested Attributes: See Priest, above. 

Suggested Abilities: Leadership 4, Acting 2, Intimida¬ 
tion 1, Subterfuge 2, Empathy 2, Drive 1, Music 2, Survival 
1, Etiquette 2, Bureaucracy 2, Finance 2, Linguistics 3, 
Theology 4, Philosophy 3, Art 2, Psychology 2 

Equipment: Bible, Crucifix, Automobile 

True Faith 

Those of true faith are able to ward off vampires using the 
cross or other holy symbols; this is believed to be more a 
function of the faith of the wielder than the symbol itself. It 
is possible that a person without a symbol is capable of 
warding off a vampire merely through the use of religious 
words — normally, however, a symbol is required. 

Especially religious characters may possess a Faith rating 
from 1-10, which describes their essential holiness, faith and 
closeness with their deity. 

Each turn a vampire attempts to approach the indi¬ 
vidual, a Willpower roll must be made. The Faith rating is the 
difficulty for the roll. The number of successes indicates how 
many steps forward the vampire may take. Failure means no 
approach is possible, while a botch indicates either a Health 
Level is lost (due to pain) or the vampire flees in the grip of 
the Rotschreck. 

Faith may also be used, on rare occasions, to determine 
if a miracle takes place; the nature of a given miracle is 
completely up to the Storyteller. 

Scholar: These intellectuals are involved in the gather¬ 
ing and classification of paranormal matters of all sorts, 
including the Kindred. They are not interested in violent 
confrontation with the supernatural and will avoid such at all 
costs. Interference or contact with them is forbidden by the 
Camarilla. 

Character Creation: Attributes: 9/6/3, Abilities: 15/9/ 
3, Background: 7, Willpower: 6 

Suggested Attributes: Scholars possess ratings of 2 in all 
Attributes, except in Perception and Intelligence, which are 
rated at 3 or even 4. 


Suggested Abilities: Leadership 4, Acting 2, Intimida¬ 
tion 1, Subterfuge 2, Empathy 2, Drive 1, Music 2, Survival 
1, Etiquette 2, Bureaucracy 2, Finance 2, Linguistics 4, 
Occult 4, Philosophy 3, Art 2, Psychology 2, Science 2 
Equipment: Automobile, various gadgets, investigative 
paraphernalia 


Vampires 


The greatest enemy of the vampire is another of his own 
kind. 

Neonate: These are vampires who have not yet reached 
100 years of age and are usually of the ninth through 13 th (or 
greater?) generations — the “teenagers" among vampires. 

Character Creation: Attributes: 7/5/3, Abilities: 13/9/ 
3, Background: 7, Virtues: 10, Willpower: 7, Disciplines: 4 

Ancilla: These are the vampires who have survived 
more than 100 years, though the term is used very loosely. 
They are often of the seventh, eighth, or ninth generations. 

Character Creation: Attributes: 9/6/4, Abilities: 18/9/ 
3, Background: 7, Virtues: 10, Willpower: 8, Disciplines: 6 

Elder: These are Kindred of the fifth, sixth or seventh 
generations, who have survived between 300 and 1000 years 
and therefore have considerable inherent power. 

Character Creation: Attributes: 10/7/5, Abilities: 21/9/ 
3, Background: 12, Virtues: 6, Willpower: 9, Disciplines: 10 

Methuselah: These vampires are of the fourth or fifth 
generations, and are often members of the Inconnu. They no 
longer concern themselves with the affairs of mortals. They 
are usually over 1000 years old. 

Character Creation: Attributes: 12/8/6, Abilities: 24/ 
12/7, Background: 12, Virtues: 6, Willpower: 9, Disciplines: 
15 

Antediluvian: These Ancients are of such immense 
power that to assign them Traits of any sort would be foolish 
— they are far too powerful for this game system to define. 
Simply assume that any conflict between an Antediluvian 
and any other Kindred (including the characters) would 
automatically result in the Ancient’s victory. To the other 
vampires, they are gods, and it is nearly impossible to defeat 
them — at least directly. Only through the use of creative 
tactics, diplomacy, and coordination between many allies is 
it possible to defeat an Antediluvian’s plans. 

Ghouls 

A mortal who drinks the blood of a vampire, but has not 
first been drained, becomes a ghoul. Ghouls do not age as 
long as they feed on vampire blood regularly, and may even 
gain some of the special powers of a vampire. However, they 
can travel during the day and are not especially susceptible to 
fire. Such ghouls do not even need to be human; animals can 
be changed as well (but Animalism is generally needed in 
order to control them). 


238 0 VAMPIRE: The Masquerade 
































• As long as ghouls regularly drink Kindred blood, 
they do not age. 

• Ghouls may use the vampiric blood in their systems 
in the same way vampires do. 

• Every ghoul has the Discipline of Potence. When 
mortals first become ghouls, they gain a Potence of one, and 
this rating can raise with experience. Ghouls can also buy the 
Disciplines of Fortitude and Celerity. 

• In rare instances, ghouls learn other Disciplines 
which their vampire master knows. How this happens is 
unknown, but many feel this phenomenon is tied to the age 
and power of the vampire. 

Ghouls also have a numer of disadvantages, however: 

• Ghouls can frenzy, though not as easily as vampires 
— the difficulty for them avoid frenzy is three less. 

• Once their natural life spans have passed, ghouls 
must always have vampiric blood in their systems or rapidly 
age and die — sometimes within days, sometimes within 
minutes. 

Werewolves 

Werewolves, or Lupines, are described in great detail in 
Vampire's companion game, Werewolf: The Apocalypse. 
However, if you do not intend to make werewolves a focus of 
your chronicle, the following niles should suffice. 


Character Creation: Attributes: 7/5/3, Abilities: 15/9/ 
3, Background: 5, Willpower: 8, Disciplines: 6 (equivalents, 
usually physically-oriented) 

They have several powers: 

• Werewolves are able to attack several times per turn 
(Celerity from 2-8 without a blood restriction). 

• They automatically heal back a Health Level every 
turn (only silver weapons or the teeth and claws of Kindred 
can harm them permanently). 

• The claws and fangs of Lupines cause aggravated 
wounds. 

• While in wolf-man form, Lupines are able to make 
shocking use of frenzy. They completely let the Beast loose 
when in wolf-man form and in return can expect to retain 
their Humanity when in human form. In a story with 
Lupines, grant them all the benefits of frenzy in combat, but 
allow them to release themselves any time after they have 
tasted blood. 

• They can shapechange into a variety of forms, all of 
them some variation of the wolf. Thus they can change into 
a wolf, a man, or something halfway in between (a wolf- 
man). When werewolves are met during the day, treat them 
as mundane mortals — it is only if they are met at night, in 
wolf form, that they have special abilities. 

In wolf form, all their Physical Attributes are doubled 
(yes, very nasty). However, they are no longer able to use 
Social Attributes in connection with any creature other than 





T 


































f werewolves and other wild beasts. They may also be able to 
> use many different Disciplines (equivalents of the vampire 
Disciplines). 

Magi 

Treat wizards as normal human beings except for their 
magical powers. In general they are extremely disdainful of 
the Kindred, but are always extremely cautious around them. 
Many of them have a special contempt for the Tremere, 
whom they consider to be traitors and blood-wizards. 

Character Creation: Attributes: 7/5/3, Abilities: 21/12/ 
8, Background: 9, Willpower: 9, Disciplines: 12 (equivalent) 

Sec the Thaumaturgy Discipline for ideas on how the 
wizards can use magic, but understand that they are far more 
capable than the Tremere in these magical arts. Simply write 
down a number of effects (spells) which you would like them 
to be able to use. Make them as creative and specific as you 
can, and as spectacular as you would like. Let the mage use 
each spell you have written down once per scene. Keep in 
mind that magi are, in general, much more powerful in places 
with magical auras and times of magical significance. 


Forged in Steel 


Faeries 

Faeries are the strange and enigmatic creatures who live 
in the mystical, magical realm of Arcadia, but occasionally 
cross over into our world. They are able to do so only on the 
most magically significant days, and go to great lengths to 
remain unseen from mortal eyes (they are greatly aided by 
natural Obfuscate powers). 

In terms of faerie powers, simply provide them with a 
variety of Disciplines, as well as various illusion powers. The 
physical forms of faeries range from tiny sprites to mighty 
tree-lords; give them whatever Attributes you deem appro¬ 
priate, but most have high Wits. 

Vampire are generally unable to travel to Arcadia, but it 
is rumored that Kindred especially skilled in the Discipline of 
Auspex may do so. 

Ghosts 

Ghosts are everywhere, but are usually unseen. Vam¬ 
pires, being dead themselves, often find themselves in contact 
with such forsaken souls. Most ghosts have the equivalent 
of the Auspex and Thaumaturgy Disciplines. 


This city is afraid of me. I have seen its true face. The streets 
are extended gutters and the gutters are full of blood and when the 
drains finally scab over, all the vermin will drown. 

— Rorschach’s Journal, The Watchmen 


What follows is a brief example of a Vampire chronicle. 
It demonstrates some of the preparation work that should be 
done before a chronicle begins, and details some of the 
products of that work as well. If you, as the Storyteller, intend 
to use this for your own chronicle, plan on spending some 
more preparation time fleshing out what is presented here. 
Though the information that follows is enough to begin, the 
more detail you have developed, the smoother the chronicle 
will run. 

This chronicle was created by the Storyteller (Mark) 
specifically for his players (Stewart, Lisa and Steve). He 
didn’t know who their characters would be at first, so some 
things changed after the chronicle began. 

The name of this chronicle was taken from the city 
motto of Gary, Indiana: Built on Sand, Forged in SteeL 


Concepts 


i me 


When Mark first started to imagine the setting, he sat 
down and wrote a list of words to describe what feelings and 
images he wanted the setting to evoke. These helped him 
more carefully delineate what he wanted the chronicle to 
incorporate. 


After writing down two or three words, he realized that 
his images were centered around a movie he had just seen, 
Roger and Me, which depicted the decay and poverty in the 
Rust Belt. This made him think about Gary, a city just to the 
east of Chicago, which he had driven through the summer 
before on his way to Milwaukee. He immediately decided to 
make Gary, Indiana the setting of the chronicle. He contin¬ 
ued to add words to the list by conjuring more images of what 
Gary might be like in the Gothic-Punk world of Vampire: 

• Old tattered billboards 

• Run-down 

• Beyond hope, beyond despair 

• Rust — Rust Belt 

• Steel mills, factories 

• Pollution 

• Chain-link fences 

• Poverty-stricken, deteriorating streets 

• Abandoned houses 

• Lake Michigan 

• Run-down harbor 

• Container ships 


240 0 VAMPIRE: The Masquerade 










































• Gothic cathedral amidst the ruins 

• Squalor and lethargy 

• Empty warehouses 

• Pool halls 

• Abandoned urban renewal projects 

• Burnt-out street lights 

• Greed 

• Drugs 

• Gangs 

• Graffiti 

• Projects 

• Abandoned stores 

• Unemployment 

• Opulence and decadence 

• Zombie people 

• Aging, decaying mansions 

• Filth-choked rivers 

Premise 

After brooding a while, and using the list of images to 
build from, Mark invented the overall premise of the chronicle. 
He decided that the chronicle would involve a lot of intrigue, 
and be crowned with such themes as betrayal and decadence. 
He hoped that this sort of atmosphere would fit in well with 
the ambiance of the setting. 


Because Gary is too small to have much intrigue, he 
knew that the majority of the intrigue would have to origi¬ 
nate in Chicago. From that premise sprang the idea of 
making the cities of Gary and Chicago arch-rivals. For 
generations, their princes had fought, each with a different 
power base, but with the collapse of the steel industry, the 
power of Gary has fallen. Not only are the living of Gary in 
misery, but so are the undead. By setting up Gary in 
opposition to Chicago, Mark hoped to create a dramatic 
situation from the very beginning. As a result of this basic 
concept, he came up with a number of different ideas: 

• Gary is in even worse shape than in our world. The 
city is in a terrible state of decay — a perfect place for 
vampires to hunt. Few notice any more how many people 
disappear each year. Industry has completely fled the area, 
leaving a desolate patch of rust known as the Wasteland. 

• Gary is ruled by a prince who is something less than a 
prince. Modius is the arch-rival of Lodin, the Prince of 
Chicago, and at one time they were fairly evenly matched. 
Modius controlled the unions while Lodin controlled big 
business. However, Lodin purposefully destroyed the steel 
industry in order to destroy Modius’ power base. He was so 
successful that Modius lost almost all of his power. Today, he 
is only a pale reflection of his formerly combative self. Lodin 
has won, hands down. 

• The success of Lodin over Modius peaked when Lodin 
was able to win away a Conclave. Twenty-three years ago, 
as a last-ditch effort to defeat Lodin, Modius convinced the 




Appendix © 241 




































































m 


Jilll 


work best, direct the prelude so that most of the characters are 
unfamiliar with the other undead inhabitants of the city. It 
shouldn't be too hard to do, for most Kindred live out their 
unlives in near-solitude. 

Character Contacts 

Below are listed five different contacts you can give your 
players during the prelude. They make it easier for the 
characters to become a part of the chronicle. It may be 
difficult to weave these situations into the prelude, but they 
are well worth the effort. These connections are described in 
terms of the type of contact each will be, and you should judge 
each character carefully when you decide what connection to 
use. 

• Romance— After the character first comes to Gary, 
he may realize that he is being watched. Do not present it in 
such a way that the character will be frightened or paranoid, 
but make it seem beautiful, gentle and romantic. It is Allicia 
who is watching him, though at first the character will not 
know her name; he will only see a beautiful woman wearing 
yellow lace. If approached, she will always flee, using her 
Obfuscate to good purpose. She will never speak with the 
character. Eventually, Allicia will reveal herself fully to the 
character — using some dramatic means to do so, perhaps by 


J 


described a number of potential antagonists, both mortal and 
Kindred. Pick the appropriate ones for each character and 
weave them into the chronicle at opportune times. You don’t 
want to be too heavy-handed, though. 

Each prelude should be private (though that may cause 
the players to distrust each other) and should introduce the 
player to the setting. It will give you a chance to implant 
some of the crucial elements of the chronicle into the 
character's persona and the player’s mind before the chronicle 
even begins. Because the chronicle is complicated and 
intrigue-filled, it is almost essential that the players be primed 
to participate in the great “Chicago Game.” 

All the sires of the characters are from Chicago. Lodin 
has forbidden the creation of neonates for the last 18 years, 
so the characters’ sires went to Gary to Embrace those whom 
they chose (for one reason or another). They have gone 
against the wishes of their pnnee, but their crimes are difficult 
to punish. 

Near the end of the prelude, bring the players together 
and let them get to know each other before the chronicle 
actually begins. Each character will know one or two others; 
in this way a network will be formed. 

The characters will have likely lived in Gary for only a 
short time, though some of them certainly could have lived 
here for up to 10 or 15 years. However, for this concept to 































244 0 VAMPIRE: The Masquerade 


simply waiting for him in his haven late one night as he 
returns. She still will not speak, but will make it obvious that 
she wishes to share blood. 

• Charity — The character meets Michael, perhaps by 
noticing a strange lurching figure with a pale aura wandering 
about the city. At first he will be very frightened if the 
character presents herself to him. He may even try to feed 
from her, if he doesn’t realize she is Kindred. Once his fright 
is over, he will make a very interesting friend. Michael’s 
loyalty knows no limits — once he has given his love and 
trust, it can never be broken. However, there is one 
complication. The witch-hunter, Sullivan Dane, has been 
watching Michael for some time, and may begin to follow the 
character as well after seeing her with Michael. Sullivan 
plans to uncover all of the undead of Gary and Chicago (he 
does not realize how many there are) before he hunts them 
down. Once he is led to Modius, his hunt will begin and the 
character may be blamed by Modius. 

• Dangerous Friendship — The characters meet Evelyn 
somewhere in the Wasteland. She is wandering about, 
exulting in her new powers, reveling in her new perceptions 
and desires. She is the childe of Juggler, but will not admit 
such at first. It is presumed that she and the characters will 
become friends, but remember Evelyn has a death wish and 
will lead the characters into much danger. Through Evelyn, 
the characters will eventually meet her brother, Gregory, a 
detective in the Chicago police force. She has broken the 


Masquerade and told him of her condition. Evelyn doesn’t 
realize the magnitude of what she has done; otherwise she 
would tell no Kindred about him. Later on, Special Agent 
Shepard may learn of the characters through his connection 
with Detective Stephens. These are dangerous contacts to 
have, for in times of crisis they may well turn against the 
characters (whom they will use for information). But if a 
friendship can be struck and trust built, they can come in 
handy. Of course, if the characters tell them anything, and 
it is found out, a Blood Hunt will be called against the 
characters for their violation of the Masquerade. 

• Adopted Son —When one of the characters is 
introduced to Modius, really play it out. Make the sire of that 
character very cruel, but play up Modius’ charm and good 
taste (he’s having a good day). The plan is to make Modius 
and the character good friends. Modius’ weaknesses will no 
doubt eventually be revealed, but they should already be 
friends by then, so that the player will understand why 
Modius is so. Modius will adopt the character, treating him 
as if he were his own childe. He will even introduce the 
character to Allicia, hoping the two will hit it off (they won’t 
and Allicia will hate the character). Eventually, Modius will 
tell the character about the history of Gary and Chicago, and 
even reveal his prior defeat. He will tell the character that he 
is weary with his position, and will even suggest abdicating in 
favor of the character, if only Gary’s independence can 
somehow be wrested from the evil Lodin. 


i r 

































• Sinister Secret — This connection is the most diffi¬ 
cult to create, but is likely to be the most interesting. Juggler 
must be the sire of the character (and thus the character must 
be a ninth generation Brujah). However, only he and the 
character know this fact (only the Storyteller and the player). 
Juggler makes it very clear to the character that, no matter 
what, the connection must remain secret: “If any should 
discover that you are mine, you would be destroyed, as would 
I." Modius accepts the character as the childc of a powerful 
but mysterious elder from Chicago, and thus treats the 
character with exaggerated respect (he thinks the character 
is of an early generation). Juggler has threatened to kill the 
character if she reveals him as her sire. Though he will aid the 
character if at all possible, Juggler will not do so if it makes his 
favoritism apparent. 


Antagonists 


There are a number of possible enemies for the charac¬ 
ters. These antagonists are described at the end of the Cast 
of Characters. For the most part they are hunters, individuals 
who track down and slay vampires. However, because this is 
such an intrigue-filled chronicle, they have developed per¬ 
sonalities, so they may not only hunt the characters, but 
interact with them as well. 


Plan 


The chronicle should embroil the characters into deeper 
and deeper conflict with the Chicago vampires. Eventually, 
the characters should be forced to defend Gary from the 
Chicago vampires. While they probably have neither a 
particular love for Modius nor any real desire to keep hold of 
Gary, they have no other place to run. Ultimately, the 
characters must decide whether to defend their home or not. 
The characters and the other vampires of Gary are likely to 
become allies of convenience. Therefore, the Storyteller 
must cultivate a dislike for Chicago in the players. The first 
story will develop this idea (see the story example following). 


At first, the conflict will be minor, but gradually it will 
become more and more brutal. Lodin wants to bring Gary 
completely under his heel and subjugate its fractious inhab¬ 
itants once and for all. Turf wars always spill blood among the 
Kindred, and this one is likely to be especially harsh. If the 
characters can hang on long enough, a Conclave will be 
called by a Justicar to resolve the dispute. The results of such 
a meeting will depend on many different factors, and should 
not be preordained. 

Hopefully, the issues and direction of the chronicle will 
evolve naturally out of the stories. The stories should have 
a great deal of focus and direction, but the chronicle should 
be much more open (in contrast to some of the chronicle 
concepts listed in Chapter Three, which arc often tightly 
focused). 

Motif 

The motif is best described by the word “decay." It is not 
so much decadence that is the trouble in Gary (that’s a 
Chicago problem) as raw entropy. The vampires who inhabit 
Gary are at the end of their rope, and no longer have the drive 
or desire to change their situation. The setting itself is 
incredibly deteriorated, polluted, dilapidated and shattered. 
Nothing in the city is new or in perfect condition. Neither 
the city nor its inhabitants have money, nor do they have 
hope. 

On the surface, some things may seem to be strong and 
vital, in sharp contrast to everything else, such as “Bold 
Prince Modius." But in the end, underneath the veneer, the 
characters will uncover the same decay. 

This will present a chance to point out the decay of the 
real world, using Gary as a grim and exaggerated example. 
The decaying infrastructure, the flight of capital, the corrup¬ 
tion of public officials, the drug epidemic, the low quality of 
education, and the decadence of youth are all themes that 
can be woven into the chronicle at one time or another. 
Certainly the basic setting incorporates such concepts; they 
need only be emphasized through the storytelling. 



































Cast of Characters 


The good die young. Thai is why immortality 
is reserved for the greatest of evils. 

— Daniel Baldwin 


Modius 

Clan: Toreador 
Nature: Conniver 
Demeanor: Cavalier 
Generation: Seventh 
Embrace: 1806 (bom 1765) 

Apparent age: early 40s 

Description: Modius is of slightly less than average 
height, but of above-average build. He looks like Albert 
Einstein, only he wears nicer clothing and has a more stately 
bearing. The hair is about the same. 

Notes: Modius has on many occasions claimed that he 
uses his name, not as an affectation, but as a sigil for his true 
power. He claims to have been active in the mystic subculture 
of Europe following the Renaissance and to have been 
present during the formation of the Arcanum. The truth of 
his past is certainly obscured by his beliefs about what he is. 



Modius is a study in contrasts, for he is not what he 
pretends to be. He lusts after power, yet when he gets it, he 
is terrified that someone will take it away from him. He is the 
aggressive yet cowardly Prince of Gary, and he would be 
happier were he not prince. He feigns interest in the arts and 
indeed has many paintings of value in his mansion, but in fact 
he has lost his love for such things. Though he does not 
realize it, Modius is no longer able to appreciate beauty. 

Though rumors circulate that he has been or is somehow 
associated with Clan Tremere, this remains unproved. He 
keeps two servants at his run-down mansion; both are elderly 
black men whom he Dominates so ruthlessly and completely 
that they are no longer capable of independent action. 

Modius attempts to control Gary with a strong hand. He 
has thus far been able to keep the young malcontents from the 
sporadic bursts of terror and violence that have besieged 
Chicago. However, he does not really have much power to 
exert, and is incapable of actually controlling what occurs in 
his city other than through cajolery and threats. Of the 
Kindred of Gary, only Juggler has learned that so far. 

Roleplaying Tips: Be as gracious, polite and sophisti¬ 
cated as you possibly can, but always add an edge of unspoken 
insult. Conjure the attitude of a bom gentleman — arro¬ 
gance and all. Let some of your nature show through every 
once in a while; simply raise your voice and the players will 
get the message. 



© VAMPIRE: The Masquerade 




































t II II It (Ml <1 (I ft 0 0 ft 1) 1) 

Allicia 


Clan: Toreador 
Nature: Martyr 
Demeanor: Caregiver 
Generation: Eighth 
Embrace: 1938 
Apparent age: late 20s 

Description: Short and of average build, Allicia is a 
dark-haired beauty of apparently mixed European descent. 
Her wide, full eyes are a sharp near-emerald green that shines 
against her pale skin. She has noticeably thin lips, but a wide, 
easy smile. When angered, however, her face becomes a stone 
mask of rage. She wears old-fashioned clothing, seemingly 
more suitable to an older woman, and nearly always wears a 
lace shawl. 

Notes: Other than a few wispy memories of red curtains 
and a smiling woman, Allicia claims to remember nothing of 
her life before her Becoming. To her, life began with her 
Becoming in Gary in the late 1930s, when she was Embraced 
by Modius. For a time, she survived by attaching herself to 
rich older gentleman who easily fell to her intriguing ways 
and beguiling gaze. Her herd was, in fact, the leading indus¬ 
trialists of Gary, who thought of her as their mistress. She 
would still be with them now, if any were still in Gary. 

Allicia does not speak now, and has not spoken for the 
last 50 years. She can speak, but simply has no desire to do 
so. If she falls in love with someone, such as a character, she 
will speak with him, at first with great shyness and difficulty, 
but after a time with amazement and energy. 

She is a familiar figure in the east side of Chicago, and is 
known for being a rich eccentric who refuses to leave Gary. 
She leads a simple existence, drawing on funds she acquired 
before striking out on her own. She maintains connections 
with one or two of the more notable families in Chicago, but 
those too will be sliding away as her lack of aging becomes 
more apparent. Her immortality has become a problem for 
her as she is beginning to realize that she must break her 
remaining connections with the mortal world. The chances 
of discovery have become too great. 

Now she spends much of her time at the mansion of 
Modius, her sire, for whom she retains a strong fondness. He 
reminds her of the men whom she once loved, and she does 
not notice the weak man he is today. As she is Blood Bound 
to him, this is not surprising. Allicia works to make the other 
Kindred of Gary more loyal to Modius. He encourages her to 
pursue her attraction to some of the handsome male new¬ 
comers to the city, telling her “you must open your heart to 
them.’’ She does this by sharing blood with them. After 
three times, they become Bound to her, and through her to 
Modius, but as she is already Bound to Modius, she cannot be 
Bound to them. She knows little of vampire lore, and does 
not realize what she is actually being used for. She shares 
blood because she is desperate for love of any sort, and even 



The Masquerade ' 

Allicia 


_*oooo a 


■ Attributes = 

Social 


*W-t«l 


■ Abilities = 



kxrwtctftt 

•OOOO Bureaucrat*_•OOOO 

••OOO Coa*MMr_ __toooo 

OOOOO Finance_OOOOO 


•OOOO U-_ 


OOOOO MaAnnt_ 


_*«ooo 

_OOOOO 
_ooooo 
_OOOOO 

_OOOOO 

_OOOOO 

OOOOO 


■*«*« 




— — 


_L_. 




1 _L_ 



□□□□□□□□□□ 





Appendix 0 247 































more importantly, for the beauty which has fled her life. 
Allicia is indeed an innocent, though the characters may well 
believe otherwise after a time. 

Roleplaying Tips: Be demure and seductive, but proper 
at the same time. Imagine your grandmother when she was 
a young woman. Evoke the sadness in Allicia with shy eyes 
and wistful looks. She will never look directly into someone’s 
eyes unless she is about to share blood. Since she does not 
speak, you have to portray her frail beauty through your 
acting. 

Juggler 

Clan: Brujah 
Nature: Jester 
Demeanor: Conniver 
Embrace: Unknown 
Apparent age: early 30s 
Generation: Eighth 

Description: Juggler is of slightly below average height 
and lightly built. He has shoulder-length dark blond hair and 
dark gray eyes with green-flecked irises. He has average, 
undistinguished features. Those who remain around him for 
a time may be unnerved by the fact that he never blinks. 

Notes: Juggler has few friends in Gary, but is tolerated 
because of his strange relationship with Modius. It is sus¬ 
pected that Modius, though obviously not his sire, owes 
Juggler some debt that has yet to be repaid (and Juggler may 
in fact be deliberately holding off payment of that debt). 
Neither discuss the subject. 

Juggler can most often be found haunting the streets of 
the Lincoln Park area (inside Chicago proper — a risky 
practice) often attaching himself to late-night revelers, mys¬ 
tifying them with his presence, and then clouding their 
memories of him as sunrise approaches. Nonetheless, there 
are stories among certain circles in the area of “The Party 
Man" who appears suddenly, bedazzles the revelers, and then 
fades back into the night. He has no respect for mortals and 
places little value in their lives. He has been known to maim 
with barely any provocation when a mortal is involved. 
Juggler has little patience with those who hinder him. 

Like many other Kindred, he speaks little of his history. 
His English/American dialect is nearly perfect, but in mo¬ 
ments of rage, he is known to lapse into bursts of raw, 
Neapolitan Italian. 

Juggler has a secret identity. He visits Chicago very 
often and is the leader of the anarchs there. Because he 
himself is from Gary, he has much more leeway than the 
other anarchs, who are all from Chicago. The primary base 
of this group is, in fact, in Gary, in an abandoned steel mill 
located in the Wasteland. Juggler has contacts with a number 
of gangs in the Wasteland and is in the process of subjugating 
their leaders. 


248 0 VAMPIRE: The Masquerade 





































Roleplaying Tips: Be dramatic and bold with every 
action you take. Juggler will be most vivid if you work up a 
strong rivalry between him and the most dominant and 
aggressive character in the players’ brood. Throughout the 
chronicle, you can play and expand upon this rivalry, and it 
can provide new twists to your stories. 


Michael 

Clan: Malkavian 
Nature: Child 
Demeanor: Child 

Embrace: Unknown; presumably within the last 20 years 
Apparent age: late teens 
Generation: Ninth 


Description: Tall and heavily built, Michael’s stringy 
brown hair is worn nearly to his shoulders. His eyes are wide 
and brown, while his teeth are broken and crooked. He walks 
with a limp on his left side, which give him a distinct lurching 
appearance. 

Notes: Michael is a truly sad case. He is apparently 
retarded; there is much speculation that he was Embraced as 
part of some cruel joke and then abandoned. Miraculously, 
he has managed not only to survive but to attract little or no 
attention in the process. 

He resides in the Telton Cemetery in Gary, where he 
sleeps within a mausoleum that bears the name Martin 
Grcenman. Michael, when asked, will point to the name and 
say “Daddy.” There are no records that indicate the Martin 
Greenman who is buried there had anyone in his family 
named Michael. 

Michael is extremely shy and difficult to talk to. He will 
only reveal himself to another Kindred who has spent at least 
a few days lurking in the graveyard looking for him, unless he 
knows the person. Occasionally, Michael attaches himself to 
Allicia and stays in her care. This rarely lasts for more than 
a few months before he wanders back to the graveyard and his 
solitude. He has apparently forged some form of permanent 
emotional bond with Allicia, however, and has been known 
to appear when she is emotionally distraught or on edge (she 
is, in fact, his Regent and he her Thrall). 

He is immensely strong, but does not strike to kill, only 
disable. Additionally, no one in Chicago, not even Allicia, 
has ever seen him hunt. When asked of it, he simply shrugs. 
The characters may at first misunderstand Michael, thinking 
him to be a killer or even a member of the Sabbat. The 
mistaken identity can last for some time. 

Roleplaying Tips: Slant your shoulders and move about 
nervously when you speak, so as to show off the limp. Play up 
your low intelligence, but make sure you let a certain crafti¬ 
ness and wisdom shine through. 




□□□□□□□□□□ 


Appendix 0 249 



























sir 


mm 


> % 
^ v 






Evelyn Stephens 

Clan: Brujah 
Nature: Bon Vivant 
Demeanor: Survivor 
Embrace: A few months ago 
Apparent age: early 20s 
Generation: Ninth 

Description: Evelyn Stephens is of average height and 
light build. She is almond-skinned and wears her dark hair at 
shoulder length. Her eyes are a unique gray-green. 

Notes: Evelyn Stephens met Juggler four months ago in 
Chicago. Somehow, she instinctively knew there was more 
to this man than his outward appearance and manner im¬ 
plied. She pressed him, cajoled him and eventually enticed 
him into revealing his secrets to her. The truth unveiled, 
there was nothing that could stop Evelyn Stephens from 
becoming a vampire. 

The transformation, however, was more traumatic for 
her than Juggler had anticipated. He was careless for a 
moment, and she fled in fear straight to her brother William. 
Juggler retrieved her, but not before her brother learned the 
truth. 

Evelyn is heady with her power. She rarely thinks her 
actions through, and is unconvinced that caution is the best 
possible course for one of the Kindred. Juggler, as her sire, is 



L 


still responsible for her; he is often amused by her actions, but 
his patience is beginning to wear thin. 

Modius does not yet know about Evelyn, but when he 
learns that a childe has been created without his permission, 
his rage will have no bounds. Make sure the characters are 
present when he finds out — it will be most interesting. 

Roleplaying Tips: Be extravagant and bold with your 
hand and body gestures. Don’t let men intimidate you — 
manipulate them back. Assume that you will get your way, 
and then make sure that you do. 

Alexander Danov 

Clan: Nosferatu 
Nature: Judge 
Demeanor: Architect 
Embrace: before 1400(0 
Apparent age: early 30s 
Generation: Seventh 

Description: Tall, with an average build for his height, 
he has a wide face with deep-set gray eyes. They are the only 
part of him that is attractive; otherwise he is a hideous 
creature, with coarse, crinkled skin, a twisted, contoured face 
and only a few tufts of hair remaining. He is an exquisite 
example of a Nosferatu. 



250 © VAMPIRE: The Masquerade 
































Notes: Danov does not speak much of his history, but his 
recollections of his conversation with Lucian before the 
Battle of Tannenburg in 1410 and his references to his ‘youth’ 
at the time point to his Becoming being not long before that. 
He claims not to know his sire, but surmises him to have been 
but an ancilla, and places himself in the seventh generation. 
Nothing has been witnessed to dispute this. 

The name he uses is not his birth name, but one he 
picked up in Russia during the mid-to-late 19th Century. 

Though not formally an elder himself, Danov is well- 
known among the Kindred of North America. During the last 
half-century, he has been moving slowly from city to city on 
what he calls a “simple search for existence.” 

Danov is searching for Golconda, and has come a long 
way. Though he does not proselytize, he will speak about it 
if asked. He will guide those whom he considers to have the 
maturity to reach Golconda, and may eventually give them 
directions on how to reach one of the Inconnu who can take 
them through the Suspire ritual. 

Roleplaying Tips: You are very quiet, but extremely 
watchful. You react to things that happen around you, but in 
a very understated way — just the smallest smile, or quietest 
chuckle. Unless the players are watching you closely, they 
will not see your reaction. At first, they should not realize 
that you are anything but straight-faced. 



4 


Lucian 

Clan: Gangrel 
Nature: Traditionalist 
Demeanor: Director 
Embrace: before 1 A.D. 

Apparent age: late 40s 
Generation: Eighth 

Description: Lucian is a tall, powerfully built man. He 
is broad-shouldered, with square, rugged features. His hair is 
black, speckled with gray, and worn short. He has rich, dark 
brown eyes and a deep, commanding voice. He takes great 
pains to conceal his short tail, furry feet and overly hairy chest 
(results of frenzies through the ages). 

Notes: Lucian is a gniff and sometimes arrogant vampire 
who possesses more than his share of charm. He does not 
speak of his past, except for the fact that he served under the 
Julius Caesar, and that he slew his own sire, whom he 
describes asa“vile creature,” sometime around 1100. Though 
he commands respect, many deride him for his self-admitted 
Kindred-slaying. He has made many enemies in Chicago, and 
has great antipathy for the prince of that city— Lodin. 

Lucian has never accepted the Kindred as a group, and 
strongly objects to clan ties as well as to sects like the 
Camarilla. He deliberately sets himself apart from other 
vampires. He was Embraced in an age when there were few 


MlHRIREL 

The Masquerade " 

Danov 


Phy»k«l Social Mental 

$«ra«*th_•••no Chart mm _•toon P.mydkm '• mvri* 99990 

PaMarttv-•••OO Manipulation_•••00 IntdlUwiKa ••»•• 

*■«*••_••••O Agpearw M-Wry QOOOO \Mt» ••••O 


Takntt 

Acuna_•••OO 

Marine m •••• • 

AilUtlci_ 99000 

B«n»l_••<>oo 

I DoJ*_•••OO 

I Fmpithv_*0000 

I Ini laudation_OOOOO 


^—-Abilities— 

Skill! 

Animal Kan_•••OO 

Drtva_ 90000 

EtlatMtu_atooo 

Firearm • • non 

Mala*_ooooo 

Mualc_•••OO 

_OOOOO 

Sac untv _______ OOOOO 

Staahh Pm** ••••o 

Survival ••••<> 

"-' Advantages= 

IL.ktrocMl, 


-Com 

bat — 

«rw. 

...... 







— 

_ 

_ 


• •••••• ooo 

□□□□□□□□□□ 


□□□□□□□□□□ 


Knowledge 

Bur»du<ra<v______«0000 

Coanpu tar _Wa»« 9999 O 

Ftnanra__OOOOO 

Invntlption_OOOOO 

fa*_OOOOO 

LlnguMIKs_•••OO 

Madkina_OOOOO 

Poult •••OO 

PrMon _•noon 

Srtanca_*»ooo 


Virtue. 

Conocience._ 


Brutal □ 

Hun .| □ 

Injur'd -I □ 

WtundoJ -2 □ 

Mauled -2 □ 

Cnr*W -5 □ 

Inopctohd □ 


































Kindred, and those that existed rarely associated with each 
other. His hatred of other elders is perhaps due to his own 
rather advanced age. Though he is old, his blood is as diluted 
as any recently made vampire 

All in all, Lucian is a fairly decent individual. He seems 
to value compassion and mercy above all other concerns. He 
has involved himself with Kindred affairs to oppose excessive 
cruelty and inhumanity. On those occasions, he has dis¬ 
played the ability to completely wipe the mind of a person, 
leaving him a gibbering husk with the mind of child. 

He is trusted by Modius, but they are not friends. Lucian 
still controls the shipyards and the docks, where the interna¬ 
tional freight ships load and unload materials. Not only is the 
stevedores’ union under his control, but the management of 
the entire operation is under his sway. He owns the Gary 
Export Company, which serves as the primary conveyance 
for vampires traveling to and from Chicago across the Atlan¬ 
tic. He knows much of the comings and goings of many of the 
elders, though it must be mentioned that such travel is very 
rare. 

Roleplaying Tips: Ignore others as much as possible; 
they bore you. When you do deign to acknowledge them, use 
your eyes with great effect, staring coldly at those who say 
foolish things. If the players do not react appropriately to 
this, tell them his Presence is strong, and they must spend a 
Willpower point if they do not want to turn away. 


Hr 


MMRIREUL 

The Masquerade 1 ' 

Lucian 


—■Anributo— —vli^P n 

Pfcy»k*l Social Mental 

S.tenghj**** ftgyyyooo CHtiMaaJM*e«4_00000 Pcwwcton tonV I POOPO 

_ooooo MmU—Uikw ooooo l anflfa M if I OOOOO 

SudhlM T»M***> 00too M** ooooo <Mm _ooooo I 


(Mgi_ooooo 

InUwhUltoq .TEMUM OOOOO 

L*»»Uf»Wp_ .ooooo 

bmotM_OOOOO 


Skills 

AnaaJ Km _Ooooo 

Ort*»__ooooo 

EUOM«.fcei_KstfLooooo 
Flranns ooooo 

M«l« . 1 m—» ooooo 

Musk_OOOOO 

_OOOOO 

SacurtW_OOOOO 

Stadlli_OOOOO 

_OOOOO 


Knowledge 

BurMwmy_OOOno 

Contpulw__OOOOO 

Rkmk*_OOOOO 

limkipiion,_OOOOO 

La» .ooooo 

Ij-Mlnln pwwrosy OOOOO 

MoJkte*_ooooo 

Ow* W**' ooooo 

PeiiUo._ooooo 

So«w pemwry ooooo 



□□□□□□□□□a 


Bcuisoi □ 

Hun .1 □ 

InMtd -| □ 

Wnunfal -2 □ 

NUW -2 □ 

Cri Pfiol -5 □ 

Inc^hdunl □ 


1I □□□□□□□□□□ 


The Hunters 


Here are three different hunter characters for you to 
weave into your chronicle. They will act when the characters 
misstep, so they provide an excellent means to maintain 
ongoing tension and suspense. They certainly encourage the 
players to be exceedingly careful. Iftheyarekilled.it will only 
attract attention to the city, bringing even more hunters. 
However, an “accident” would not be so obvious. 


Sullivan Dane 

Born: 1957, Mapperly, Great Britain 
Occupation: Former Jesuit brother; witch-hunter 
Nature: Loner 
Demeanor: Survivor 
Faith: 8 

Description: Dane is of above-average height and build, 
with lean, sharp features. His dark hair is usually worn short 
in a very utilitarian cut. His eyes are thin and dark green. He 
bears the scars of severe bums across both of his hands and 
forearms; thus, he usually wears gloves. 

Notes: From an early childhood, Dane believed in his 
calling from God. He saw evil as a tangible force in the world, 
one which had to be confronted if it was to be defeated. He 


252 © VAMPIRE: The Masquerade 


i—i—r 

































traveled abroad for a few years upon reaching maturity before 
becoming an applicant to the Jesuit order in 1980. However, 
he never completed his studies. 

It is believed that during the winter of 1982, he encoun¬ 
tered a rogue Caitiff on the streets of Georgetown, in 
Washington D.C. It is more than likely that Dane inter¬ 
rupted the hunting of a vampire who, on the edge of her 
sanity, decided to play with the young novitiate before 
consuming him. Dane proved smarter than she expected. He 
escaped her, hunted her for the following weeks, and finally 
caught her. He learned of her fear of fire and used it against 
her. She was destroyed utterly and he was scarred by the 
flames himself. However, now Dane has no fear of flames. 

He left the order less than a year later, unable to 
convince them of his experience. Clearly, if there was one 
such servant of evil as he had met and destroyed, there were 
others. Saddened, but not angered by the Church’s unwill¬ 
ingness to believe him, he set out to perform the Lord’s will 
himself. However, members of the Inquisition heard of his 
experience and have made him one of them. They have been 
able to give him some support, and have provided him with 
information as well as a number of contacts in different cities. 

Dane is driven, but strongly in control of his faculties. He 
has learned much of the Kindred and their ways, and since 
that fateful encountered has been responsible for the deaths 
of at least six other Kindred. He has sought to prove the 
existence of vampires to the Church, but has been careful 





about concealing their existence from the general public. He 
appreciates full well the chaos that might reign were the 
world to learn of them. 

He is a quiet, careful hunter. Those he stalks are barely 
aware of him at the periphery of their consciousness before he 
strikes. About five years ago he destroyed a pair of Kindred 
in Algeria after a long hunt. It is believed that at the time he 
had with him at least one active member of the Jesuit order 
who witnessed the pair’s activity and ultimate destruction. 
There have been strong rumors of physical evidence: re¬ 
mains, photographs, possibly even videotapes. Since that 
incident, there have been an increasing number of rumors 
that the Holy Office in Rome is embroiled in an internal 
controversy over the incident and the existence of Kindred. 

Dane understands the Kindred and their folklore, but he 
is a man of the 20th century. His monetary resources are 
usually poor, unless he is able to find some benefactor, but 
whenever he can, he uses the weapons and technology of the 
modern world in his hunt. 

He has set up a base in Gary. He will likely begin 
following the characters, shadowing their every move and 
gradually learning more and more about them. The charac¬ 
ters should have opportunities to learn they are being followed, 
but Dane is very careful, so it will be difficult. Dane may have 
gotten in contact with the Inquisition since he has reached 
Chicago, and thus may have significant resources backing 



| t t t V4MPIPF III 

j The Masquerade'" 

Sullivan Dane 

•”* 38 —MtrihtB— r 
P*iy»*cal SuUI Menial 

Strength-••OOO Charisma_•oooo PmaeKkm ••••>> 

DastwWv C4T-MKC WO Manipulation_•••DO Intalllpcoca DllMM— WO 

Sa«inaJXTTa/ 1 «j£**«*o Appear, oca ••OOO Wto 


Taints 

Actio*_••ooo 

Alarums. <*»»•**'«*••••• o 
AtM«hc»>m y*»«xv ••••O 
BrwH_IflftffA ._••••<> 

••••o 

Empathy QOOOO 

Intimidation_OOOOO 

leadership_OOOOO 

Sitteraise Wi «f«OQ 
Ssibterlu(»_OOOOO 


^—Abilities— 

sun. 

Atoms! Kan_ •OOOO 

P*y_••ooo 

Firearm. ppp.p 

M»We .••••O 

Mtasfc ,. tflPVAl ••••• 

Hapalr__ *0000 

Securtiy ••.on 

Smd.h.EiUigO.-..... 

StnMeal_••ooo 

Advantages 


knowledge 

Bureaucracy_ OOOOO 

Computer-OOOOO 

Finance_OOOOO 

InyemlMMton ••••• 

l*»_••OOO 

Mcdiclae_»oooo 

Occul t VAAfl _••••<! 

Wan__ooooo 

ScUnc a _OOOOO 


Self-Control_ 


□□□□□□□□□□ 


Bnmnl □ 

Hun .| □ 
Irfund .1 □ 
N fcn M 4 □ 
MmM 4 □ 
Cripjdnd -5 □ 
li»pwMnl □ 


J □□□□□□□□□□ 

tilWt thscsphneil BscIcmsuMi l V—im 

f i i i f" 


Appendix 0 253 














































r - 


JJjL&MBIREi 


_The Masquerade" 1 

Shepard 


Attributes ■*"=» 3 SJ« < >- 

Ph)*k«l Social Menial 

_Ooooo CKsrUma_oaooo Pwcpriow WAAY. ••ooo 

DaUWHv_OOOOO M w» l tetM _oaooo Intclllsvi**_ UNO 

ooooo Apr«trMH_oaooo Wo _ooooo 


Impuhv 
InOmitUiion _ 
le^...h, P 
Siiunlo_ 


_OOOOO AiHnul Km 

_OOOOO Drive_ 

_OOOOO Enqueue _ 

_OOOOO Firrrim._ 

_OOOOO M4m,_ 

_OOOOO Muuc 

• •<"..1 Repair_ 

_OOOOO Seeuniv_ 

_OOOOO Smith 

_OOOOO Survival 


_OOQOO Bairvam raev OOOOO 

.oaooo Cmapulw_OOOOO 

.OOOOO Fmuik*_.OOOOO 

.ooooo litveowmion Rwe«ep ooooo 

.OOOOO Lou_OOOOO 

ooooo UnguMMa_OOOOO 

.OOOOO MiJntne._OOOOO 

_ oaooo Occuh_ooooo 

OOOOO Polkkr ooooo 

. ooooo Sehncr_ooooo 


-Other Trails- 

’butf PtoUHHK immm* 


hffouad* Vlrtaes 

i _ooooo Corackncc _ooooo 

>eTS ooooo 

££>_ooooo Sdf-Coocrol_ooooo 

_ooooo 

_ooooo Comp -ooooo 


Bn-wl □ 
Hurt .| □ 

lrfurni .| □ 

Wounfcd -2 □ 

Niaial -2 □ 

Crip(4ol -5 □ 

ImpmtdnJ □ 


aaaaaaoooo 

□□□□□□□□□□ 


□□□□□□□□□□ 




him up. Alternately, the plot of a story could be woven 
around preventing Dane from getting in contact with the 
Inquisition. 

Roleplaying Tips: Dane is too cautious to ever speak to 
the characters directly, though he may speak to them by 
telephone in order to receive more information. 

Special Agent William Shepard 

Born: 1958, Detroit 

Occupation: FBI agent 

Nature: Director 

Demeanor: Fanatic 

Description: Of slightly above-average height and aver¬ 
age build, Shepard wears his midnight-black hair short in a 
trim, nearly military cut. His eyes are deep blue and almost 
unnaturally intense. He has a small scar just below his left ear. 

Notes: Shepard knows. How he knows is unclear, but he 
knows. He knows that vampires really exist. He knows they 
are everywhere, especially in Chicago. He knows they are 
evil and must be destroyed. What he doesn’t know is how to 
convince others of this truth. 

As a member of the FBI based out of Chicago, he is 
restricted by the Bureau’s jurisdictional limitations. Offi¬ 
cially, the Bureau can only become involved in a crime if it 
falls within its jurisdiction: kidnapping, bank robbery, of¬ 
fenses involving federal property or employees, interstate 
crime, and other related areas. Shepard is eagerly awaiting 
the day when one of the Kindred steps over that line. Shepard 
will often attempt to involve himself in matters of local 
jurisdiction and continue to hover nearby until warned off. 

Ironically, Shepard is not a member of Special Affairs, 
nor is he even aware of its existence. 

You will want to make Shepard the nemesis of the 
characters, preferably after they have made a major mistake 
and have in some way exposed themselves. It is best if you do 
not work him into the chronicle right away, but do so later. 

If Shepard ever manages to get in touch with Detective 
Stephens, sparks will fly. He will have a knowledgeable ally 
in the local forces who will have the power to call him in. 

Roleplaying Tips: Shepard will speak to the characters, 
but only if he himself is being watched by others. He is very 
professional in bearing, and will not reveal what he is think¬ 
ing to those he interviews. 


0 VAMPIRE: The Masquerade 

































Detective Gregory Stephens 

Born: I960, Chicago 

Occupation: Police detective 

Nature: Cavalier 

Demeanor: Caregiver 

Description: Stephens is taller than the average man 
and has a slightly larger than average build. He is dark- 
skinned, with a square and craggy face, and has close-cut, 
salt-and-pepper hair. His eyes are gray, though the right is 
slightly darker than the left. 

Notes: Stephens is a detective with the Chicago Police 
Department, Homicide Division. He is a careful, cautious 
man who is knowledgeable in the ways of the police and 
Chicago politics. He joined the force in 1980, but he was after 
a job and held no special desire to uphold law and order. His 
time on the force has matured him into the hard-working, 
compassionate detective that he is. 

He is intimately aware of the Kindred. Recently, Juggler 
sired Stephens’ sister Evelyn, at her request. During the first 
few days of her transformation, Juggler was careless and she 
fled to her brother in fear. He has known of her condition 
since then, and is tom tremendously by it. In many ways he 
fears her, and those in the city like her. He loves her dearly, 
and pities her for the horror that she has become. At the same 
time, there is something disquietingly attractive about her 
condition. 

For the last few months, he has been doing everything in 
his power to find a way to “cure” his sister. He has contacted 
all sorts of fanatical organizations, and has even followed his 
sister on occasion to find out more about the other vampires. 
He knows more than any other mortal in the Chicago area 
about the undead. If need be, he will kill to protect his sister, 
or to rescue her from her fate. 

Out of concern for his sister, Stephens has occasionally 
helped various Kindred within the city. He has also been 
known to work against them when his conscience demands 
it. He hates Juggler and has even argued with him on 
occasion. The only thing that has stayed the vampire’s hand 
is an edict by Lodin protecting all members of Chicago’s law 
enforcement community. That has not stopped Juggler from 
severely injuring him on one occasion. 

If he is ever killed in the line of duty, his will stipulates 
that a letter in a safety deposit box be delivered to one of the 
police commissioners, one of Stephens’ classmates from the 
Police Academy. The letter reveals everything that he has 
learned in the past few years. 

Roleplaying Tips: Play the hard-boiled detective to the 
hilt, but don’t bother to make him emotionless —Greg 
involves himself emotionally in everything he does, he just 
doesn’t always show it. 




□□□□□□□□□□ 


































































a warning to the players: you cannot trust anything or anyone 
in Vampire, and things are never as they seem. Intrigue and 
politics pervade every word and motion among the Damned, 
and one must tread carefully. 

The theme of this chapter can be anything you would 
like it to be, including romance. 

Setting 

The prince’s house is an old decaying mansion in the 
center of Gary. Once the home of a steel baron, it was built 
in the most illustrious neighborhood of the growing city. 
However, times have changed and most of the mansions in 
this neighborhood have been divided into apartments. Only 
Modius’ house is left, and it has apparently sheltered Modius 
for quite a while. The passage of time has begun to affect the 
structure; indeed, the roof is near the point of collapse. Snow 
has gathered on the roof, and now water drips through holes 
in the ceilings and is collected in buckets that must be 
constantly emptied and moved by the servants. 

If asked about the state of repairs of the house, especially 
for a Toreador who spends so much time in his haven, Prince 
Modius will display a surprising amount of paranoia regarding 
his safety. The characters will get the impression that Modius 
feels anything as noticeable as a roofing service working on 
the house is enough chaos to draw unwanted attention to his 
undead existence. 

The mansion is quite large, with over 20 rooms. Most of 
them are furnished in what would once have been considered 
the height of fashion—divans, chandeliers, grand piano, and 
leather armchairs — but now they are moth-eaten and 
decayed nearly beyond use. On the main floor is the parlor, 
living room, dining room, kitchen, Modius’ office, and an art 
studio for Modius (which contains a dozen partially com¬ 
pleted paintings, most of them depicting what seems to be a 
Dantesque vision of hell). Modius sleeps in a basement 
bedroom when he sleeps at the mansion at all. He has a 
second haven, located in an old taconite processing plant 
near the lakeshore. At the end of the party, Modius leaves 
directly for that haven. 

The house is guarded by four large, white, tough-looking 
men — all of them stewards from the local unions. Armed 
with revolvers and truncheons, they have been told not to 
speak with the guests. They are under the Domination of 
Modius just as the servants are. They are dressed in work 
boots, jeans, and either flannel or blue work shirts. 

Despite the decay of the surroundings, Modius’ party is 
as elaborate and sumptuous as anything a mortal would 
throw. Delicious-looking appetizers and main dishes are set 
on tables around the edges of the room, safely away from the 
dripping water (even though vampires can’t touch the stuff). 
Classical music plays softly in the background (it’s a Bose 
stereo system) and a dance floor has been prepared for anyone 
who knows ballroom steps — it’s the only sort of dancing 
Modius will allow. 


Appendix © 257 






























^Dialogue 


This scene is a good opportunity to determine more 
about each individual character and his ties to Gary. A 
number of small conversations could take place. Though 
most of the possible interactions between Kindred will be 
dialogue, there is a possibility that some action may take 
place as well. See the scenes below for examples of the types 
of conversations that can be held, and play out whatever 
dramatic moments you think are appropriate. 

• The Hunt 

Before the players arrive at the party, you might want to 
suggest that they hunt for some blood. This is an opportunity 
for characters low on blood to fill up, but you don’t want to 
have to do it for each player. This may well be the players’ first 
experience with leading their characters through the often 
horrific process of hunting mortals. You won’t always want to 
spend a lot of time on such scenes, but the first one at least 
should be fairly detailed and evocative. Refer to the Vessels 
section at the end of the story for suggestions for unusual 
encounters, though you are encouraged to create situations 
that you know will evoke a special response from the player 
or character in question. There is often a scene with some 
sort of violence and mayhem at the beginning of a movie to 
get the audience’s attention. If you think that one of your 
players would like this sort of thing, begin the story with that 
character trying to deal with a botched hunt. Make it very 
exciting, dramatic and tension-filled, not only for the char¬ 
acter involved, but for the players who arc watching (perhaps 
another character could happen across the scene and save the 
day; it’s a good way to connect two characters). It’ll wake up 
the players for sure. 

• Formal Greeting 

Modius greets the characters when they first arrive at the 
mansion. You should roleplay through this introduction for 
each character in turn. Ask the players when they are likely 
to arrive: early, just on time, late, or very late. Have the “just 
on time” characters arrive about ten minutes after the early 
ones, the late characters ten minutes after that, and the very 
late about an hour after that (just before Juggler arrives). You 
will need to adjust these times if you are doing the scene Live- 
Action. 

After being allowed to enter the foyer of the mansion by 
the union guards, characters will be able to approach the 
front parlor. Standing by the door to this room is Modius in 
an out-of-date tuxedo (complete with tails). He shakes 
hands and welcomes the characters to his haven, always 
behaving with extreme courtesy. Remember that the char¬ 
acters met him at least once before when they were first 
released from their sire and presented to him. Perhaps 
something occurred to one of the characters during the 
prelude that you can have Modius refer to here, thus making 


L 


the character more at ease. Once they are done with the 
pleasantries, the characters will be able to interact with the 
other guests at the party. 

• Enigmatic Danov 

A vampire stands in the middle of the dance floor in the 
parlor, smiling vacantly at the wall. This is Alexander 
Danov, a Nosferatu who has been wandering about the 
country for some time. Recently, he has come to the Chicago 
area, and Modius has given him permission to stay in Gary. 
Alexander will welcome the character by name, and will 
mumble something like, “You are new to the game, so 
unsullied. I will enjoy watching you grow tonight.” He will 
be curious about the characters, wanting to know all he can 
about who they are as people, and to that end he asks 
questions about what the character thinks of morality, crime, 
diablerie, Golconda, the Traditions, the anarchs, etc. He is 
more interested in the person than where the person lives or 
what the person does. Use his questions as a way to get the 
players to think more about their characters. 

As Danov speaks with a character, however, it is clear 
that he knows certain things about that character that he did 
not realize that anyone else knew. Hopefully, this will 
unnerve the player and give him respect for Danov. This will 
be repeated with each character in turn, until Danov has met 
them all. 

He will listen in on other people’s conversations, but will 
not start them himself. He understands everything that 
occurs, but will only observe what is going on and will not 
interfere in any way. The characters will either think he is a 
complete nut, or will understand his gentle wisdom. If 
Alexander takes a liking to one of the characters, he may give 
them a warning: "Don’t let yourself be sucked in.” He will 
never explain what he means by this cryptic statement. 

Remember that Danov is on the path to Golconda, so he 
can guide the characters in their quest to reach it (if they so 
wish). This is a long-range objective, of course, but Danov is 
the way you can weave it into the chronicle. 

• Shy Michael 

A character may notice Michael standing in the shad¬ 
ows in the comer of the dining room. This simple-minded 
Malkavian is very reluctant to speak with anyone, and if 
someone makes a Perception + Empathy roll (difficulty 8), 
they will realize that he is very frightened. If they are 
somehow able to question him about it (it will be very 
difficult to do so), they will discover that he thinks he is being 
followed. If the characters go to the front of the house and 
look around, they may notice (on a Perception + Alertness 
roll; difficulty 7) that there is a man across the street sitting 
in a car watching the house. Though the character will not 
yet know who the man is, this is Sullivan Dane, an ex-Jesuit 
witch-hunter who is tracking Modius. If they attempt to 
pursue Sullivan, he will simply drive away. All those who 
reveal themselves to Dane, however, put themselves on his 


258 0 VAMPIRE: The Masquerade 

































target list. If Modius is told about the person watching the 
house, he will become very frightened and may accuse the 
characters of being behind it. He then calls over one of his 
guards, who leaves to go to a back room. Within minutes, 
sirens can be heard, and a little while later there are seven 
police cars in front of the house. You may use this as an 
opportunity to scare the characters, but the police are actu¬ 
ally here on the orders of Modius. The police will stand guard 
outside until the end of the party. This is also Modius’ little 
way of demonstrating his power. 

• Imperious Lucian 

Another vampire can be found in front of the cold and 
empty fireplace in the parlor, sitting in one of Modius' moth- 
eaten armchairs. This is Lucian, who will not even look up 
if a character approaches him. He is clasping his hands 
together loosely, fingertip to fingertip, and is glaring into the 
distance. If a character speaks with him, he will answer her 
questions, but in as few words as possible. If the questions 
become at all personal, he will become very angry and will 
threaten not to speak with them further, but this is an empty 
threat — conversation, even dreary conversation, is better 
than simply sitting there. If he warms up to a character, 
especially if he has a crowd, he may spontaneously launch 
into a story about his past, recounting how he served under 
the Julius Caesar and was forced to slay his own sire. 

Speaking privately, he will warn one of the characters 
about the “treacherous spy from Chicago,” that Danov per¬ 


son. He claims to have evidence against Danov, but will not 's 
reveal it, explaining that by doing so “I would bring the wrath J 
of... (and at this point he whispers)... Lodin, down upon my 
head. I would not live to see the morrow." 

He may also play games with a character whom he has 
taken a dislike too. Taking her off to a private comer, he will 
say: "I would not tell you this if 1 did not truly like you. You 
must be careful. There are things going on which you know 
nothing of." He will then pause, back away lightly, and say 
that it’s too dangerous for him to go further, that “it may be 
better, certainly kinder, if you did not know the truth.” Once 
he is “convinced” that he should tell her what he was going 
to say, Lucian continues: “Modius is a cannibal and practices 
diablerie. He has reached such an age that he requires the 
blood of Kindred to live. He has already eaten his way 
through the last batch, and it will not be long before he begins 
to hunt you as well.” Lucian can’t wait to see what happens 
in this little game of his. 

Later on, Lucian will ask some of the characters if they 
know where J uggler is. He chuckles if they ask about him, and 
will say “This party will liven up a bit when he gets here, just 
you wait.” However, he will not say anything more about the 
matter, telling the characters to be patient. 

• The Trap 

At some point during the party, Modius and one of his 
servants will approach each character and engage in some 
small talk. He will be very polite and friendly, and will be, if 




































r anything, overly unctuous (don’t overplay it; make him 
actually seem like a nice person). However, Modius has a 
secret itinerary — he desires to know the location of at least 
one haven of each vampire in Gary. He explains that he 
wants to be able to contact the character if a time of crisis 
arises. In actuality, this is his means of gaining more power 
over his fractious “subjects.” If the character refuses, Modius 
will grow very angry, and in the future will distrust whatever 
the character says and does. He is paranoid, and all those who 
fail to humor him incur his hatred and fear. If a character lies 
about where his haven is, he will be able to get away with it, 
at least for now. 

• Screwing lip 

If anything occurs at the party to reveal that a guest is 
anything other than human (e.g. a character uses Potence to 
lift something very heavy), Modius will fly into a great rage 
and accuse the "perpetrator of this terrible crime” of breaking 
the Masquerade. Unless he can be quickly calmed down, he 
will order the offending character to drink some of his blood 
(thus bringing her closer to Blood Bond). The other vam¬ 
pires will say nothing at this point, but if the characters attack 
Modius, the others will stand behind his authority, albeit 
reluctantly. Though he may be a fool, he is the prince, and 
for most of the year he leaves the rest of the Kindred alone. 

• The Seduction 

Allicia may be attracted to one of the male characters— 
usually the eldest or most sensitive-looking among them. She 
might approach a character whom she met during the pre¬ 
lude, or another in order to make the first jealous. Early in the 
party, Allicia will watch the character, but she always slips 
away if he stares back or tries to approach her. Eventual ly, she 
will draw near the character, put her hand in his, and lead 
him away from the party. She furtively takes him up the 
servants’ staircase to her room, where a dust-covered, cano¬ 
pied feather bed sits. She closes the door and begins to touch 
the character all over, putting her finger over his lips if he 
attempts to speak. If things heat up, she will begin to cry, 
shedding tears of blood, but she will pantomime that they are 
tears of joy, not of sadness. 

At some point, she may pantomime an offer to exchange 
blood. Not only is this incredibly pleasurable for vampires, 
but it would also make the character much closer to her 
because such a mingling is the first step of three toward 
creating a Blood Bond. However, as she is already Bound to 
Modius, the character is one step closer to falling under the 
control of the prince. However, you should let the character 
regain all of his Willpower because of the intensity of the 
passion, or perhaps even gain a new Willpower point alto¬ 
gether. 

Modius will pretend to be the jealous and protective 
father if he catches the character with Allicia (which he will 
try to do, timing it so he catches them in the act of sharing 
> blood). He does this to get the character to trust Allicia even 

_ 




more, and thus to fall even more under his control. If the 
character and Allicia share blood but two more times over 
the course of the chronicle, Modius will have the character 
under his complete control — or so he thinks. 

This is your chance to add romance to the chronicle, or 
at least try it out to see if you want to include it. If Allicia truly 
falls in love with the character (judge by the of depth of the 
roleplaying), then she will side with the character and not 
with Modius. After a time, because of the depth of the 
feelings involved, she will no longer be Blood Bound to 
Modius, and will thus be truly able to be Bound to the 
character. This will drive Modius into a terrible rage and an 
extended frenzy which will last for weeks. The two lovers will 
have to hide in fear for their existences, since Modius will use 
all of his resources to find them. The other characters will 
probably not be very pleased by it either, believing the 
character to be manipulated (use your storytelling skills to 
make them think this way — secret notes, etc.). It will likely 
become a very Romeo and Juliet-type situation, and could 
end tragically. 

Make the scene in her room as romantic as you possibly 
can. Go slowly, describe details, speak in a soft, low voice, 
and try to be very honest and direct in the way you speak. 
When you finally do look into the player’s eyes (while 
rolcplaying Allicia), do so only briefly, but do your best to 
make it as sincere and sensitive a moment as possible. Don't 
be embarrassed when describing or playing the scene during 
Live-Action. After all, this is only a game. 

• Midnight Toast 

As midnight approaches, Modius calls everyone into the 
dining room and the servants pass glasses of champagne 
around to all the guests. He stands formally before them all, 
and begins to speak of the future glory of Gary, and the rebirth 
of the union movement. He announces that he has managed 
to gather the power to get one of the steel mills to reopen. 
Within a few months, it will open and Gary will be sparked 
by a brief period of growth. 

A few minutes before midnight, Modius looks towards 
the door and suddenly demands to know where Juggler is. If 
no one answers, he says, “That arrogant bastard will be 
punished for his tardiness to my court. I will not tolerate such 
behavior." 

Then one of the servants steps forward with a watch in 
his hands and counts out the last seconds of the year. Modius 
raises his glass and at the stroke of midnight proposes a rather 
strange toast: “May we discover the beauty that we cannot 
share.” 

You might want to describe the grandfather clock strik¬ 
ing out twelve in the background — just something to add a 
little tone to the mood. 

• Crashing the Party 

One of more radical vampires of Gary, Juggler, arrives at 
the party quite late. Juggler crashes the party with a retinue 


260 G VAMPIRE: The Masquerade 
































of mortals in tow. Thednink mortals immediately descend on 
any available females and start dancing. Juggler scoops up 
Allicia for the same purpose. He turns off the classical music 
that Modius was playing and inserts a hardcore CD which he 
brought with him. (At this point you should actually change 
the music to punk or heavy metal — Black Flag or the 
Butthole Surfers would be appropriate.) 

Modius, who was becoming very passionate in a diatribe 
against modem art, will be taken completely unaware. After 
a long moment of stunned silence, he will react by demanding 
that the mortals be killed for such a breach of the Masquer¬ 
ade. However, he does not even suggest that Juggler be 
punished. He’s terrified that the mortals might remember the 
house and what they saw going on inside of it. Keep in mind 
how paranoid Modius is of discovery. 

It will be up to saner minds (i.e. the characters) to suggest 
that the mortals not be killed, but simply mind-wiped. Any 
character that participates in such wholesale slaughter of 
human life should definitely roll for loss of Humanity. You 
may wish to play up the Modius-Juggler conflict even more, 
but remember that though Modius is the prince, he treats 
Juggler with respect and fear, more like an equal than a 
subordinate. 

Juggler will only laugh at the debate and will take no part 
in it. Once some decision has been made, he stands back with 
a smile and lets the events unfold as they will. Juggler will not 
prevent the execution of the mortals, though he will not 
allow Evelyn to be harmed (see below). 

Mingled with the humans is Evelyn, the woman Juggler 
Embraced without the permission of Modius. If one of the 
characters is also his neonate, Juggler may give him a quick 
glance, as if to say "don't say a word.” During the exchange 
between Modius and Juggler, Evelyn will approach one or 
two of the characters with naive curiosity and perhaps 
accidentally mention who her sire is. 

Juggler is openly contemptuous of Modius as well as most 
of the other guests, whom he calls “the little slaves." He asks 
one of the characters (presumably his “rival”) why he is 
present. Before they can answer, he will loudly announce, 
“You groveling Thrall. Do you not see past this meaningless 
ritual? It is the pathetic court of a windbag, senile, has-been, 
weakling prince.” He may speak further with the other 
characters, seemingly interested in who they are, but every¬ 
thing he says is directed more toward Modius than anyone 
else. The language he uses is bold and direct, and he will pull 
no punches. 

• Evelyn’s Presentation 

Later on, after the excitement dies down, Juggler pre¬ 
sents his childc to Modius. Suddenly turning off the music, 
Juggler announces to the others that there is “another guest 
whom you should all welcome to this gathering — mychilde, 
Evelyn." He then turns to Modius with a sardonic smile, and 


says, “Please, dear Master, why so glum ? Is she not exquisite ? 
Such well-sculpted beauty is so rarely found these days, and 
she has a spirit to match!” 

Modius will not react well. He will in fact be outraged, 
but in the end he will do nothing. After yelling and making 
threats for several minutes, he will suddenly grow quiet and 
say simply, “I trust that you have taught her of the Tradi¬ 
tions.” Having said that, he will say nothing more on the 
subject, and will go back to his speech on the decadence of 
modem art. 

As for Evelyn, she acts without fear and with great 
boldness, introducing herself to the others. She is curious 
about who everyone is, why they are here, and what sort of 
people they are — it is all, obviously, very new for her. After 
a time, she even goes over to Modius and speaks with him. 
Once she has done so, Juggler will shout, “Ah, you have 
welcomed her. She is one of us now." 

• Annabelle’s Arrival 

Late into the party, a message arrives from the Prince of 
Chicago. The letter is delivered by a woman of surpassing 
beauty. She is in fact Annabelle Triabell, one of the elders 
of Chicago, as well as an old friend of Modius (they are of the 
same clan). Before she enters the house, one of the servants 
comes in to tell Modius that she has arrived. Modius will look 
extremely surprised, and perceptive characters (Perception 
of 4 or more) will notice a look of terror flash across his face. 
Enterprising characters who look out one of the windows in 
the front of the house will notice a long white limo parked in 
front, and may even see Annabelle delicately step from it. 

Once he learns that Annabelle has arrived, Juggler 
leaves the party, taking Evelyn with him. Exiting via the 
back door, they say goodbye to no one, and try to make as 
little fuss as possible in doing so — in direct contrast to the 
way they entered. 

Once Annabelle enters the room, it is clear that she is an 
exceptionally powerful woman. She looks about her at the 
guests, smiles, and gives her coat to one of Modius' servants. 
She then step over to Modius and patiently waits until he 
remembers to kiss heron the cheek. Once he has done so, she 
grasps his arms and leads him into his office, smiling politely 
at everyone else as they leave. A few minutes later, after some 
muffled shouts and exclamations coming from within (and 
an uneasy silence in the other rooms), they emerge. Modius 
is yelling wildly and clutching a letter written on a piece of 
parchment paper. “How dare he command me in this way! 
I will not tolerate it, JusticarornoJusticar.” Annabelle, who 
comes out just behind him, replies, “His language is some¬ 
what strong, but you must meet him halfway.” They continue 
to talk back and forth about the letter, letting the players 
know that it is from Lodin and that it makes some sort of 
demand. 

It should be obvious to the characters that Annabelle 
uses her influence with Modius to diminish his anger at the 
ultimatum from Lodin. Modius will vehemently protest the 
demands of Lodin, but will gradually settle down and tell the 


Appendix © 261 


































0 <1 ft I) ft 0 II i II II II I) ft I) 

characters that they must Present themselves to Lodin. If the 
characters interrupt Modius’ conversation with Annabelle, 
he will become very angry and will use the anger as an outlet 
for his embarrassment. 

Eventually, Annabelle convinces him to return with her 
to his office, where they remain for some time. Before they 
do so, however, Modius excuses himself and politely requests 
that everyone make themselves at home, and wait “but a few 
moments” for him to return. The characters will have about 
15 minutes to spend discussing what occurred. If anyone tries 
to leave, one of the servants will fetch Modius, who will 
strongly “request” that the character stay. 

• Announcement 

When he finally emerges from his office, Modius makes 
an announcement (Annabelle leaves before he does so). He 
tells his guests that he is “rejecting this pile of rubbish, these 
contemptible demands," and that he will stand strong against 
the tyranny of Lodin. Then he tells them that he wishes the 
“neonates among us,” to travel to Chicago and deliver a reply 
to Lodin. Looking quite fierce, Modius explains that he will 
not tolerate any interference in the affairs of his city. 

He offers to make the characters “my emissaries to 
Lodin, to make it clear to him that I am not his servant." No 
non-player vampire will respond to the offer, so maybe the 
characters will decide to accept. If they do not, Modius will 
request that they do so. If they still refuse, he will threaten 
them, cajole them, bribe them and will in fact do anything to 
get them to go to Chicago (he has no choice). He will give 
the leader of the group a sealed letter to present to Lodin. If 
it is ever opened, the characters will discover it to contain 
only empty platitudes and excuses, the meaning of which is 
not exactly clear. 

To assist his official representatives, Modius supplies the 
“volunteers" with another letter requesting safe passage for 
his official emissaries. Modius assures the characters that this 
paper will allow his representatives to reach Lodin without 
any trouble — he is not simply mistaken, he knows full well 
that the letter is worthless. 

Before they leave, however, Modius will bring one of the 
characters over to the side and say privately to him or her: 

“You understand of course, for the sake of formality, that you 
may need to Present yourself to him. You do see, don’t you 
—a formality. In his deluded mind, he sees you as his subjects, 
and requires you to Present yourselves to him just as you were 
Presented to me. It probably won’t do any harm to humor 
him — after you deliver my letter, of course.” 

• Words of Advice 

Before the characters leave, Lucian will approach one of 
the characters privately and tell him or her that if they have 
any troubles in Chicago to go to the Succubus Club. He 
| ii jji'iTi jju describes to them an old friend of his who frequents it, a 
vampire named Sir Henry Johnson. While he is explaining 
this, however, Modius intervenes and tells the characters 





The Masquerade 

ANNABELLE 


4 


- Ulrifcatrc - 






_*#ooo C t im n ■■wrw ••••o 

•••OO MmI^h— '^i —mo 


_•••OO 

•••oo 

•••OO 



t Traks- 


• ••••••OOO 

□□□□□□□□□a 


a 
■i o 
-i a 
4 a 

j a 
4 o 
a 


i i i □□□□□□□□□□ j_ \a 


II I 

262 0 VAMPIRE: The Masquerade 


i i r 

































that the Succubus Club is “nothing but the hangout for the 
dregs of our kind. 1 1 is for those who wish to pretend they have 
spirit, when in truth they do not." However, it is the only real 
lead the characters have. If they do not go to the Succubus 
Club, they will not know where to go at all. 

Characters 

See the previous section for details of the Kindred of 
Gary. Annabelle, an elder from Chicago, is described here. 

Annabelle Triabell 

Clan: Toreador 
Nature: Bon Vivant 
Demeanor: Bon Vivant 
Embrace: 1722 
Apparent age: early 30s 
Generation: Sixth 

Description: Of average height and slightly above- 
average build, she has stylish shoulder-length ash-blond hair 
and wide, sky-blue eyes. She has a large, full mouth and the 
bearing and appearance of a fashion model. 

Notes: Annabelle is the eldest of the Toreador clan in 
Chicago, though you would never know it by her actions. She 
is a hedonist, living in the public eye under the name Ellen 
Stanley-Greer as the wife of John Greer, publisher of the 
Sentinel syndicate of newspapers. Greer is an older man, in 
his late 60s, who is apparently completely under her control. 
The two have been married since the early '60s, and the local 
media has begun to comment on the apparent agelessness of 
Mrs. Greer. 


She knows no other life except excess. Her existence is 
a decadent whirlwind of action and sensation. Many of the 
younger Kindred in Chicago spend at least a short time in her 
retinue, experiencing things quite literally undreamed of by 
mortal man. Lodin is continually at odds with her over her 
behavior and the constant threat of a media scandal. 

She is a friend of Modius, the Prince of Gary, who is quite 
flattered with her attentions. It is probably an attempt on her 
part to create friction between the two princes, and thus to 
allow her a greater measure of power. She manipulates both 
in order to increase the tension between them as well as 
decrease it. None know her true motivations. 

Afterward 

Upon completing Baptism by Fire, you have three 
options. First, you may feel that the party was a fitting 
conclusion to your first Vampire chronicle. Things may not 
have gone right and the players may have had enough of 
Gary. You can start over by giving everyone a chance to 
make up new characters now that they know what is going 
on. This also gives you a chance to create your own unique 
chronicle, as well as stories of your own. 

Your second option is to continue the story by creating 
your own ideas on where it will go. There are any number of 
different subplots you can follow; indeed, much of the 
chronicle could involve following up each and every subplot 
presented above. 































Index 


Brawl 148, 222 
Broods 24 
Brujah 46, 126 
Bureaucracy 153 


Bn 

'W. A 


Ability 80, 83, 90 

Accounting, The Tradition of the 36, 39 

Acting 148 

Action 75, 83 

Advantages 80, 90 

Aggravated Wounds 191 

Aiming 226 

Alertness 148 

Allies 174 

Anarch 32 

Ancilla 32 

Animal Ken 151 

Animalism 156 

Antagonists 106, 236 

Antediluvian 32 

Appearance 93, 146 

Arcanum, The 49 

Archetypes 140 

Architect (archetype) 141 

Armor 229 

Armor Chart 229 

Athletics 148 

Attack 223 

Attribute 80, 83, 88, 145 
Aura Colors 159 
Aura Perception 159 
Auspex 158 
Automatic Success 78 
Awakening 212 

Awarding Experience Points 183 
Awe 165 


Backgrounds 91, 174 
Beast, Nature of the 27 
Beast, Shadow of the 168 
Becoming, The 26 
Bite 227 
Blood Bond 203 
Blood Point Chart 179 
Blood Pool 80,92, 179 
Blood Rage 169 
Bloodlines 45 
Body Slam 228 
Bon Vivant (Archetype) 141 
Botch 83 

Bravo (Archetype) 141 


Caitiff 32, 47 
Camarilla 42 
Caregiver (archetype) 142 
Cauldron of Blood 169 
Celerity 161 
Characters 23, 83, 105 
Charisma 145 
Child (archetype) 142 
Childe 32 

Chronicle Archetypes 107 
Chronicle, Elements of a 104 
Clans 80, 88, 125 
Clans, Other 47 
Claw 228 
Climbing 212 
Cloak of Shadows 163 
Cloak the Gathering 164 
Combat 80, 222 

Command the Wearied Mind 161 

Communicate with Kindred Sire 170 

Complications 78 

Composition 220 

Computer 153 

Concept 80, 87 

Conclave 42 

Conditioning 162 

Conflict 112 

Conformist (archetype) 142 
Conniver (archetype) 142 
Conscience 178 
Contacts 93, 174 
Courage 178 
Cover 225 

Creating a Chronicle 103 
Creating a Story 111 
Credibility 218 
Cryptology 221 
Curmudgeon (archetype) 143 


Damage 224 
Decision Stage 210 
Deflection of Wooden Doom 170 
Degrees of Success 77 
Demeanor 80, 88, 140 
Destruction, The Tradition of the 40 
Deterioration 195 
Deviant (archetype) 143 


264 0 VAMPIRE: The Masquerade 































Devil’s Touch 170 
Dexterity 145 
Diablerie 187 
Dice Pool 83 
Difficulties 77 
Director (archetype) 143 
Disciplines 90 
Disease 195 
Dodge 149, 223 

Domain, The Tradition of the 36,38 
Dominate 163 
Downtime 83 
Drama 115 

Drawing out the Beast 158 
Dread Gaze 165 
Dream Sequence 66 
Drive 151 


Elder 32 
Elysium 35 
Empathy 149 
Entrancement 166 
Equipment 93 
Etiquette 151 
Examples of Rolls 81 
Experience Points 80, 182 
Extended Actions 78 


Facedown, The 218 
Faeries 240 
Fame 174 

Fanatic (archetype) 143 
Fast Talk 217 
Feats of Strength 213 
Final Death 192 
Finance 154 
Finishing Touches 92 
Firearms 151 
Firearms Table 227 
Firefight 222 

Firefight Complications 225 
Flank and Rear Attacks 227 
Flashbacks 64 
Fledglings 26 
Foreshadowing 65 
Forgery 220 

Forgetful Mind, The 162 
Form of Mist 168 
Fortitude 165 
Freebie Points 93 
Frenzy 195 
Full-Auto 226 


Gaining Blood Pool 179 
Gaining Humanity 184 
Gallant (archetype) 143 
Gangrel 46, 128 
Generation 80, 175 
Generations Chart 140 
Ghosts 240 
Ghouls 51, 238 
Gleam of Red Eyes 167 
Golconda 188 
Gothic-Punk 29 
Government, The 48 
Grapple 228 


Healing 191 
Health 80,83, 179 
Health Levels 179 
Heightened Senses 158 
Herd 176 

Hierarchy of Sins 200 
Hospitality, The Tradition of 36, 39 
Humanity 80,92, 178,184 
Hunger, The 27 
Hunting 213 


Immobilization 224 
Inconnu, The 45 
Influence 176 
Initiative 210, 222 
Inner Circle, The 42 
Inquisition, The 49 
Intelligence 147 
Interrogation 218 
Intimidation 149 
Investigation 154 
Investment 220 


J ester (archetype) 143 
Judge (archetype) 143 
Jumping 213 
Justicars 43 


Knowledges 153 


Appendix 
































r l 


Law 154 
Leadership 150 
Lextalionis 40 
Linguistics 155 
Live-Action 24, 66 
Loner (archetype) 144 
Lupines, The 50 


Magi 51, 240 

Majesty 166 

Malkavian 46, 130 

Manipulation 146 

Martyr (archetype) 144 

Masquerade, The Tradition of the 36, 38 

Medicine 155 

Melee 151, 222 

Melee Weapons Table 228 

Mental Attributes 147 

Mentor 176 

Mesmerize 162 

Methuselah 32 

Mood 115 

Mortals'Healing Times 191 

Motif 104 
Movement 225 
Movement of the Mind 173 
Multiple Actions 209 
Multiple Opponents 227 
Multiple Shots 226 
Music 152 


Nature 80, 88, 140 
Neonate 32 
Nosferatu 46, 132 


Obfuscate 165 
Occult 155 
Oration 218 
Other Knowledges 155 
Other Skills 152 
Other Talents 151 


Parallel Story 65 
Paths (Thaumaturgy) 173 
> Perception 147 


Performances 218 
Personality Archetypes 140 
Physical Attributes 145 
Plot 114 
Points 83 
Politics 155 
Possession 162 
Potence 167 
Prelude, The 97 
Premise 241 
Presence 167 
Primogen 35 
Prince, The 32 

Progeny, The Tradition of the 36, 39 

Props 67 

Protean 169 

Psychic Projection 160 

Pursuit 216 


Quirks 93 


Raising Disciplines 184 
Range 225 
Rating 83 

Rebel (archetype) 144 
Rebirth 186 
Recollection 220 
Recovering Willpower 177 
Remorse 200 
Repair 152, 214 
Research 219 
Resisted Actions 78 
Resolution 224 
Resolution Stage 210 
Resources 176 
Retainers 93, 176 
Rituals 171 
Roleplaying 22 
Rotschreck 198 
Rule of One 77 


Sabbat, The 44 

Sacred Haven, defense of the 169 

Safecracking 221 

Scenes 83, 208 

Scheme 106 

Science 155 

Score 83 

Search 221 

Sects 41 


3 } 


VAMPIRE: The Masquerade 
































Security 152 
Seduction 217 
Self-Control 178 
Setting 105 
Shadowing 214 
Sharing of Spirits 158 
Simple Action 83 
Skills 151 
Sneaking 214 
Soak 224 

Social Attributes 145 
Social Distinctions 31 
Song of Serenity 157 
Spark of Life 93 
Specialties 93 
Spirit's Touch, The 159 
Spray 226 
Stake 195, 227 
Stamina 145 
Status 177 
Stealing 216 
Stealth 152 
Story Archetypes 116 
Storyteller 23, 59, 83, 86 
Storytelling 21 
Storytelling, Advanced 64 
Streetwise 150 
Strength 145 
Stunt Driving 215 
Subterfuge 150 
Summon 166 
Sunlight 194 
Survival 152 
Survivor (archetype) 144 
Sweet Whispers 156 
Swimming 215 
Symbolism 66 
System 83 


Taking Actions 211 
Talents 148 
Targeting 226 


Taste for Blood, A 168 
Teamwork 78 
Telepathy 160 
Thaumaturgy 171 
The Beckoning 156 
The Lure of Flames 173 
Theft of Vitae 169 
Theme 112 

Thousand Faces, Mask of the 164 

Three-Round Burst 226 

Time 75 

Toreador 47, 134 

Torpor 195 

Track 220 

Traditionalist (archetype) 144 

Traditions, The 37 

Trait 83 

Tremere 47, 136 

Troupe 83 

True Faith 238 

Turns 208 


Unseen Presence 164 
Using Blood Pool 178 


Vampires 238 

Vanish from Mind’s Eye 164 
Ventrue 47, 138 
Virtues 91, 177 
Visionary (archetype) 145 


Wake with Morning’s (Evening’s) Freshness 169 

Weather Control 173 

Werewolves 239 

Willpower 80, 83, 92, 179 

Witch-Hunter 47, 237 

Wits 147 

Wolf Claws 167 































Last Words 

I sit atop Stone Mountain today and think of 
all the changes of the last year. 1 am not who I was 
when I wrote this book. I have been changed by it. 

I can scarcely believe what has happened since 
the first printing of Vampire. The first surprise was 
that people actually liked what I had created. The 
second was that others shared my love of the 
vampire. Our numbers are legion. 

The White Wolf game studio has also changed 
this year. Success has enabled us to say and do as 
we wish, and more and more people seem to be 
listening. The word is getting out. We have some 
bold plans for the future. 

Only the technology of the portable computer 
and desktop publishing allows me to do this (God 
bless Macintosh). It is a miracle that I am able to 
typeset directly into the pages of this book from my 
aerie. A revolution has occurred in the last five 
years, and no one seems to notice. Literally anyone 
can publish in this age of silicon. The people nave 
the power to speak again. We don’t need the media 
to tell us how to think. 

It is because of you that these words are being 
written. Your support created this company, and 1 
hope that we remain worthy of that support. You 
need to let us know when we stray from the path. 

I love to sit atop this granite mound, because 
here I have vision. Here I can see beyond the petty 
grievances and ambitions of daily life. I can see 
more clearly. What you hold in your hands is the 
result of nearly a year of naked obsession. It is the 
product of sweat and passion, agony and exulta¬ 
tion. I hope that you like what we have done with 
it. 

As I look out over the lakes and church steeples, 

I can think only of the night. 1 can think only of 
the night breed. They live in my dreams. 

Nature Red, In Tooth 
and Claw 

Emotional numbing, mass addictions, low self-esteem, 
depression, apathy, anomie, stress, all the modem illnesses 
are symptoms of the absurd and tragic struggle to bridle 
instinct. Guilt is engendered by the imperfect ability of 
humans to suppress the inner rage of the repressed id. 

Adam Parfrey, 
Apocalypse Culture 

k_ 


You cannot ignore emotion. You cannot sup¬ 
press instinct. You cannot repress evil. The levee 
fills all too quickly, and the flood waters never stop 
adding to the reservoir. No dam is free of cracks 
and all barriers must eventually break. 

You must learn to harness the dark waters 
instead of damming them up. When the flood 
eventually comes, it will destroy everything you 
have struggled to build. 

Evil must be checked, but it cannot be ignored. 
Instinct cannot be halted, but it can be modified, 
redirected. Evil must be harnessed before it over¬ 
comes. You must somehow come to terms with 
evil, accept it and understand it, and then, finally, 
overcome it. 

Deep in all of us resides a demon, or so the 
medieval folk believed. Taken as a metaphor, it 
speaks volumes about the human condition. There 
is evil in us all. 

Vampire was written in order to discover the 
nature of Evil. Evil most certainly does exist, but 
it is not as cut and dried as some would have us 
believe. The age-old dichotomy of good and evil, 
black and white, is false. 

Vampire is an exploration of evil, and as such, 
it is unsafe. You are digging deep when you play 
this game. This game was not meant to be comfort¬ 
able — it was designed to provoke and inspire. It 
was designed to make you think and feel, to dream 
and aspire. 

Most human evil is a perversion of the territo¬ 
riality, aggression, and herd programming built 
into our unconscious. Unharnessed aggression 
leads to war, and unmodified herd mentality leads 
to the Inquisition. 

We are half angel and half demon. Our reason¬ 
ing capacity and self-awareness put us on a 
ractically divine level, yet our animal bodies and 
iological needs chain us to evil reality. 

Modern culture provides so much security 
against our primal fears, against nature itself, that 
we are cut off from our true selves. The miraculous 
products of technology have eliminated many of 
the basic terrors of existence (like being eaten), 
but have done nothing and can do nothing to 
eliminate our inner demons. And these unchecked, 
unharnessed inner demons are perverting us. 

Explore your own inner evil, discover that 
which makes you unclean, and then cleanse your 
sores. Become good in spite of yourself. Fight 
against your instincts. Take the high road. 



268 © VAMPIRE: The Masquerade 
































Inspiration 


What the imagination seizes as beauty must be truth 
— Whether it existed before or not. 

— JohnKeats, 

“Woman When I Behold Thee” 

Many people inspired Vampire: The Mas¬ 
querade, both those whom I have had the privilege 
of knowing and those whose work 1 have heard, 
watched or read. The efforts and creativity of 
many created this game; no one person could ever 
create anything of this scale. 

Each of us takes the ideas and thoughts of 
others and passes them along. We may evolve the 
idea, concept or seed, but we can never claim sole 
ownership. What we call creativity is actually 
evolution. Creativity is concealing one’s sources. 
If one has changed an idea enough so that its 
source is concealed, the idea is perceived as avant- 
garde. 

Below I have listed the people and works that 
have inspired the creation of this game. Check 
them out, and nurture your imagination. 

Movies 

Near Dark, Vamp, The Hunger, Nosferatu 
(original silent movie), Dracula (original talkie), 
Dracula (Coppola’s newest) Lost Boys, Blue Vel¬ 
vet , Dangerous Liaisons, Rear Window, Casablanca, 
Alien, Aliens, Blade Runner, Highlander (but not 

ID 


Music ^ 

The Cure, U2, New Order, Morrissey, Red Hot , 

Chili Peppers, The The, XTC, Gypsy Kings, Philip 
Glass, Public Enemy, Sisters of Mercy, The Clash, 
The Doors, Jane’s Addiction, Siouxsie and the 
Banshees, Sting, L7, Prince, Midnight Oil, REM, 
Pink Floyd, Mike Oldfield, Placido Domingo, Enrico 
Caruso 

Novels 

Interview with the Vampire,The Vampire Lestat, 
Queen of the Damned, The Body Thief, Anne Rice; 
Dracula, Bram Stroker; I Am Legend, Richard 
Matheson; Those Who Haunt the Night, Barbra 
Hambly; Some of Your Blood, Theodore Sturgeon; 

The Vampire Tapestry, Suzy McKee Charnas; The 
Hunger, Whitley Streiber; The Delicate Dependency, 
Michael Talbot; The Light at the End, John Skipp 
and Craig Spector; Lost Souls, Poppy Z. Brite; Sand¬ 
man, Neil Gaiman; Time Enough for Love, Robert 
Heinlein; East of Eden, John Steinbeck 

Games 

Scruples, Illuminati, Cosmic Encounter, Call of 
Cthulhu, Ars Magica, Runequest, Pendragon, 
Shadowrun, Gurps Horror, Corps 

Thinkers 

Carl Jung, Joseph Campbell, Milan Kundera, 
Herman Hesse, Albert Camus, P.B.Shelly, Mercea 
Eliade, and (of course) Vaclav Havel 


TZX! 


ft 1 /Ae— 


September 12, 1992 


Appendix 0 269 
































r 

Name: 

Player 

Chronicle: 


Physical 

Strength_• O O O O 

Dexterity_• O O O O 

Stamina_• O O O O 


Talents 


The Masquerade™ 

Nature: Generation 

Demeanor Haven: 

Clan: Concept: 

— Attributes — 

Social /He 

Charisma_#0000 Perception_ 

Manipulation_#0000 Intelligence_ 

Appearance_ #0000 Wits_ 

— Abilities — 

Skills Knov 


Mental 


Perception_ 

Intelligence, 

Wits_ 


.•OOOO 
.•OOOO 
• OOOO 


Knowledge 


Acting 

OOOOO 

Animal Ken 

OOOOO 

Bureaucracy 

OOOOO 

Alertness 

OOOOO 

Drive 

OOOOO 

Computer 

OOOOO 

Athletics 

OOOOO 

Etiquette 

OOOOO 

Finance 

OOOOO 

Brawl 

OOOOO 

Firearms 

OOOOO 

Investigation 

OOOOO 

Dodge 

OOOOO 

Melee 

OOOOO 

Law 

OOOOO 

Empathy 

OOOOO 

Music 

OOOOO 

Linguistics 

OOOOO 

Intimidation 

OOOOO 

Repair 

OOOOO 

Medicine 

OOOOO 

Leadership 

OOOOO 

Security 

OOOOO 

Occult 

OOOOO 

Streetwise 

OOOOO 

Stealth 

OOOOO 

Politics 

OOOOO 

Subterfuge 

OOOOO 

Survival 

OOOOO 

Science 

OOOOO 


Disciplines 


=Advantages= 

Backgrounds 


Virtues 


OOOOO 

OOOOO 

Conscience 

• OOOO 

OOOOO 

OOOOO 



OOOOO 

OOOOO 

Sell-Control 

•0000 

OOOOO 

OOOOO 



OOOOO 

OOOOO 

Courage 

• 0000 


-Other Traits* 


.00000 

.00000 

.00000 

.00000 

00000 


Combat 


Weapon 

Difficulty 

Damage 








-a. . Humanity ■■ »* . — 

0000000000 

■ ■ i" Willpower - 

0000000000 

□□□□□□□□□□ 


Health 


Bruised □ 

Hurt -1 □ 

Injured -1 □ 

Wounded -2 D 

Mauled -2 d 

Crippled -5 d 

Incapacitated □ 


-Experience 


— » ■ — Blood Pool-_ 

> □□□□□□□□□□ 

2\ Attributes:7/5/3 Abilities: 13/9/5 Disciplines^ Backgrounds^ Virtues:7 Freebie Points: 15 (7/5/2/1) 
































