Contents 
The Sacred Ways 4 
The Prophecy of the Phoenix 15 
Book One 
Chapter One: Introduction 20 
Chapter Two: Setting 28 
Chapter Three: Storytelling 50 
Book Two 
Chapter Four: Rules 64 
Chapter Five: Character Creation 72 
Chapter Six: Traits 84 
Book Three 
Chapter Seven: The Spirit World 162 
Chapter Eight: Systems 186 L 
Chapter Vine: (Drama 204 
Appendix 250 

Contents 3 

EEE am, Zu. 


acred Ways 


The wolf was coming for him again. Brian knew that this 
time he would not escape. It was in the house. It was coming 
to his bedroom. Brian ran down the stairs, his pajamas 
ripping on the doorway. Blood covered his hands, but he 
didn't know why. 

He ran out — through the front yard, through the gate, 
into the forest. He kept running, his breath making steam- 
ing puffs in the night air. The breeze was cold. The forest 
was menacing, all prickly and dark. Snow-covered roots 
tore at his feet; thorns ripped at his clothes. 

The wolf was gaining on him. He knew it would catch 
him this time — all the other chases were just dreams, but 
this was real. He glanced over his shoulder and suddenly 
knew what the froth on its jaws meant. It was hungry; he 
could see the eyes of the beast lusting for him. 

Somewhere up ahead, a howl shattered the stillness of 
the forest. The moon suddenly floated from behind a cloud 
and into view, half-full, looming above him, shedding its 
light on the snow. Wolves’ paws made padding sounds as 
they crunched through the snow. What was that? White 
moving against black up ahead? Darkness. Wolf's eyes? 

Brian turned as the wolf leaped atop him. Heavy claws 
pressed into his chest but did not break the skin. He fell 
back, his breath knocked from him. The wolf stood over 
him, its huge jaws open. Brian whipped his neck from side 
to side, looking wildly about for help. 

The wolf bit his neck once, lightly, then again, harder. 
Fangs pierced the skin. Blood dribbled out. Brian whim- 
pered. 

The wolf let go and looked deep into his eyes. 

"You've come..." it said, recognizing Brian for the first 
time. 


Brian awoke. Cold sweat stained the ancient quilt that 
covered him. He still wore his pajama bottoms, but his 
bloody nightshirt had vanished. A chill ran through him as 
he realized how cold it was. Looking down from a loft, he 
saw an old Native American man crouched over a 
woodstove, stoking it. The man's long braids were gray- 
white, and although he appeared to be very old, he moved 
with a grace that belied his age. Oak burned in the stove, 
popping and cracklingassap hit the fire. Something smelled 
good. His eyes moved across the wooden roof, the log walls, 
the stacked cans of food, and the precious glass window- 
panes of the cabin. Scratched into the log walls were many 
jagged slashes, as if some animal had sharpened its claws 
there. 

"I've got cakes for you. Come down, little one,” the old 
man said. Brian shook himself awake a little more, floun- 
dered in the bed, found his footing on the heavy ladder, and 
climbed down. He scratched himself, finding a flea in his 
pajamas. 

“Where are we? I don't...] don't remember...” Brian 
began. 

The old man placed a stack of flapjacks on the table, 
followed by a can of something that smelled like maple 
syrup. Pure butter was melting across the topmost cake. 
Brian could almost taste it. "Eat," the old man said, his face 
unbroken, as he went to the kettle over the fireplace and 
poured himself some coffee. 

Brian looked all around the cabin. He now saw that the 
scratcheson the walls were carved — purposeful gashes, not 
the random scratchings of a wild animal. A single wisp of 
smoke coiled from a small clay bowl, under which hung a 
small animal skull of some kind. The smoke smelled like 
sage, pungent and cleansing to his nose. Brian slowly sat 


Werewolf: The Apocalypse 


down at the table, still rubbing his eyes and trying to wake 
up. The room was strange, but oddly familiar. 

A wind blew through the flue, and the fire in the 
cookstove sputtered for a second. The draft blew through 
the room, and the old man seemed surprised by it. He 
cocked his head, as if listening to something in the distance, 
and nodded. “Well, then, go on and see if you can't hide the 
scent. I’m counting on you." 

Another sudden gust of wind shaped the smoke from the 
incense into spirals. Then the breeze abruptly stilled. 

The old man shook his head, smiling, and sat down at the 
table. His expression became solemn. Brian found himself 
trusting the old man, and the hotcakes looked too good to 
pass up. Taking the fork, he tore into the food. 

"Your first time is always hard. You don’t remember what 
happened or where you are. This might be a good thing; 
you've been through quite a lot. Do you remember my 
name?" 

Brian shook his head no and shoveled more buttered 
hotcakes in his mouth. He was ravenous. 

The old man didn't notice. “I am Death-Takes-Last. 
That is the name the People gave me when I was your age. 
It...has to do with the prophecy given to me at the time of 
my birth, that I would be alive until the last times. My 
family lives long. I'm to be your guardian for a while. " 

"Guardian? Why? I've got parents. Where are they?" 

"They're not here. You can't go back to them. You've 
Changed, Brian." 

"Changed how? I can't go back to them? What do you 
mean?" 


"You're of the wolf-people, Brian. You're a Garou. A 

changer of shapes. A werewolf." 

n) “A werewolf?? You've gotta be kidding me." 

ER The old man shook his head once, emphatically. “No. 
You are Garou. Like me.” 

Brian put down his fork. “You’re crazy, old man.” He 
stood up. “You’re damn crazy. Where are we? Are you 
kidnapping me?” 

“Sit down and finish your breakfast, Brian.” 

Brian ran for the door and threw it open. Just outside the 
doorway, at ease in the snow, a huge, black wolf rested. It 
turned immediately as Brian opened the door, and ad- 
vanced on him, growling, as he stood there. 

“That is Chaser-Never-Rests, Brian. She too would like 
you tosit down and finish your breakfast,” the old man said. 
Brian watched as the wolf began to twist and turn. Its body 
bulged, grew huge; a giant wolf flashed before his eyes. 
Slowly it grew arms and hands, becoming a towering 
human-wolf. Finally, it shrank, lost hair, and became a 
rather pretty woman. “Call me Kate,” she said, smiling. She 
wore a black leather jacket, jeans and a strange antler-horn 
necklace. 

She rushed to catch Brian as he nearly collapsed, and led 
him back to the table. Death-Takes-Last produced a metal 


mc. Rake 1 EL 


flask and put it on the table. "Drink," the old man said. 
Brian drank deeply from the flask. The liquid within was 
bitter, but upon choking it down Brian instantly felt better. 
“Okay...so...I’m a werewolf. Fine. Great. I guess this ruins 
my social life. You know, gotta stay inside when the full 
moon is out..." 

Kate laughed. “Nope, we mostly change when we want 
to. Besides, it's the New Moon for me. You're a Half Moon 
kind of guy yourself, I think." The old man nodded. "In- 
deed, Chaser. Brian is a Philodox, a keeper of the Sacred 
Ways. That is why he's here." 

"Huh? Whar's that supposed to mean?" Brian asked, 
taking another bitter draught from the flask. He wrinkled 
his nose as he swallowed, but the stuff calmed him down 
and made him feel better than he'd felt in a while. The old 
man took the flask from him, watching the boy's face. No 
recognition dawned there. 

Death-takes-Last bowed his head, his voice sad. "You 
don’t remember? Many nights have we stood in your 
dreams, as we stand here now, in this very place, speaking 
to you the Wisdom of the People. 

Brian shook his head slowly. “No...no, I don't know 
anything..." 

"When you were born, the moon was half full in the sky. 
Your kind is best suited for the keeping of the old ways, the 
knowledge of the customs and rites of the People. I am a 
Keeper of the People's Ways myself. I know the Silver 
Record; if I have to, I will teach it to you again." 

"Grandfather, perhaps the boy will remember all if told 
a litele...he's stressed out. I remember little of my First 
Change,” Kate said. 

“What's the Silver Record? Is that anything like a gold 
record ora platinum record?” Brian asked. Curiosity welled 
up in him. 

“A record of the People...of all the Garou, all over the 
world. It is represented by the glyphs you see carved in these 
walls. This isa spiritual place, a Lodge of the Silver Record, 
and you are blessed to be here." 

“Ah, I don't get it...I feel...ahh, like I’m in a log cabin 
in the woods. Like when we used to go deer hunting. Look, 
mister, why don't you just let me go phone my mom and dad 
and tell them that I’m okay, and then I'll come back and 
listen to your stories all you like. What say?" 

Kate grinned and smiled at the old man, who didn't seem 
to react to her. A renewed breeze fanned the flames on the 
cookfire in the stove, then swirled around Death-Takes- 
Last's head. He listened briefly to the breeze and addressed 
the wind, “I understand. Thank you, Sussra. I release you.” 
He turned to Kate. "Go and patrol the bawn. There is little 
time! Goandsee what can be done to delay them." Without 
another word, Kate nodded and strode out the door, slam- 
ming it shut. 

Turning back to the boy, the old man spoke harshly but 
quietly. “Did your father ever teach you to listen to your 
elders? Well, I’m your elder, and you'll listen to me! Or will 


Sacred Ways 5 


turn you out into the snow and let the Wyrm have you for 
breakfast!" 

Brian squinted his eyes. "The uis The Worm? What's 
that?” 

A moment 'sftustration passed rT s face, 
followed bya calming breath and a steady look. “That is 
part of the story, but not all of it. Let me start at the 
beginning while you eat your breakfast--Do you see this 
glyph here? It is the firstone— the earliest Record. This is 
what it says...” " 

Of the first ones.of Gaia, % 

I, Phoenix, am alone, the first and the last 

I witnessed the birth of Luna in 

watched her grow 

1 basked in her power 

and in the cracks of the earth I saw 

there come Life. i 

“What is this, the book of Genes 
Record?" 

The oldman smiled. "Not quite, a history 
of ouf people. The Record has been kept by many Garou 
over the years — legend säys the mythical Phoenix itself 
drew this glyph. The Record seems to be protected and 
watched over by Phoenix. Many have kept this Record 
after Phoenix, each adding her own glyphs, her own ideas. 
Each glyph isa memory, a section of the Record. These 
glyphs contain spirits within them, spirits that teach the 
meaning of the glyphs.” 

“You mentioned Gaia. Whois that? Isn't that the Greek 
goddess of the earth?" 

“Gaia is our word for cheMother, thé sum of all creation. 
All chatyou see heré is Gaia. THe Eatth, the Sun, the stars, 
the Worldspbothvhere and in thé Umbra — albar&ofGaia. 
All are'of Gaiayéven the Weaver, the Wyld, and the 


is? Who wrote this 


“And hare they? Vo hat. .ischis Wyrm?” 
“This PAR of i ] Brian.” 


Of the M». SA, ‘he dies. 

there Were Wyld, ever-changing Changer 
Weaver, ever-weaving Maker 

and Wyrm, ever-consumihg Balancer. 
Then Weaver grew mad 

and hunted for Wyld, 

caught Worm in het cocügn ys 


though Wyld escaped 


In imbalance, Wyrmawas corrupted. 
became Corruption 

It grew hungry for creation 

and opened its fangs 

to consume all of Gaia 


“What does that mean —the Wyrm is corruption? Is the 
Wyrm a monster or something?” Brian asked. 

“The Wyrm is both a very real monster and a powerful 
spirit that manifests in manyways. The toxic waste dumps, 
the child who is abused or molested, the$éandalous politi- 
cians: all of these can be examples of the Wyrm's presence 
and power, although human evil is often equal to any the 
Wyrm creates. The Wyrm is a magical beast that has the 
power to possess others and thereby give them power. Its 
power was great in the early times, and the Garou fought 
many battles with its minions then, as now. The Wyrm is 
hungry and seeks to devour all of Gaia." Death-takes-Last 
looked out the window. "It's out there, now. Waiting." 

“What happened then?” Brian said. "We're still here. 
Why?” 

“The Record continues. Gaia usually answers all chal- 
lenges, in her way. See, here..." 


The Wyrm rose ovee the Earth 

I felt the cold chill of its shadow 

And, as in Winter, 1 lepè; 

I was rudely awakenediby Luna 

shining like her brother in the sky 

“Come,” said Luna, “Bring a gift. New önesjof Gaia are 
born.” 

I went to the place where Luna shone 

on her sister's creations 

and I saw/apes who were like wolves 

and wolves who were like apes 

and knew that nothing, would ever 

be the same again = 

And Luna sicli’: Gaou. They shall 
protect Her froin the Wyrm, who. hungérs for Her 

All pay fespect to them, for they are our Mother's 


warriors. 


“So let me geufhis straight. We're supposed to go out and 
fix toxic landfills, clean rivers; and prevent logging in the 
Amazon? Just like Capraifi Planet? Because of some mythi- 
cal beast? I mean, I'm all for the environment, but..." 

"The Wyrm is very real. Its influence is everywhere, and 
not just in the obvious places. We've discovered that a 
Garou must first defeat the Wyrm within before he can 
hope to fight it without. You will come to realize this when 
you undergo your Rite of Passage." 

“I suppose there's a Silver Record mark for that." 

"These glyphs tell of the First Pack, and of the first Rite 
of Passage...” 


Werewolf: The Apocalypse 


Grandfather Wolf led the Garou cubs 

into the forest and left them there 

for three moons, alone — 

they whined and fought among themselves 

but when the Wyrm's minions struck 

they were of one mind, a Pack, 

the First Pack, and slew the Wyrm's foul creatures 


"So, the Rite of Passage ís some Boy Scout thing where 
you get left in the woods?" 

“No, Brian. The Rite of Passage isa crucible. A test of the 
very nature of your soul. During it, you will discover your 
inner being. You will go from being a cub, a young one, to 
being an adult, fully recognized as one of the Garou. You 
will receive your Garou name;" 

"Like Death-Takes-Last?" 

The old man smiled. “Yes.” 

“So, does the Wyrm attack you during the Rite?" 

"It often involves danger, and this makes us strong. 
Afterward you. are welcomed as a new Garou. Here — this 
is the First Pack's celebration..." 


Then, Luna, shining through the trees, called for 
their Rite-Gifts to be given them: 

Gifts came to the cubs, the First Pack, 

from the Five Directions 

From the East came the Way of Stepping Sideways 
From the South came the Way of Fiery Rage 
From the West came the Way of Changing Shapes 
From the North came the Wisdom Ways 

And from Within, Gaia gave the cubs 

part of Her, to carry within them always — 

the Way of Gaia. 


"What are all these ways? What do they mean?" Brian 
asked. 

“We Garou have.many magical abilities, gifts ftom the 
Five Winds. The East gave us the way Of moving from this 
world into the spirit world — this is how] came to you in 
your dreams. The South gave us Rage, which-makes us 
terrible, ravaging warriors even as it threatens to destroy us 
from within. Luckily, as a Philodox, you are most balanced 
in Rage. 

"From the West came out Changing Way, the ability to 
take many shapes, including the war-form of half-wolf, 
which we call Crinos. From thé North came our Wisdom 
Ways. The Garou Wisdom ways are twofold: our Gifts and 
Gifts are magical powers; these let us perform such 
shimmering out of sight and knowing Truth when 
we hear it. They are secrets of Gaia shared among those of 
like mind. Rites are our special prayers to Gaia, though they 
serve social functions as well. They are our ways of relating 
to thesacred inallofus. Finally, from Within, we have been 


deor. LE 


given some of Gaia Herself, that which is commonly called 
Gnosis.” 
“Where does the Moon thing come from?” Brian asked. 
“Ah. The auspices. This glyph speaks of it...” 


And Luna said, “Know that these 

are also my children.” 

Luna gave them beautiful fur, 

each shadowed with one of Luna's faces 
Great Luna, wild-hearted.Luna: 

mother of wisdom 

mother of craft 

mother of madness 

she of many faces — though 

never move than.one she shows — 

took the Garou to her five-walled lodge 
and taught them their best talents 

their inner Gifts 

And there were Five of the First Pack, 
called Ahroun, Galliard, Philodox, Theurge, and 
Ragabash. They stood strong in the light 
of their Mother's Sister, and knew that her 
power and magic was with them. 


“You see, the Moon is not just a heavenly body to us. She 
is the reflection of Gaia's beauty. She is the quicksilver 
changer, the source of all mystery, the mother of all spirits. 
We see her as the Mother of our Gifts. But she is also the 
bringer of madness, the creator of Rage. 

"Your auspice is not merely your birth-phase. It means 
much more. The Ragabash are openers of the ways and the 
paths; they break boundaries so that others will know their 
own limitations. The Theurges are summoners of spirits, 
seers of visions. The Philodox are keepers of the Sacred 
Ways — mediators and judges. The Galliards are dancers- 
for-the-moon, bards and singers, the wild ones whose 
beautiful howls cleave the night air. Finally, the Ahroun 
are great warriors with unending bravery, strength, and 
resolve. You are Philodox, the Half Moon. This is who you 
are, but more importantly, this is your role among the 
Garou." 

"So, the auspices are like zodiac signs?" 

“Not exactly, but close. How you choose to serve your 
auspice is up to you, but remember: you will always be 
judged by the People according to your auspice. The tradi- 
tion of the auspices is a long one, reaching back to the First 
Pack itself." 

"So every Garou owes its lineage to one of this First 
Pack?" Brian asked. 

"[n a way, yes. Though many tribes were spawned from 
that first pack." 

"Tribes? Like Native American tribes?" 


Sacred Ways 7 


ans 


"Yes, but only 13 of them currently live in Gaia. Three 
ofthe first tribes have been forever lost. Here, the Watcher- 
of- Wolves, another keeper of the Silver Record, spoke of 
them..." 


Many years passed, and 

the first cubs mated with 

wolves and humans 

Their lines grew strong > 

and they became many tribes 

These are the tribes 

as they were told to me, Watcher-of- Wolves 

Each ran through the deep forest 

and had its own ways 

The Silver Fangs, strong, ruled us all 

with the Lords of Shadow behind them 

and the Gnawers-of-Bone beneath them 

The Black Furies stood away from their Brothers 

commanded by the Mother 

they grew in her Rage and her Wisdom 

and set themselves apart 

Then came the War of Rage, and 

many of the People followed the Wyrm-bears 

to their far north hiding places 

and so grew the Ger of Fenris, | 

the, Fianna, and the White Hotlers 

"What was the. War of Rage? A great battle against the 
Wyrm?" 

Death-Takes-Last sighed. “It isa time when we hunted 
the other changersof the world, those who take the skins 
of other animals. Chief among them were the werebeats, 
the Gurahl, who kept knowledge from us and consorted 
with the Wyrm. Orso the Record goes: Our people tell it 
differently now, for it was wewho were it the wrong. The 
bears were merely keeping-powerful medicine out of the 
hands of fractious children? A. sad time for us, a time of ill 
judgment. Let me continu 


Some of the People decided 

to make the long journey, 

following the Pure Ones 

following their heart 

and they crossed over icy «vastes 

and found many peoples in a new land 
These Garou were the Croatan; 

the Wendigo; andithe Uktena 

Later, Cities blossomed in the plains 
and some of the People turned their backs, 
on the forest, and left it to dwell behind walls 
we called that kind the City Walkers 
Among all the People there were those 
who ever looked up 

into the night sky 

alone, even among their pack, 

and they called themselves the Stargazers 
and lived high in the mountains 

1 am of the Children of Gaia; 

bom as a wolf to my people, 

who ended the Impergium, 

who made peace with the humans 


“1 thought werewolves were humans who changed into 
wolves, not the other way around.” 

“Garou are born among both wolves and humans. A 
Garou's ancestry is known as his breed. Yes, wolves must 
learn to walk on two legs like we learn to ruon four. Also, 
there is anotherbreed; a middle one;.born of a forbidden 
union between Garou. These are called metis. They are 
scorned because of their unholy origins, and yetsome metis 
have attained great glory.” 

“What was the Impergium ?" 

"Once, before the days'of Sumer and Egypt, the People 
set themselves up as rulers and shepherds of humanity. 
They believed that they could prevent the Wyrm from 
further devouring the Earth if they made certain that the 
human population did not swell beyond a certain number. 
Thus, we went into the humans’ villages, found their oldest 
and weakest, and culled the humans, preventing the spread 
of their seed into the holj forests and lands: 

"The Children of Gaia were Garou who defied the elders 
and fought to end the Impergium. Through hard work and 
sacrifice, they succeeded. Listen.mow to the last of the 
tribes’ glyphs...” 


Our Southern tribe, the Bunyip — 
where are they? 

we give howls across the wind 
send spirits on the wind 

and they do not answers 


Werewolf: The Apocalypse 


“The Bunyip are lost to us, vanished without a trace. 
They were victims of the Wyrm's tricks and our own 
foolishness. The Croatan of the Pure Ones died defending 
Gaia from the Wyrm. None of that tribe remains. 

"Thereare others among the 13, such as the Red Talons, 
wolves who live apart from humanity and hate it. Know also 
of the Silent Striders, secretive wanderers. They are often 
our messengers and deliver eerily accurate omens. 

"The Record mentioned the White Howlers — the tribe 
that dishonored us, the tribe that turned from us into the 
Lairofthe Wyrm, to dance the Black Spiral. They now call 
themselves Black Spiral Dancers, and serve the Wyrm with 
heart, soul, and body. Iam of the Wendigo. You, my son, are 
of the Fianna." 

“Whatever you say. I just don't understand what all this 
means." 

"You will meet many kinds of auspices, breeds, and tribes 
in the pack you will join." 

"Pack? Garou run in packs like wolves?” 

"Indeed. The pack is most important to us. See this 
glyph...” 


And, I, Shines-Bright-Claws, 

fell to the ground, crying, 

for my Pack was dead 

and without my Pack I am nothing. 
1 do not wish claws 

or eyes, or arms, or legs, 

or fur, or skin. 

Tam incomplete, I am nothing 

my Pack is dead 

and I wish to join them 


"Kind of melodramatic, don't you think?" Brian said, 
wrinkling his nose. 

“You've never known a true family, Brian. Your family 
was torn apart, full of hate, anger, distrust and disharmony. 
A pack isa thing of Gaia, with a life and a spirit all its own. 
Indeed, the spirit of a pack is called its totem, and there are 
many totems. My pack’s totem is Chimera, the Dream- 
teller. Yours may be Falcon, or Owl, or Coyote, or Fenris. 
Who knows? There are as many totems as there are hairs on 
your head.” 

“Is...is your wind a totem? Brian said. 

Theold man looked quietly at Brian fora second, his eyes 
searching for a flicker of recognition, some sign that the 
teaching he'd given the boy in his dreams was emerging. 

"Not exactly. You see, Brian, there are spirits all around 
us. [n this house, in the ground, in the trees, in the rivers. 
Even in the city; indeed, some Garou talk to the spirits 
inside computers. In the ancient times, many spirits were 
afraid of us. Here, this glyph speaks of it...” 


Where we walked 

the forest was quiet 

and the spirits grew still 

We were alone, but 

Luna, our guide and protector, 

showed us the way of speaking with the spirits 
in their own tongue 

and we spoke to them 

We spoke to their Fathers and Mothers 
their Grandfathers and Grandmothers 
their leaders and wise ones 


There was called a Great Moot of Spirits 
there were many prayers to Gaia 
and Night Flyer, the no-moon, 
invited Eagle to the gathering 

and the other totems came 

to hear and speak at the Moot 

We created a treaty 

a decision for peace 

among the spirits of Gaia 

No more would we hunt them: 
without contrition 

in return, they promised us 

that if we honored them in ceremony 
and dance 

they would respond to our call 

they would make our claws sharp 
and lend their power to Our might 


"The spirit you saw here, the wind spirit, called Sussra, 
is a spirit ally of mine. I summon her when I need her aid. 
We have worked together ín the past, and I have fed her 
from the wellspring of Gaia within me. She is more of a 
friend than a servant.” 

“] thought you said Theurges summoned spirits. How 
come you can?" 

Death-takes-Last smiled: The cub was thinking! “I know 
the proper Gift. Not all of.us fit so neatly into our auspice. 
I've learned a few Gifts here and there from the people at 
my caern.” 

“Caern? A pile of stones?" 

“No. A place consecrated to Gaia. We call it a caern 
because some of the first of our sacred places were burial 
mounds, or cairns. But caerns are much more to us. Here, 
this glyph speaks of an ancient caern...” 


Sacred Ways 


We traveled long and far > 
our seekers liótoling to. us 
ovef rock and'stone and show 
we looked fot'à placeswöistand 
1 T we went 
king 


But stood we did 

on the longest night 

The moon's crescent ose 

over the highest peak 

in the light of Luna 

on virgin ground 

higher than all, we called Be 
called Gaia with our howl 

Silver throne, our silverglen 

with curling, blasting, 

stinging waters 

higher still the silver mountains 
stronger still the ancient fir 

we cast our lot, ñ 

we danced and howled 

we called for Gaia in thenight 
and darkness came from all around 
we did not fear the dragon’s flight 


Star, Stone, Wind;-River, = 
all fout of theft the e 
speni their lives chat fateful ge 


Gaia's sacred groun; 
let the war for Wy: 
through all Gaia's ca 


cribehsshe‘Sept of the 
ne.of the oldest caerns.” 


“Sept?” ^ 

“A sept is a. 
caern.” Death-Talé 
the Caern of die 


Ga ou base an individual 
E . “This place is 
and we ate members of its 


dden lindy: 
sept. You see, Brian, these erns Sa resources of a 
caern. In times long mbi s squandered on 


petty things. The t sintowunthinking battle. 
We lost many fm marly 5 weredefiled. And so 
Gaia led the People to ee caerns and govern 
themselves. We Garou hayem iati 


“TIl say... pack, breed; 
know where your loyaltie 


, sept...how do you 


"go? Guess?” 


Death-Takes-Last smiled. This was a question the boy 
had asked before, during hisdream-teaching. It was a good 
sign. "You don't have toguess. It's quitesimple, really. Long 
ago, the Philodox ofthe People recorded our leaders’ words 
of wisdom and crafted them into a chant. We call this chant 
the Litany. Here, see.chis.glyph? Ir speaks of it so...” 


In the times before 

when darkness ruled shë 

the People grew scattered 

angry, they warred against each other — 
raided each other's sacred places 
there was no peace 

Garou fought Garou 

and the Wyrm divided us one by one 
and cut us down 

the Wisdom of the People 

was great, however, and 

the elders of the People 

were strong 

they led their children and 

their children’s children to 

anew understanding 


A Grand Moot of all Garou 
was called 

at Table Rocks ¥ 

All gathered fromiall over the world 
in a night's time 

There they were 

one Tribe, and'there 

the Galliards chanted 

the first Litany $ 

from sunrise to sundown 

they repeatéd the words 

until all present su 


Only three beasts sáve Wolf: Were allowed to listen 
they were 

Lizard, who remembered every word, 

Raven, who understood. ‚every word, 

and Coyote, who kept his'own. counsel 

It is said that in the last days 

Lizard, Raven, and Coyote will return 

to remember, to.teach, and to brealethe Litany 
for the Garou must bé'as constant. 

and as ever-changing as.the!Moon. 


“How did the Garou get £0 one place from all over the 
world? A lot of running? 

“No, Brian. Actually, the People back then could have 
tun from one side of the world to the other, for during that 


Werewolf: The Apocalypse 


time the lands were magical and closertto; 

there exists a method of traveling ai 

method is called a Moon Bridge. At 

called Paths of the Moon, but we modern Pe 

Bridges, because they arc up into the spirit world and back. 
down into ours. They are the means we use to travel back 
and forth among the caerns.” £ 

“I get the idea that not all Garou like each él Be. Is 
true?" & 

"That is very true, Brian. Many of. "n q quarrel 
needlessly, and the Ahroun are always mindlessly attacking - 
one another. This is because of the gift of Rage wi 
Some say that the Wyrm gave us Rage, turning 
own worst enemies. Certainly, the Black Spiral 
proof that this is partly true. We lose all contri 
Rage yerum us. We become killing mad! 


can see." 

The old man bent down and opened the cookstove. The 
heat from the fire shot across the room. “Like fire, Brian, 
you must make your Rage a useful thing, not a destructive 
thing. You must learn to temper it, not release it all at once. 
If you do not learn this, Rage will consume you." He to toss 
another log on the fire, and it caught and roared to 

“Is...is that what happened...back at the house, with 
me?” Brian suddenly had visions, flashes of memory. His 
parents, lying twisted on the floor. The black thing, flaps of 
skin hanging loosely under its gnarled arms, grinning at 
him, whispering and ieooing to him. He remem 


Death-Takes-Last nodded. * “Your frenzy is what saved 
your life, and the People will speak of you for it.” 

“Why? What did I do?” Brian was shaking, the shock. 
wearing its way down to the bedrock of his soul. His parents 
dead! And nothing he could do to save them! y 

Death-Takes-Last took the boy's hand in his own. Bri an, 
felta wave of calm flow through him. The old man's i 
fingers held Brian's young ones, and they walked toge! 
toward the wall. “Touch them, Brian. They are indi 
Touch them and know the truth." 


‘they will bring us 
great Glory 

find the young ones 
listen to them, 
distento their 


ou hear Wisdom within you, 


like from 


Pm waking up, slowly... 


find the young ones 
before they are lost. 
show them right ways 
show them truth 
make them stand 
against the Wyrm 
make them stand 

for themselves 

find the young ones 
forge their spirits. 
make them also 

in Honor grow 
Wisdom, Glory, 
Honor: great Renown 
for deeds yet greater 
in the darkness 

we will mark them. 


When the last Garou 
is dead 

none will say that 
Gaia died lonely 
none will say that. 
there was no fight 
we will bring tooth 
and claw:to the 
enemies who dwell 
in Gaia's night 

in the last times 
watch the last signs 
watch the rising 

of the Night. 


"But I did nothing! They were already dead — my 
parents were already dead! Why does that give me Glory?" 

“You slew a Black Spiral Dancer, Brian. Your claws are 
sharp, and the-way ôf your ancestors flows through your 
blood. The.Glory goes to you." 

“Why didn’tithey scream? Why didn’t they run?” Tears 
spilled down Brian's cheeks; he turned to the old man, 
leaning against him. As Brian sobbed, he felt a wall begin 
to crumble in his mind, 

“The Delirium, Look here...” 

Brian touched the glyph, and the words flowed, unbid- 


den, into his mind. 


Sins of the first times 

sins of pride 

we brought the night-fear 
made mothers hide their children 
children hide their old ones 
they watched and waited 
alone, in their caves 

the warriors would fight 
and they would die 

and nothing could stop: 
the Impergium 


We brought the night-fear 
they were frightened 
children after children born 
many winters passed and we 
were there during every one 
We-brought the night-fear — 
deer-transfixed, 

they-could not scream 

they could not move 

they did not remember 

our passing 

the Delirium 

took them too 


Now it rises 

night-fear always 
two-legs runs in fear 
from us 

in the war-form. 
Crinos half-wolf 

the Delirium 

strikes them down 

Sins of the past 

sins of pride 

the Wyrm's trick 

of fear versus heart 
We bring the night-fear 
we live among them 
yet know that we are 
always apart 

we cannot love them 
we cannot stay with them 
always, always 

the night-fear comes 


Werewolf: The Apocalypse 


Brian shook, the sobs coming freely now. He heard a 
slamming door, felt a burst of wind. The old man comforted. 
him, but spoke quietly with Kate in a tongue Brian had 
never before heard. 

"They are coming, Deathbear-rhya. The bawn is shat- 
tered." 

“I will open a Moon Bridge, Chaser-Never-Rests. You 
will leave through it. I will follow after you. I must burn this: 
lodge. They must never capture this information." 

"Somuch wisdom lost, elder? Burned to the ground? This. 
cannot be." z 


“The lore is within young Brian. It lies within himsand& 


he knows it now. The Record is held in his heart.” 

Brian looked up. “As it has always been, Death-Takes- 
Last,” he said, uttering the Garou words as if in a trance; 

Outside, the wind howled. Outside, he heard maniacal 
laughter in the distance, the whoop-whoop-whoop callof the 
whippoorwill. 

Death-Takes-Last strode to the center of the small cabin. 
and closed his eyes. Humming softly, he called out to 
Phoenix, totem of the caern. The totem began to open the 
Moon Bridge. 

Brian watched in awe as an opalescent globe expanded 
from the ground. He watched as it grew in size until it stood 
taller than Kate, filling the room from top to bottom. A 
wind blew through, a warm, moist wind. Kate lookedangry, 
almost defiant, before she bowed her head and stepped into 
the Moon Bridge. Then the globe collapsed and was gone. 

"One more thing must you learn, Brian. You must know. 
that it is your duty, as Keeper of the Record, to add another 
mark onto it this day." Death-Takes-Last looked hard into 
Brian's eyes. Brian felt a strange need to obey the man, as 
if he were a father. 

"You will speak of the day that Death-Takes-Last died. 
You will speak of how he stayed behind to do his final duty 
for Gaia. You will write this glyph into the Record." 


"But — but I thought you were not supposed to die until ^ 


the last days!" Brian cried. 
Death-Takes-Last grabbed Brian’s arms. “Theseare the 
last days, Brian! Remember théGlyph of the Apocalypse?" 


These are the last times 
when the Wyrm shall rise 
and its coils shall sheathe the world 
and Garou will fight Garou 
when the humans hunt us 
in strange Weaver-creatures 
when death follows us 
like a hungry bear 

¿We will know the last times 

ople will shrink in number 
iere will not be enough to care 
properly for the caems 
lost cubs will die 
dr be taken by the Wyrm 

"and many visions 

- will be fulfilled 
Guard these signs well 
mark.the last times 
they are coming 
they are coming 


“Wecall it the Apocalypse. It is here. These times are our 
final times. Who knows when the Wyrm’s final strike will 


~ occur? Until then, we can but hope, and continue to fight 


it.” 


The wind shrieked outside; clouds of snow obscured the 


2 windows: The whole lodge creaked amid the storm. 


“Théwinds are keeping them back, but the Black Spirals 
followed us here. There are not enough Garou to defend 
this place. So we must make sure it does not fall into their 
hands. This is why I stay. Mark well what happens! Your 
glyph is needed for the People.” 

“] can't let you stay here to die! You're needed. The 
People need your wisdom." 

- Y ou have all of my wisdom now, boy. And more, for the 
blood of wise ones runs in your veins. You will know what 


Sacred Ways 


The old man £n for the 

and twisted and grew, became war-form, the Crinos. It 

might have scared Brian di looked so familiar to 
given 

you a name. The People'shál "oyr es-Last. 

For the Record will igyerdallinto, ¡fs coilfupless it has 

defeated all other Garou fe £ 4 AÑ 

ds uch 1 smooth sides of 


“Go, damn y: 
There was 
Two black tl 


They were crafed/Ánd 
them. 


Brian, who had turned to lookatthem, feltashove, hard, 


through and away. 


Mark it well 


O Gaia's children » 
I sing the song of e 


Death-Takes-Last 

his strength was great 
his wisdom stronger. 

he was my tea T 
before I first Change 

I saw the ending 

of the last one 

“These are the last Ér 
he said to me 

for he died 

defending Gaia F 
defending the Garou f 
and all we are 

for he died 2 
defending the Litan: 
keeping the Record 
safe from harm 


Mark it well © 

O Gaia's children 

for my name is — 
W»rm-Tales-Last' 
passed into my keeping 
was the Retord ~ 
and'of those Keep 


I am the last. 7 a 


Forget. "rue 

De Tous si Tu 
Keeper ofthe Silver Record, E 
burning withithe silver flame. 


> 


The Prophecy 
of the Phoenix 


One of the earliest Garou legends is the Prophecy of the Phoenix, which foretells the Apocalypse. 


Phoenix took me. 

Carried me in his claws. 

High above the worla, 

So that J could see beyond tomorrow. 
And J looked, 

J beheld the future. 


J saw the decimation of our kin. Hunted beyond hunting, death beyond 
death, to the last one. There were no more children, or grandchildren, or 
fathers, or mothers. This was the first Sign Phoenix gave to me, that the 
Children of the Weaver, the Humans, would give to us, the Garou. 


J looked. 
J beheld the future. 


J saw the Children of the Weaver birthing. A great tide of Humans, rising. 
J saw more and more, until Gaia groaned at having to carry them all. 
Their houses overrunning, their rakes raping, their hands clawing at the 
pedo earth, trying to feed from Her. This was the second Sign of the 
ast days, that Phoenix showed me, that the Humans would 2o. 


The Prophecy of the Phoenix 


J looked again. 
J beheld the third Sign. 


So many. So many children. So many Humans. And they fell against each 
other, one to one, and the Wyrm brought forth corruption and gave each a 
measure. And the strange Fire J saw, out of control, the great Plume rising 
over the wilderness, spreading death wherever it shone in that dark and 
cold land. And J heard the agony of the Sea as She keene2, for some 
drunken fool had poured a lake of black death out upon her. 


J turned my head away in disgust, but J could not help but look again. 
J beheld, then, the fourth Sign. 


The Wyrm grew powerful: its wings fanned the breezes of decay. Jt 
spread its diseases, and they were horrible: the Herd became afflicted with 
diseases of the head and the blood. Children were born twisted. Animals fell 
sick and no one could cure them. Jn these final days, even the Warriors of 
Gaia could not escape the palsied talons of the sickness-bringing deathbire. 


A tear in my eye, J looked again, and the Phoenix showed me the fifth 
Sign. 


J saw other Plumes rising like 2eath-spears toward the beautiful sky, 
piercing it, letting Father Sun burn and parch Gaia. The air gm hot; 


even in the darkness of Winter it was warm. The plants withered in the 
sun. A cry of pain and disease arose from the dying forests; as one the 
relations cried tears of mourning. 


Then, as though a veil were torn, the sixth Sign showed itself to me. 


Jn these last days, Gaia shakes in rage. Fire boils from the depths. Ash 
shrouds the sky. The Wyrm skulks in the shadows made by these. ..and 
rears to strike. The old ones are gone; the Guardians of the Pathways and 
the Crossroads are finished. In these final days, the sixth Sign will ma 
itself known in the Packs that form. Each Pack will have unto itself a 
Quest, a Sacred Journey it must perform. Such is the will of Gaia. 


And J saw the sky turn black, and the moon was as blood. 


And the seventh Sign J glimpsed, though J could not look on it in full. But 
its heat J could feel. 


16 Werewolf: The Apocalypse 


The Apocalypse. The final days of the world. The Moon was swallowed by 
the Sun, and it burned in His belly. Unholy fires fell to the ground, burning 
us all, twisting us and making us vomit blood. The Wyrm made itself 
manifest in the towers and the rivers and the air and the land, and 
everywhere its children ran rampant, devouring, destroying, calling down 
curses of every kind. And the Herd ran in fear. And the Dar Ones, 
children of the Wyrm, crawled from their caves and walked the streets in 
daylight. 


J turned my head [rom the sight. Phoenix told me: "Chis is as it shall be, 
but not as it should” 


Phoenix left me then. 


Now, J cannot dream. ) can only remember the Signs, each one in perfect 
detail. These are the last days. May Gaia have mercy on us. 


That the Prophecy is upon us, my Fostern, there can be no doubt. Call me a doomsayer. Call me a cackling hag-bitch. Call me 
what you will — but listen to my words. I tell you now that before this decade dies, this millennium ends, we shall see the first glimpses 
of the seventh Sign. Already we have seen mass extinction, overpopulation, and the endless disasters of the humans...or have Valdez 
and Chernobyl fled your feeble memories? They are destroying the Mother's every organ; now she shakes in agony and rage, vomiting 
ashes into the sky. Who can deny he has seen the Signs? Surely none among you would be so foolish? These are indeed the last days. 
The time of prophecy is upon us. Act now we must, for we have no time left for words. 

— Amara Windcrusher, Black Fury Philodox 


The Prophecy of the Phoenix 


E dne 


Gas er 
rn. 2» 
Making, » dancing; outgoi outgoing: 
a Salbe Wold Sings its song of 
‘Endless Daun... Dawn.» 


Leti qoo 


3 Gaia's full 
Er po ae : 
Given raw creation, 
an 
"¡Nature's OEM, 


Leaf, hoof, tooth'and claws FE 
— They are Born! a 


— "Song of the Triat Wyld 
p A Galliard. 


E 


Ge 
= 

» 
E 
y 

M 


There was thunder 
There was lightning 
Then the stars weni 
And the moon fell from the sky. 

— Tom Waits, "Earth Died Screaming" 


What you hold in your hands is a game of make-believe, 
of storytelling. It will allow you to assume the role of a 
werewolf, a tortured creature of rage and pride, and to tell 
stories about your adventures. In the end, however, this 
game is more about you than it is about werewolves, for it 
is of you that the stories are told. 

Although Werewolf isa game, it is more concerned with 
storytelling than it is with winning. Werewolf is a tool 
enabling you to become involved in tales of passion and 
glory, and to help tell those stories yourself. If you've never 
done this kind of thing before, you may be confused by the 
whole premise ofa storytelling game. Once you understand 
the basic concepts, however, you'll find that storytelling 
isn'tall that strange. Indeed, it is something you've done all 
your life. 

Youare going to weave wondrous tales — stories of peril, 
fear, and savage horror. The heart of the stories is you: the 
werewolf. These stories may well be grimmer and darker 
than the fairy tales of your childhood (though those too 
were rather grim if you think back), and they will likely 
capture your imagination and involve you far more deeply 
than any play or movie does. This is because you're inside 
the story as an active participant, not just an observer. 
Storytelling is an experience unlike any other. 


NN ——^—O———-—«—«-—»-—»-—-»-—»—»—-———— RIEN S 


Chapter One: Introduction 


ERBE Ps CAT eT ER ——————À 


t Out. 


Storytelling 


Bow down: I am the emperor of dreams. 

— Clark Ashton Smith, "The Hashish-Eater" 

Long ago, before movies, TV, radio and books, people used 
to tell each other stories: tales of the hunt, legends of the gods 
and the great heroes, or gossip about the neighbors. They 
would tell these stories aloud, as part of an oral tradition of 
storytelling — a tradition that has largely been lost. 

We no longer tell stories — we listen to them. We sit 
passively, waiting to be picked up and carried to the worlds 
others create. We have become slaves to our TVs, permitting 
an oligarchy of artists to describe our culture to us. 

However, there is another way. Storytelling on a personal 
level can once again become a part of our culture. That is what 
this game is about: not stories told to us, but stories we tell 
others. Werewolf is about bringing stories home and making 
the ancient myths and legends a more substantial part of our 
lives. 

Storytelling allows us to understand ourselves by giving us 
a tool with which to explain our triumphs and defeats. By 
looking at our culture, our family and ourselves in new 


contexts, we can understand things we never before real- 


21 


| 


ized. Storytelling is entertaining because it is so revealing, and 
exhilarating because it is so true. Our fascination with stories 
has a purpose to it: of that there is no doubt. 


Roleplaying 

Werewolf is not only a storytelling game, but a roleplaying 
game as well. You not only tell stories, but actually act through 
them by assuming the roles of the central characters. It's a lot 
like theatre, but you make up the lines. 

To understand roleplaying, you need only think back to 
your childhood and those wonderful afternoons spent playing 
Cops ‘n’ Robbers, Cowboys and Indians, or Dress-Up. What 
you were doing was roleplaying, a sort of spontaneous and 
natural acting that completely occupied your imagination. 
This play-acting helped you learn about life and what it meant 
to bea grown-up. It was an essential part of childhood, but just 
because you have grown up doesn’t mean you have to stop. 

In Werewolf, unlike pretend, there are a few rules to help 
you roleplay. They are used mainly to avoid arguments — 
“Bang! Bang! You're dead!” "No I'm not!" — and to add a 
deeper sense of realism to the story. Rules direct and guide the 
progress of the story, and help define the capacities and 
weaknesses of the characters. The essential rules for Werewolf 
are described in Chapter Four. 

Werewolf can be played with nearly any number of players, 
but roleplaying games in general are best when there are six or 
fewer players. The mystery and flavor are diminished when 
players must compete for attention. 


«Che Storyteller 


Werewolf is structured a little differently from the games 
with which you might be familiar. In the first place, there is 
neither board nor cards. Second, one player needs to be the 
Storyteller — the person who creates and guides the stories. 

Being the Storyteller is something like being the Banker in 
Monopoly™, except it is even more important. The Story- 
teller describes what happens to the characters as a result of 
what the players say and do. She decides if the characters 
succeed or fail, suffer or prosper, live or die. Storytelling is a 
very demanding task, but it is also most rewarding, for the 
Storyteller is a weaver of legends. 

The Storyteller's primary duty is to make sure the other 
players have a good time. The way to do that is to tell a good 
tale. Unlike traditional storytellers, however, the Storyteller 
doesn’t simply tell the story; instead, she creates the skeleton 
of a story and then lets the players flesh it out by assuming the 
roles of its leading characters. Storytelling in Werewolf is a 
careful balance between narration and adjudication, between 
story and game. Sometimes the Storyteller must set the scene 
or describe what occurs (such as when the characters are 
asleep), but mostly she must decide what occurs in reaction to 
the words and actions of the characters. She must be as 
realistic, impartial and creative as possible. 

As the Storyteller, you are in charge of interpreting and 
enforcing the rules, yet you are also an entertainer — you must 


22 Werewolf: The Apocalypse 


ES A PUR -————— //, 


struggle to balance your two roles. Most of this book was 
written to help you do just that. It won't make being a 
Storyteller easy, because it never will be easy, but it will make 
you better at it. 

The role of the Storyteller is explained in much more detail 
in Chapter Three. 


The Players 


Most of the people who play Werewolf will not be Storytell- 
ers, but rather players who assume the roles of the central 
characters in the story. Being a player does not require as much 
responsibility as being a Storyteller, but just as much effort and 
concentration. 

As a player in a Werewolf chronicle, you assume the 
persona and role of a werewolf, whom you invent and then 
roleplay over the course of one or several stories. The life of 
your character is in your hands, for you decide what the 
character says and does. You decide which risks to accept or 
decline. Everything you say and do when you play your 
character has an effect on the world. 

You must be both an actor and a player. As an actor, you 
speak for your character and act out whatever you wish your 
character to do or say. Whatever you say, your character says, 
unless you are specifically asking a question of the Storyteller 
or are describing your actions. By announcing and describing 
to the other players what you are doing, you become a part of 
the ongoing story. 

Asaplayer, you try todo things that allow your character to 
succeed and thus “win the game." This strategic element of the 
game is essential, for it is what so often creates the thrill and 
excitement of a dramatic moment. 

Often, after describing the actions “you” want to take, you 
must make dice rolls to see if your character succeeds in doing 
what you have illustrated with words. Your character's Traits 
— numeric descriptions of her strengths and weakness 
dictate how well your werewolf can do certain things. Actions 
are the basic elements of Werewolf, for they describe how 
characters change the world and affect the course of the story. 


Charactersare central toa story, for they alter and direct the 
plot; without characters you can't have a story. As the story 
flows, thecharacters, not the decisionsofthe Storyteller, direct 
and energize the progress of the plot. 

To some extent, each player is also a Storyteller. Players 
should feel free to add ideas and elements to the story, though 
the Storyteller may accept or reject them as she sees fit. In the 
end, the story, not an individual character, is most important. 
Characters are tools for telling a good story. 


Characters 


Many different elements compose what we like to think of 
as the "self": too many, in fact, to separate or identify. In truth, 
we really don't know who or what we are. We wear many 
masks. It is from this essential diversity of self that our desire 
and ability to pretend to be someone else originate. 


Characters are the literary versions of real people — they 
are not real, but they do capture some aspects of reality. Only 
when you enter the world of the story can your characters 
become complete. They are real only with you as the animat- 
ing force — the soul if you wish. Never treat your characters 
as projections of yourself (even if that's all they are). Treat 
them as unique individuals, as works of art, or as fragile 
expressions of your poetic sensitivity. You must treasure the 
characters that you create. 

Werewolf characters are easy to create. It takes only 30 
minutes or so to choose all the Traits that describe your 
character. It takes much more time and effort to turn this 
collection of numbers into a living, breathing character. You 
must reach deep inside yourself to find enough that is real and 
true to produce a complete character. The Frankenstein 
monster was easily assembled from available body parts. It was 
the breath of life that proved difficult. 


Charactercreation isdiscussed in greater detail in Chapter Five. 


Winners and Losers 


There is no single “winner” of Werewolf, for the object is 
not to defeat the other players. To “win” at all, you need to 
cooperate with the other players. Because this is a storytelling 
game, there is no way for one person to claim victory. In fact, 
Werewolf isa game in which youare likely to lose, for the task 
before your werewolf characters is almost impossible. The 
Wyrm rises, and the Age of Apocalypse is here. Instead, you 


must try to survive as long as possible and eke out the most 
drama from the ongoing tragedy. 

The only true measure of success in Werewolf is survival. 
However, ifthe character hassome overwhelming motivation 
(such asa need for vengeance), accomplishing this goal is also 
a measure of success. Additionally, stories have conclusions 
that either benefit or harm the characters. If the characters 
learn that a popular politician is actually a corrupt minion of 
the Wyrm and manage to foil his plot, then they “win.” If they 
never even discover who was behind the plot (much less 
manage to stop him), then they lose, though they may not 
know it until it is too late. 

In order toachieve even partial victory, the characters must 
usually become friends. They must look out for one another 
and have a modicum of trust in each other. The World of 
Darkness is so dangerous that trustworthy allies are essential. 


Playing Aids 


For the most part, Werewolf was designed to be played 
around a table. Though the game does not require a board, a 
number of props require a table to use properly. You will need 
dice, pencils and paper, and photocopies of the character 
sheet. The dice required are 10-sided; these you can purchase 
in any game store. The Storyteller may also want to have paper 
on hand in order to sketch out a setting (making it easier to 
describe to the players), as well asa few other props to show the 
players what the characters see (photographs, matches, scarves 
— anything to make the experience more vivid). 

Some players may want to use miniatures with their 
Werewolf game. Combat in Werewolf can become intense; 
figures representing the characters and their opponents can 
help the Storyteller and players focus on the action. Rules for 
using miniatures with Werewolf are given at the end of 
Chapter Nine. 


Live-Action 

Live-Action roleplaying can be the most dynamic and fun 
part of playing Werewolf. Live-Action roleplaying is similar 
to improvisational theater, wherein the actors (the players) 
act through the scenes created and introduced by the Story- 
teller. This makes a much more intense and immediate 
storytelling experience. 

Players in a roleplaying game generally describe what their 
charactersdoandevensay,butduringLive-Actionroleplaying, 
they do what their characters do and say what their characters 
say (within limits). They can stand up, walk around, hold up 
a letter, shake hands, or rush to a window to see what is going 
on. Of course, imagination still needs to be employed, and the 
Storyteller may still interrupt the action to describe objects 
and special situations. 

No dice are used during Live-Action (especially in White 
Wolf's Mind's Eye Theatre line of Live-Action products). 
Instead, everything is decided through acting. The Storyteller 
simply uses the characters’ Traits to decide how well the 
characters manage to perform certain mechanical actions 


Chapter One: Introduction 23 


| 


(such aspickinga lock). The Storyteller must also decide how the 
other Storyteller-run characters react to the players’ characters. 


Rules 


You must followa few basic rules to ensure that Live-Action 
roleplaying progresses smoothly and safely. These rules must 
be obeyed if you intend to run any Live-Action roleplaying at 
all. Safety is always a primary concem. 

* Don't Touch: A player should never actually strike or 
grapple another member of the troupe. No sort of combat 
should ever be performed — that is one thing you should leave 
for the dice to decide. Live-Action playing involves only 
talking, not fighting. If players or Storyteller assistants get too 
rambunctious in their roles, the Storyteller should call a time- 
out from the acting and remind everyone of the rules of play. 
Repeat offenders should be asked to leave, or the action should 
be returned toa table and conflicts resolved through dice rolls. 

* No Weapons: No props can be used if they must touch 
another player to be effective. No real weapons of any sort can 
ever be handled at any time during Live-Action roleplaying. 
Only those toy guns that can be easily identified as toys can be 
used; even then, the no-touch rules must still apply. 

* Play Inside: Play inside your own home or in whatever 
private area the game normally takes place. Make sure that 
everyone else in the area understands what you are doing. 
Never perform Live-Action if passersby may be confused or 
frightened by the event. If you play outside, such as in the 
woods behind your house, make sure privacy is maintained. 

* Know When to Stop: When the Storyteller calls fora time- 
out, all action must immediately stop. Even during Live-Action 
(especially during Live-Action), the Storyteller's word is final. 


The Werewolf 


In reality, the werewolf and other human-animal combina- 
tions are basic archetypes of the psyche. 

— Malcolm South, Mythical and Fabulous Creatures 

What does it mean to be a werewolf? This subject is not 
easily understood even by the Garou themselves, because it is 
simply what they are. Werewolvesare neither human nor wolf 
— they are a unique race of creatures in and of themselves. In 
their human form they are enough like us that we can describe 
them using the same rules and Traits that describe humans. 
Only when they shapeshift to another form must new features 
be added: for example, to portray the werewolf lightning 
speed, or its terrible claws and fangs, or the incredible strength. 
and tenacity that it possesses when enraged. 

This game is about people, all kinds of people, who do their 
best to make their way through life after the revelation of their 
nature: that they are not the normal humans (or wolves) they 
once believed they were. Instead, they are Garou — outsiders, 
shapeshifters, werewolves, Earth's last dying protectorsagainst 
a terrible force that grows stronger by the night. 


24 Werewolf: The Apocalypse 


ya mmm URP m SS 


m ru SL Ae ts 


Werewolf Characteristics 
So seek the wolf in thyself 
Shape shift nose to the wind 
Shape shift feeling I’ve been 


Move swift all senses clean 


Earth's gift 

Back to the meaning of wolf and man. 

— Metallica, “Of Wolf and Man" 

* Multiple Forms: A werewolfisabletoassume human and 
wolfforms, as well as three other intermediate forms. One such 
form is the Crinos, the dreaded “wolfman” half-form, which is 
the incarnation of Rage. The other two resemble human and 
wolf form respectively, but are larger and more savage. 

* Immunity to Wounds: A Garou is not really immune to 
injury, but isable to regenerate injuries incredibly quickly (one 
Health Level per turn). Only if a werewolf receives wounds 
thatreduce herbelow the Incapacitated Health Level (wounds 
fatal to normal humans) isshe slowed down for long. However, 
wounds caused by silver weapons, fire, and the claws and teeth 
of their own kind (or other supernatural beasts) cannot be 
regenerated in this way. 

* Gifts: Garou are able to speak with spirits and can use 
them to transform the world. The various Gifts they wield are 
the tangible effects of these mystical powers. 

* Perception: Garou have vastly increased powers of 
perception. They are simply able to smell and hear better — 
especially when in Lupus form. 

* The Delirium: Garou in Crinos form create a blind, 
instinctive terror in humans who view them. Humans’ 
dependence upon rationality is so total that they cannot 
accept the truth of werewolves' existence; they will believe 
anyconvenient rationale rather than concede the existence of 
Garou. Mostsimply forget what they haveseen. The end result 
of this reaction, known as the Veil, is the predominant reason 
why werewolves are generally thought to be creatures of 
legend. 

* Frenzy: Werewolvesare extremely emotional creatures and 
can be overcome by their emotions, especially the emotion of 
anger. They can be driven into a frenzy — a mad, berserk rage. A 
werewolf's amount of pent-up Rage (frustration) is an important 
factor in this occurrence. During a frenzy, the Garou instinctively 
changes into Crinosform, and nothing is remembered about one’s 
human side — the domination of the wolf is total. 


A Dision of Evil 


To understand Werewolf, you must be able to savor its 
mood. Its atmosphere is dark, brutal and exotic. Werewolf 
combines a Gothic ambience of horror with a film noir, Punk 
world of pollution and decay. 


This is the world of the Apocalypse; the end is not coming, 
it is here. Gaia — the Earth — is doomed, and the fault lies 
with its guardians, the Garou themselves. The evil force 
known as the Wyrm is rising once more to consume Gaia, and 


the Garou's eons-old battle against the horror is slowly but 
surely being lost. The characters may struggle to slow the 
approaching doom or revel as best they can in the last days, but 
the one thing they can never forget is the Apocalypse. 

Stories in Werewolf contain an element of impending 
horror. Not only is the end coming, but the characters have 
helped to trigger it. The Wyrm resides within even Gaia’s 
protectors; indeed, many of the Garou have given up the 
struggle and joined the enemy in treacherous alliance. The 
very Rage that gives the Garou so much power is itself the taint 
of the Wyrm. In fact, the Garou's 3000-year oppression of the 
humans may well have warped them into inflicting so much 
harm upon Gaia. The truth will never be known, but that does 
not prevent blame being shed. 

Nonetheless, these werewolves, who are so stained with evil, 
may become heroes of uncommon valor and virtue. The charac- 
tersin Werewolf are expected to be heroes—they must care about 
what they have become and about what they may soon be. 

Justice is served only if good overcomes evil — the monsters 
must lose. Thus, for werewolf characters to “win,” they must 
somehow become heroic. They must defeat the monsters 
within by exerting self-restraint, nurturing the impulses of 
virtue, and displaying genuine courage. 


Lexicon 


The following is a brief lexicon of terms in broad use 
among the Garou. Garou have taken words from many 


Chapter One: Introduction 


(ui ne c————— 


different sources, and an etymological study of their lan- 
guage would unearth a veritable babel of tongues. However, 
any attempt to understand Garou and their culture must 
begin with the peculiar language they have created and 
with which they define themselves. 

Besides their own language, Garou can also communi- 
cate with wolves or speak any human language they know. 


Common Parlance 


These words are in common use among the Garou. 

Anchorhead: A spirit gate between the Near and Deep 
Umbras. (See Membrane.) 

Apocalypse: The age of destruction, the final cycle, the 
birth of death, the everlasting corruption, the end of Gaia — 
a word used in Garou mythology to describe the time of the 
final battle with the Wyrm. Many consider this time to be the 
present. 

Auspice: The phase of the moon under which a particular 
Garou was born; commonly thought to determine personality 
and tendencies. The auspices are: Ragabash (New Moon; 
Trickster), Theurge (Crescent Moon; Seer), Philodox (Half 
Moon; Judge), Galliard (Gibbous Moon; Moon Dancer), 
Ahroun (Full Moon; Warrior). 

Bane: Evil spirits that follow the Wyrm. There are many 
different kinds of Banes: Scrag, Kalus, Psychomachiae and 
more. 


| 


Bawn: A boundary area around a caern, where mortals are 
watched. 

Blight: Any corrupted area in either the spirit world or 
physical reality. 

Breed: The ancestry ofa Garou, be it wolf, human or other 
Garou. 

Caern: A sacred place; a meetingspot where the Garou can 
contact the spirit world. 

Celestine: The greatest spirits; the closest things the Garou 
have to gods. Examples are Luna (the Moon) and Helios (the 
Sun). 

Concolation: A great moot, wherein many tribes gather to 
discuss matters that concern the Nation of Garou. 

Concord, The: The agreementall the tribes reached nearly 
9,000 years ago, after which the Impergium was ended. The 
traditions thereof are still obeyed today. 

Corruption: The act of destroying, devolving or debasing 
life; also, the often overwhelming effects of the Wyrm's 
actions. In the present age, it often specifically refers to the 
ecological ruin humans wreak upon the environment. 

Crinos: The half-wolf, half-human form of the Garou. 

Deep Umbra: Theaspectsof the Umbra that lie outside the 
Membrane. Reality becomes more and more fragmentary the 
farther one travels from the Realm. 

Delirium: The madnesssuffered by humans who look upon 
a Garou in Crinos form. 

Domain: A mini-Realm in the Umbra, usually connected 
to a larger Realm in the Deep Umbra. 

Feral: Slang term for Lupus. 

Gaffling: A simple spirit servant of a Jaggling, Incarna or 
Celestine. Gafflings are rarely sentient. 

Gaia: The Earth and related Realms, in both a physical and 
a spiritual sense; the Mother Goddess. 

Garou: The term werewolves use for themselves. 

Gauntlet: The barrier between the physical world of Earth 
and the spirit world of the Umbra. It is strongest around 
technological (Weaver) places, weakest around caerns. 

Hispo: The near-wolf form of the Garou. 

Homid: A Garou of human ancestry. Occasionally used 
disdainfully by ferals (e.g., "That boy fights like a homid."). 

Impergium: The 3,000 years immediately following the 
birth of agriculture, during which strict population quotas 
were maintained on all human villages. 

Incarna: A class of spirits; weaker than the Celestines, but 
still greater spirits by any measure. 

Jaggling: A spirit servant of an Incarna or Celestine. 

Kenning: The empathic calling some Garou perform when 
howling. 

Klaive: A fetish dagger or sword, usually of great spiritual 
potency and nearly always made of silver. 

Litany: The code of laws kept by the Garou. 

Lupus: A Garou of wolf origin. 


26 Werewolf: The Apocalypse 


p——————— 1 


Membrane, The: The barrier between the Near and 
Deep Umbras. To breach it, an Anchorhead must be found. 
Alternatively, the Garou can travel through the Dream 
Zone. 

Metis: The sterile and often deformed offspring of two 
Garou. Generally reviled by Garou society. 

Moon Bridge: A gate between two caerns; it most often 
appears during moots. 

Moon-Calf: Idiot, simpleton. 

Moot: A sept or tribal conclave that takes place at a 
caern. 

Mule: Slang for metis. 

Near Umbra: The spirit world surrounding the Gaia 
Realm. 

Pack: A small group of Garou bound to each other by ties 
of friendship and mission as opposed to culture. 

Penumbra: "Earth's Shadow"; the spirit world directly 
surrounding the physical world; many, but not all, terrain 
features will be the same. 

Protectorate: The territory claimed and patrolled by a 
pack or sept. 

Reaching: Traveling into the spirit world. 

Realms: The worlds of “solid” reality within the Tellurian. 
Earth is referred to as the Realm. 

Ronin: A Garou who has chosen or been forced to leave 
Garou society. It is a harsh fate to become a "lone wolf." 

Sept: The group of Garou who live near and tend an 
individual caern. 

Tellurian: The whole of reality. 

Totem: A spirit joined to a pack or tribe and represen- 
tative of its inner nature. A tribal totem isan Incarna, while 
a pack totem is an Incarna avatar (a Jaggling equivalent). 

Triat, The: The Weaver, the Wyld and the Wyrm. The 
trinity of primal cosmic forces. 

Tribe: The larger community of Garou. Tribe members 
are often bound by similar totems and lifestyles. 

Umbra: The spirit world. 

Veil, The: See Delirium. 

Ways, The: The traditions of the Garou. 

Weaver, The: Manifestation and symbol of order and 
pattern. Computers, science, logic and mathematics are 
examples of the Weaver's influence on the material plane. 

Wyld, The: Manifestation and symbol of pure change. 
The chaos of transmutation and elemental force. 

Wyrm, The: Manifestation and symbol of evil, entropy 
and decay in Garou belief. Vampires are often manifesta- 
tions of the Wyrm, as are toxic waste and pollution. 

Wyrmhole: A place that has been spiritually defiled by 
the Wyrm; invariably a location of great corruption. 


un SL 


Dulgar Argot 


The younger Garou use these words to help distinguish 
themselves from their elders. 


Ape: Slang for human or homid. If the speaker wishes to 
indicate true contempt for her subject, she may use the 
word “monkey” instead. 

Cadaver: A derogatory term for a vampire. 

Flock, The: All ofhumanity, particularly those humans 
from whom the Garou recruit their members. 

Gremlin: A malevolent spirit. 

Leech: See Cadaver. 

Run: A ritual hunt or revel that takes place at the 
conclusion of a moot. 

Sheep: Humans. 

Stepping Sideways: Entering the spirit world. Most 
elders consider this term flippant and disrespectful. 

Throat: To best another in ritual combat. Used asa verb 
(e.g., “I throated his sorry butt!”). 


Old Form 


These words hail from the distant past of the Garou and 
display their Fianna origins. They are no longer used 
frequently. However, all Garou know these terms. 

Adren: A pupil or a student who learns from a Mentor. 

Airts: The magical paths within the spirit world (e.g., 
Spirit Tracks, Moon Paths, etc.). 

Aisling: A journey into the spirit world. 

Anamae: "Soul-friend"; most often a bond with a pack 
totem. 

Anruth: A Garou who travels from caern to caern but is 
bound to none of them. 

Athro: Teacher, Mentor. 

Awen: The sacred Muse, the creative impulse. Some say 
she isa spirit, but she has never been found. Moon Dancers 
periodically go on quests for her. 

Brugh: Any sort of mystic place, whether a Garou caern 
ora Wyrmhole. Often a glade or cave located somewhere 
in the wilderness. 

Charach: A Garou who sleeps with another Garou or 
has done so in the past. Often used as a word of anger. 

Chiminage: Traditionally, a sept can make a request of 
any Garou who uses its caern; “chiminage” is the term for 
the request. 

Cliath: A young Garou, not yet of any standing rank. 

Fomori: Humans who have turned to the Wyrm and 
draw their power from it. They are the enemies of the 
Garou. 


Fostern: Your pack brothers and sisters; those who are 
your family by choice. 

Gallain: The Kinfolk of the Garou — those humans and 
wolves who are related to the People and are not prone to 
Delirium, but who are not actual werewolves. 


Chapter One: Introduction 


Harano: Inexplicable gloom, inexpressible longing for 
unnamable things, weeping for that which is not yet lost. 
Some say it is depression caused by contemplation of Gaia's 
suffering. 

-ikthya: “Of the Wyrm"; a suffix appended to a name. 

Inceptor: A Garou who guides another through a rite. 
An inceptor is also called a ritemaster. 


Kinain: The relationship among Garou who are related 
by blood through an ancestor. This term of endearment and 
pride is never used when referring to metis. 

Pericarp: The Near Umbra around each Realm. 

Phoebe: An Incarna of Luna, representing the Moon. 

Praenomen: The guardian spirit of a pack. 

-rhya: “Greater in station”; a suffix appended to a name. 

Urrah: Garou who live in the city; also, the tainted 
ones. 


-yuf: "Honored equal"; a suffix appended to a name. 


This chapter details the world of the Garou — the 
werewolves' physical environs, theirculture, institutions, friends 
and foes. 


«Che Gothic-Punk 


Worlo 


Turn on, tune in, burn out in the acid rain 
— Sisters of Mercy, “Black Planet” 

The world of Werewolf is not our own, though it resembles 
ours in many ways. Werewolf is set in a Gothic-Punk world — 
a World of Darkness. Externally, little differs between our 
world and this World of Darkness — the established religious, 
social and political institutions are much like those ofour own 
planet. The World of Darkness, however, isa film noir environ- 
ment— thecitiesare labyrinthine and gloomy, the bureaucrats 
are corrupt, and the important people have skeletons in their 
closets. It is a world of extremes — the rich are usually filthy 
rich, and their money has warped them in the manner of The 
Great Gatsby's characters. The poor are much more numerous 
and visible here, and their lot is even more desperate than in 
our world. Starvation, even on the streets of the First World, 
isnot unknown, and the poor often provide prey for the urban 


-——— UO— PERDER ERIPUIT 


predators — the werewolves, vampires and other night stalk- 
ers. 


Chapter Two: Setting 


LZ ———— I? 


Night City seemed designed by a bored researcher with one 
finger on the fast-forward button. 
— William Gibson, Neuromancer 


Gothic describes many of the world's physical features 
massive, brooding, dark and ominous. The sense of oppression 
and conspiracy is much greater here, and everything seems to 
be done with an ulterior purpose in mind. Buildings are huge, 
looming edifices, often encrusted with gargoyles and other 
statuary. Housesoften stand forcenturies, giving many suburbs 
a "haunted house" ambience. Corporate and government 
agents are faceless and impersonal, dressed severely in black 
suits and ties. The Church is enormous and ritualistic, with 
strong similarities to the medieval Catholic Church. Eeriness 
and foreboding pervade the world, and there always seems to 
be a storm in the sky at the right time. 

Punk is the other half of the equation. The counterculture 
ofthe cities, sick of the oppressive physical and social tableau, 
rebel with words, dress, music and often violence. The down- 
towncoresofthecitiesarefilled with underground clubs, street 
gangs and bands inciting aggression and revolution. Crime is 
perennial and open, and people are generally tougher and 
more cynical than in our own world. 

Obviously, not every troupe will wish to range the full 
spectrum of Gothic-Punk. The Storyteller is free to add as 
much or as little Gothic and/or Punk as she wishes. It should 
be noted, however, that Werewolf is largely a game of mood. 
Without a suitably tense, strange atmosphere, the game can 
lose much of its flavor. 


«Che Cities 


Nocturnal motions as we leave our cocoons 

Antennae tuned to inhuman vibrations 

Shaping the cities of the world that's to come. 

— Killing Joke, "Inside the Termite Mound" 

The cities of the World of Darkness are oppressive places. 
Eventheirhuman inhabitants find them bleak, and the Garou 
despise them as sores on the skin of Gaia. Though the Bone 
Gnawer and Glass Walker tribe have to some degree en- 
croached into the cities, urbanareasremain largely thedemesnes 
of the Wyrm. The very earth-spirits are warped and mutated 
by such places; at best they become fey and strange, at worst 
they are actively malevolent. 

It is important to understand that werewolves, particularly 
those not of the Bone Gnawer or Glass Walker tribe, are not 
at home here. Werewolves view the concrete wastelands in 
the same manner that a “civilized” human views the Amazon 
Jungle or Sahara Desert. As previously noted, the cities are 
largely under the sway of the Wyrm’s creatures, and many 
urban spirits display overt hostility toward the Garou. Mali- 
cious city elementals mock the werewolf travelers, lead them 
into traps or even attack them outright. The hated vampires 
constantly watch for Garou, slaying any they find. The loom- 
ingskyscrapers house Wyrm-corrupted businesspersons, while 
the rusting tracts of industrial wasteland are haunted by 
fomori. Werewolves do not lightly venture beyond the con- 
fines of the forests and hills. 


The Wilderness 


This is the forest primeval. 

— Henry Wadsworth Longfellow, “Evangeline” 

If the “civilized” areas of the World of Darkness are bleak 
and oppressive, the wildernessis little more comforting. When 
one views the sullen, shadowy expanses of tangled forests, 
windswept moors and stagnant swamps, one can understand 
why the humans of the Gothic-Punk world so frantically cover 
the land with cities. 

Theambience of the World of Darkness pervades the wilds. 
The line of demarcation between city and wilderness is 
narrow, and once it is crossed, the human traveler finds herself 
in an alien land. The wilds have long been guarded by the 
savage Garou and their Impergium, and thus humans instinc- 
tively fear and distrust the dark places beyond the city lights. 
The dwellers of the rural towns tend to be sullen, insular and 
secretive; many strange events quietly take place in such 
locales. Rural folk know they are not alone in the wilds, and 
superstition runs rampant through the hamlets and truck 
stops. City newspapers write off the occasional bizarre slayings 
as the deeds of serial killers and the like, but the natives know 
better. 

Even the Garou, who call the wilds home, know but a few 
of the land's secrets. Indeed, the wiser Garou reiterate that 
some of Gaia’s mysteries are better left unknown. Gaia is not 
alwaysa loving mother, and werewolves have long known that 


| 


certain places in the wilds are taboo. Garou who foolishly 
venture into these places often do not return; their more 
prudent brethren sigh and shrug. Such is Gaia's way... 


Wolves 


Wild wolvesare virtually extinct. A few scattered packs can 
be found in Europe and the United States, but wolves are 
largely relegated to zoos and breeding projects. Only in 
Alaska, Canada, Scandinavia, and Siberia can they still be 
found in their natural habitat. 

This situation is disastrous for the Garou. Lupusaccountfor 
as little as 13% of the total Garou population — the wolf side 
of the werewolves’ blood has dangerously thinned. Garou 
require the strength of both their human intellect and their 
wolf instinct if they wish to be whole. The growing imbalance 
has rendered many werewolves weak in body and mind (this 
isparticularly true of the inbred Silver Fangs). Many werewolves 
go insane; others succumb to the lure of the Wyrm. 

It might be noted that wolves do not suffer from the 
Delirium; however, an enraged werewolf in Crinos form will 
terrify even the wolf packs. Packs viewing such a sight usually 
leave their territory, never to return. In this age of dwindling 
forestsand encroaching towns, sucha migration usually proves 
fatal for the wolves. 

Garou may communicate with wolves just as they can with 
humans; this is an automatic action if the Garou is in Lupus or 
Hispo form. Garou in Homid, Glabro or Crinos form will not 
always be understood. 


The Present Day 


Wandering between two worlds, one dead, 

The other powerless to be born. 

— Matthew Amold, “Stanzas from the Grande Chartreuse” 

The stagnation and confusion of the modern world have 
affected the Garou moreso than most creatures. Whereas in 
the old days there were vast expanses of wilderness and clearly 
defined territories, in this age of cities and factories there is 
simply not enough land to go around. As the sacred sites are 
drained of energy by human negligence and supernatural plots, 
the tribes and septs must compete for mundane and spiritual 
resources alike. Werewolves of different tribes, who once 
looked upon one another as brethren, now glare at one 
another with lowered ears and slitted eyes. Even the packs vie 
with each other for supremacy. 

Many Garou, afraid or tired or simply disgusted, turn away 
from their duties, seeking freedom in anonymity. Indeed, 
apathy and malaise are among the Wyrm's greatest allies. The 
Garou have, in large part, lost their fire. They roll around with 
each other in the dirt, seeking dominance over some petty 
pack; desperately clutch at their ever-shrinking domains; or 
simply retreat to the stagnant security of tedious human 
existence. Cynicism and callousness are increasingly com- 
mon, and the numbers of ronin (Garou who turn away from 
their pack and tribe) swell with each new moon. 


Chapter Two: Setting 


an ee // 


Now, in this age of smog and concrete and rust, when the 
Garou are at their nadir, the Wyrm will strike in earnest. Will 
the planet succumb to the great cancer, or can a handful of 
determined warriorssomehow stem the onrushing maelstrom? 


Other Lycanthropes 


The ancients were people, yet also animals. In form some 
looked human, while some walked on all fours like animals. 
Some could fly like birds; others could swim like fishes. All had 
the gift of speech, as well as greater powers and cunning than 
either animals or people. 

— Okanogan Native American legend 

The Garou carried out their Impergium not only against 
humans, butagainst the planet's other species ofshapeshifters. 
In their quest to prove themselves supreme among Gaia's 
creatures, the Garou implemented the War of Rage, decimat- 
ing all those whom they deemed rivals. The other members of 
the Changing Breed — the werecats, weremegatheriums, 
werealligators, and the like — were either driven toextinction 
or forced into far corners and caves. The Garou then forgot 
about them. 

The other lycanthropes, however, did not forget, and 
harbored a festering hate ever after. Hidden in their jungles 
and caves, they whispered tales of the Garou oppressors to 
their children, and their children's children. Gradually, the 
Garou assumed the status of devils — to be avoided or, 
preferably, killed on sight. 

The Garou long ago realized their mistake and would just as 
soon leave the other lycanthropes alone. As the wilderness 
slowly shrinks and human incursions increase, this is not 
alwaysan option. The Garou and the others have increasingly 
been forced into contact — usually with violent results. 


Garou Society 


I believe in the way of an older law 
When we used to dance to a different drum 
And we are changing our ways 
Yes we are taking on different roads 
Tell me about the forest that you once called home. 
— Dead Can Dance, "Tell Me About the Forest" 
Garou are as much wolf as human, and their society reflects 


this. The following sections describe their cultural institutions 
and beliefs. 


Becoming Garou 


For eons, Garou reproduced by breeding with humans and 
wolves in relatively equal proportions, thus keeping their 
blood relatively pure. In the early days, when humans were few 
and wolf packs roamed the world, Garou could take their pick 
of breeding stock. Certain groups of humans and wolves 
became favored by certain groups of Garou, and thus the 
different tribes and lineages were born. Chosen breeding stock 


31 


—-—-—^^^A^A^A^-—^————— RBS 


became known among the Garou as flocks, and great battles 
were fought over breeding rights to the best flocks. 

Because the Garou gene isrecessive, nine children out of 10 
are born normal humans or wolves. These children are still 
immune to the Delirium and often aid their brethren in 
mundane matters (see Kinfolk, below). Even the few that are 
to become Garou spend their childhood years as normal 
members of their mundane species. They are often watched 
from afar by their Garou family. Garou-to-be are markedly 
different; they have strange and sometimes terrifying dreams, 
often wanderalone for hours or days, andare frequently unable 
to get along with or relate to their peers. They often have a 
sense of inexplicable longing. 

Between 10 and 16 years of age (if human) or one and two 
years (if wolf), the Garou-to-be undergoes further trauma; a 
wolf is often driven from the pack, while a human adolescent 
is often ostracized or institutionalized. At this point, the 
Garou ofthe tribe show themselves, kidnapping the child and 
guiding her through the shock of the first transformation. The 
confused and often traumatized adolescent Garou is taught 
the rudiments of tribal lore. Following this, she, along with 
other “cubs,” is savagely thrust into a great test of cunning and 
strength. This test is known as a Rite of Passage, and it is 
inevitably a harsh and deadly affair. Many Garou do not 
survive their Rites, but those that do establish themselves as 
the fiercest of predators and gain a sense of what it means to 
rely on pack-brethren. Garou who survive the Rite of Passage 
are accepted as full, if novice, members of their sept and tribe. 


Lost Cubs 


Lately, the Garou have discovered more and more adult 
humans (or, very rarely, wolves) who have the potential to 


become werewolves, but who were somehow lost by their 
tribes and never taken through a Rite of Passage. These 
individuals have so repressed the wolf aspect of themselves 
that they have no idea it is there. They are known as “lost 
cubs,” and many go insane or die of depression. So few 
Garou are left that it is considered a time of great joy when 
such a lost individual is discovered. 


Breeds 


Creatures kissing in the rain 

Shapeless in the dark again 

In the hanging garden change the past 

In the hanging garden wearing furs and masks. 

— The Cure, “The Hanging Garden” 

Garou usually live among either human or wolf society 
prior to becoming Garou; this factor engenders many different 
outlooks on life. 

Homid: Homid Garou grew up in human society. Although 
they were often maladjusted and ostracized, they still know how 
the system works. They understand and use the subtle shadings of 
human vocabulary, and can interact with humans much better 
than other Garou can. (Note that “homid” refers to Garou bom 
from human stock, while “human” refers to the race as a whole.) 


32 Werewolf: The Apocalypse 


[POPE m mn m ————À 


Homids are in the middle of a moral quandary. They see the 
environmental devastation wrought by their kindred, but cannot 
reconcile themselves to the destruction of their people. The guile 
they feel at their race's folly is often synthesized into anger at the 
lupus. Homid Garou often insult and bicker with their lupine 
brethren, treating them like rustic fools. 

Certain groups of homid Garou, confident in their superiority, 
feel that ifthe lupuscan't hack it, maybe they don't deserve to live. 
These Social Darwinists feel that homid Garou, as the dominant 
predators of the dominant species, are the only legitimate branch 
of Garou. 

Metis: Although metis Garou are the most familiar with Garou 
culture, in many ways they are leasta partofit. Their very existence 
isastain on the Garou, a reminder ofpastsin. Metis themselves are 
sterile and deformed, victims of their recessive, inbred genes. They 
are generally scomed by their peers, although these days they are 
permitted to live — the Garou can't be too picky about their 
warriors, and of all the breeds, the metis can most easily attain the 
dread Crinos battle-form. 

Surprisingly, few metisleavethe tribe. Theirdeformitiesare just 
asnoticeable among humansor wolves, and in Garou society metis 
atleast havea place, low as it may be. Asa result of theirtreatment, 
many metisare themselves hostile and cruel, thus reinforcing their 
stereotype as vile and base creatures. A few metis, however, are 
caring and compassionate. Such a metis is a truly tragic figure, for 
his sympathy for others is rarely returned. 

Lupus: Lupus Garou spent their early years among wolves. 
Once lupus constituted a significant proportion of the Garou 
populace, but now they are rare. 

Lupus were raised as creatures of instinct, and tend to act on gut 
intuition. Although they were always more intelligent than their 
wolfsurrogate family, they were andare still generally untutored in 
the subtletiesofhigher thought. They tend to speak less often and 
valueactionsmorethan long-windedorations (“monkey-babble”). 
When they do speak, they speak directly, with little flattery, irony, 
sarcasm or metaphor. Lupus detest hypocrisy; those disliked by a 
lupus generally know it. 

This is not to imply that lupus are stupid; on the contrary, 
they are among the most cunning of the Garou in terms of 
simply getting things done, and can concoct elaborate plans for 
achieving objectives. 

The lupus know well that they are dying, and that this is largely 
the fault of the humans; because of this, and because of their low 
numbers, lupus tend to be cliquish, often disdaining the company 
of metisand homidalike. Many lupus belong to the genocidal Red 
Talon tribe, or at least agree with its policies. 


Caerns 


She took me to her elfin grot 
And there she wept and sighed full sore. 
— John Keats, “La Belle Dame Sans Merci” 
Ley lines. Menhirs. Burial mounds. Dragon-stanes. Haunted 
spots. That creepy old house at the end of the road. 


Just as the Sun has its sunspots, places where the solar flares 
erupt into space, so does the Earth have areas where the raw 


| 


mystical energy of Caia leaks into the world. Werewolves 
build temples and shrines atop these spots, which are then 
called caerns. By tapping into the power of caerns, Garou can 
travel between them, even across vast distances. Garou can 
also use caerns as "lightning rods" to summon powerful spirits 
or evoke awesome mystical energies. 

Much to the Garou's chagrin, other beings know of these 
sites. Mages seek out caerns and systematically rape them of 
theirenergy (which the mages call Quintessence). Minions of 
the Wyrm corrupt and occupy caerns, warping them to evil 
(see Wyrm Caems, below). Faeries use caerns as bridges 
between their world and Earth. 

Caerns are integral to Garou culture. They serve as sites of 
worship, meeting areas, and final resting places for those 
werewolves too old tocontinue life’s journey. Even the Garou's 
physical and mental health are affected by the proximity of 
caerns. Without the mystic energy of the sacred spots to unite 
their disparate natures, werewolves may well sicken and die, or 
go insane. 

Each tribe possesses its own caerns, although there are some 
communal sites. These sites are appropriate to the tribe — 
Children of Gaia may take refuge at a serene glen, while Get 
of Fenris may hold mad revels upon a battlefield. 

Caerns are usually dedicated toa particular spirit, often the 
totem spirit of the tribe that maintains the caern. Gates to 
these spirits’ domains can be opened by those Garou powerful 
and learned enough to know and enact the correct rite. 

The Wyrm also has unholy sites of its own; such places are 
discussed later in the chapter, in the Wyrm Caerns section. 


Urban Caerns 


Many caerns have been swallowed by the expanding cities. 
Most such caerns are rendered inert in the process, but some 
survive, pockets of mystical might in the midst of spiritual 
desolation. Thus, as the number of wild caerns dwindles, 
Garou more and more frequently risk the cities in order to 
worship at what was once theirs. Obviously, such worship runs 
an extreme risk of exposure. Revels, where the Garou run 
about in Crinos form to frighten intruders, are particularly 
important to Garou worshipping at urban caerns. 

This covert worship provides fodder for many urban legends 
and nursery rhymes. For example, if werewolves hold monthly 
moots in an abandoned stockyard, the Delirium ensures that 
people instinctively avoid that spot, especially when the hour 
of the moot draws nigh. No one understands why such unease 
is felt, but few are brave enough to traverse the “haunted lot” 
or the site of the “weird axe murders,” particularly at night. 


The Litany 


The Litany is the great song of ages containing the tradi- 
tions, codes and laws of the Garou. All Philodox are required 
to learn it by heart, and most good Moon Dancers learn a 
significant portion of it. The Fianna are the true masters of the 
Litany, and even their Ragabash know most of its intricacies 
— ideal for extricating themselves from various situations. 


The Litany isa complex and often convoluted thing, but its 
intricacies serve the purpose of poetry moreso than 
pontification. Practical application of the Litany is much 
simpler than the hours-long chants of the Fianna would seem 
to indicate. The Garou are a fairly straightforward people and 
have little patience with convoluted legal maneuvering. In 
most cases, a violator of the Litany is well aware of the 
consequences of his actions. 

The following are some of the basic tenets of the Litany; 
there are many others, often varying by sept or tribe. 


Garou Shall Vot Mate with Garou 


Because of the deformities and psychoses displayed by metis 
werewolves (and the age-old prejudice correspondingly levied 
against metis), Garou are forbidden to mate with their own 
kind. Werewolves must instead seek mates among either 
human or wolf society. This tenet embodies one of the great 
Garou tragedies; Moon Dancers often move audiences to tears 
with ballads of Garou who fell in love and could not express 
their passion — or who did and were torn to pieces by their 
outraged tribe. 

Reality: The number of metis among the Garou shows that 
this law is no longer so inviolate as it once was — certainly not 
a capital offense, though a source of great shame to the 
offenders and their lineages. 


Combat the Wyrm Wherever Jt 
(Dwells and Whenever Jt Breeds 


The Garou were spawned, say the bards, to fight the Wyrm, 
and much of their early history comprises battles between their 
great heroes and the Wyrm's minions. Most Garou pay at least 
lip service to this tradition. 

Reality: In recent ages, many Garou have forgotten or 
simply ignored their mission. Increasing political tension, 
competition for living space, and the general complexity (and 
unattractiveness) of the homid world have taken their toll. 


Respect the Territory of Another 


The practice of this portion of the Litany has changed over 
the last few centuries; humans have spread to the extent that 
urinating one’s territorial markings has become impractical. 
Instead, a Garou visitor or immigrant must first ask permission 
by singing the Howl of Introduction, reciting name, sept, 
lineage, totem and tribe. 

Reality: The Glass Walkers and other urban Garou con- 
sider howling in public uncouth and will accept a telephone 
call or fax from a visitor. Many younger Garou ignore this 
portion of the Litany altogether, considering it “fascist.” 


Accept an Honorable Surrender 


The Garou realize that they are a dwindling race and that 
intraspecies duels commonly occur. Realizing that continuous 
battles to the death would only advance the Wyrm’s cause, the 
Children of Gaia and Fianna incorporated this element into 
the Litany. In theory, a Garou combatant may end a duel by 


Chapter Two: Setting 33 


POL PT TR —————PÀ 


| 


exposing her throat; the opponent is honor-bound to accept 
the surrender. The loser suffers no reduction in Renown, 
although the winner may certainly gain Renown. 

Reality: In practice, this element is not commonly in- 
voked. Certain tribes consider losing to be shameful, and 
damn the Litany if it says otherwise! Wendigo, Silver Fangs, 
Shadow Lords and, especially, Get of Fenris lose considerable 
respect among their peers by surrendering. Additionally, Get 
of Fenrisare notorious for "accidentally" ignoring a surrender, 
instead tearing out the offered throat. 


Submission to Those of Higher Station 


Garou’s wolf nature practically enforces a hierarchical 
structure within their society. Thus the Garou have imple- 
mented the concepts of Renown and Rank. Within reason, 
any request by a Garou of higher Rank is to be obeyed. 

Reality: Many of the younger homid Garou scoffat the idea 
of kowtowing to a bunch of blunt-fanged, mangy, crusty, 
broken-down old alphas. The Bone Gnawers all but ignore 
this section of the Litany (otherwise, they argue with a sneer, 
they would have to spend their entire lives submitting). The 
Silent Striders, Children of Gaia, Stargazers and other egali- 
tarian werewolves espouse personal choice in the matter of 
whom to respect. The Silver Fangs and Shadow Lords, of 
course, enforce this edict with iron claws. 


The First Share of the Kill for the 
Greatest in Station 


This portion of the Litany is much favored by the Garou 
elders, as well as such tribes as the Silver Fangs and Shadow 
Lords; it is grudgingly acquiesced to by the rest. The “kill 
clause" also applies to the spoils of war — thus, in theory, the 
prey’s most powerful fetishes and the like may be garnered by 
the Garou with the highest Renown. 

Reality: By their nature, packs subject all the tenets of 
Garou society to interpretation. Very few packs allow one 
member to keep all the best loot all the time. A Garou who 
tries too hard to enforce this edict will probably be obeyed, but 
should be prepared to accept the consequences of her selfish- 
ness, 


ye Shall Not Eat the Flesh of Humans 


This portion of the Litany was first sung in the post- 
Impergium days; the Stargazers are believed to be responsible 
for its insertion. They noticed that Garou who routinely 
consumed human flesh often grew Wyrm-tainted; further- 
more, cannibals had a hard time stalking and killing more 
challenging prey, such as woolly rhinos or Banes. Addition- 
ally, in these modern times, this rule serves a function similar 
to the “kosher” laws of the Hebrews; modern humans’ chemi- 
cal-laden diet makes their flesh bitter and unhealthy. 

Reality: Red Talons scoff at this section of the Litany; indeed, 
they often make a point of hunting and devouring humans. 
Though they donot like to admit it, many Garou who succumb to 
frenzy later awaken with a strange taste in their mouths. 


34 


Werewolf: The Apocalypse 


Respect for Those beneath Ye — All 
Are of Gaia 


Garou tend to think of themselves in communal terms, and 
they thus realize that most creatures have some sort of contri- 
bution to make toward the whole. When all is said and done, 
Garou were created to be the world’s protectors. The chivalric 
ideal is much in vogue among some septs, and Garou who 
display a great deal of noblesse oblige may gain Renown. 

Reality: The Shadow Lordsand Get of Fenris pay lipservice 
at best to this edict and would strike it from the Litany if they 
could. The Bone Gnawers cynically jest that because no one 
is beneath them in station, they need respect no one. Most 
tribal gatherings will ignore a younger Garou, frenzied and in 
Crinos form, who thoughtlessly slays a lesser being such as a 
deer or human. 


The Veil Shall Not Be Lifted 


This is perhaps the most inviolate portion of the Litany. 
There is no “reality” here — Garou are aware that both the 
Wyrm and the Inquisition hunt for them. Garou who disobey 
this edict die at the claws of their brethren. 


Do Not Suffer Thy People to Tend 
Thy Sickness 


In the ancient days, an injured, infirm or aged Garou was 
simply torn to pieces by his peers. As time went on, however, 


^ 


itcame to be considered more dignified to let such a Garou end 
his own life. 

Reality: The Children of Gaia adamantly believe in natu- 
ral death and defend their old against the depredations of other 
tribes. Some older or wounded Garou, particularly those too 
weak to shapeshift, accept the shame of returning to human or 
wolf society to die. 


The Leader May Be Challenged at 
Any Time during Peace 


Though Garou are known for their pack mentality, this 
does not mean they must slavishly obey their leaders. If no 
immediate threat is pending, Garou of sufficient standing may 
challenge another's position of leadership. A contest of some 
sort is usually staged. If the challenger wins, she assumes the 
mantle of leadership; if she loses, she must accept the leader's 
dictates with good grace. 

Reality: An extremely tough and skilled leader is often 
virtually immune to challenge. Some unscrupulous packs 
have challenged leader one after the other, wearingdown the 
leader and thus ensuring that at least one among the pack wins 
the leadership position. Certain cunning leaders among the 
Bone Gnawers and Shadow Lords have declared continuous 
states of martial law. 


The Leader May Not Be Challenged 
during Wartime 


Certain creatures of the Wyrm are monstrous in size and 
power, and no one Garou can best them. Pack tactics are vital 
to the Garou's success against such creatures, and obedience is 
vital to successful pack tactics. In battle, the word of the leader 
is immutable law. A Garou who disobeys a superior will be 
destroyed as soon as circumstances permit. 

Reality: If it is evident that the leader is incompetent, 
Wyrm-corrupted or under magical control, Half Moon judges 
often ignore the “insubordination” of a Garou whose disobe- 
dience saves a pack or sept. Unfortunately, any Renown said 
subordinate would have otherwise received is negated by the 
technical violation of the Litany. 


ye Shall Take No Action That Causes 
a Caern to Be Violated 


Like the preceding clause about the Veil, this rule is fairly 
ironclad. The caerns are Gaia’s lifeblood, and if they are 
destroyed, the Garou will cease to exist. Even a Garou who 
accidentally leads an enemy to a caern is often severely 
punished. 


Justice 


Rules are written in the stone, 
Break the rules and you get no bone 
All you get is ridicule, laughter, 
And a trip to the House of Pain. 
— Oingo Boingo, “No Spill Blood” 


Chapter Two: Setting 


[POF D EEE ET Ss ZT ER ——— 


Garou are not a rigid, doctrinarian race. A simple explana- 
tion of wrongdoing is often enough to solve an impending 
problem. Mostdisputesare settled viaa reprimand, a mediator, 
or, if necessary, a duel. The mere disapproval of pack, sept or 
tribe is often enough to correct these intensely communal 
beings. Accordingly, Garou crimes and criminals are rare. 

Nonetheless, the laws and traditions are at times broken. In 
such cases, the sept or tribe sees to it that the offender is 
brought to justice. 

Trial procedures vary depending on the sept or tribe in- 
volved. The Get of Fenris prefer trial by combat, while the 
Bone Gnawers' "courts" are informal and subject to rampant 
bribery. The Children of Caia most often settle matters simply 
and cleanly, with but a single arbitrator; by contrast, the High 
Inquisitions of the Shadow Lords are terrible things, with 
lengthy interrogations and grueling ordeals. The Uktena use 
various strange spirits to frighten the truth from the accused, 
while the Glass Walkers rely on polygraph tests and modern 
criminological procedures. 

Sometimes the leaders of an outraged sept offer a bounty for 
the capture (or the skin) ofa violator. This bounty consists of 
talensand training, and can be quite substantial. Some younger 
Garouemploy themselvesasfull-time investigators and bounty 
hunters, traveling from sept to sept and capturing werewolf 
criminals. 


Organization and Power 
Structures 


Power and equality, and I’m out to get it 

I know some of you ain't with it. 

— Public Enemy, "Party for Your Right to Fight" 

Garou hierarchy often varies by tribe; obviously, the social 
structure of the Children of Gaia is less stratified than that of 
the Shadow Lords. Still, Garou are part wolf, and instinct thus 
plays a large role in how they relate to each other. 

Garou social units, from pack to tribe, are remarkably 
similar in structure, varying only by size. A pecking order is 
established early on, and one individual ischosenas the leader, 
or alpha. While Garou society contains several broad social 
strata, thereare very few absolute equals. Some tribes and septs 
establish their members’ places by brute force; most, however, 
use the system of Renown to establish hierarchy. This system. 
channels ambition in a positive direction — if Skullflayer 
wants to be leader, let him go out and kill a few Banes to prove. 
himself worthy! 

Though this "caste system" sounds somewhat Orwellian, it 
is important to remember that Garou instinct reinforces it; 
every fiberofa werewolf's being insists that he stay in his place. 
Werewolf superiors rarely abuse their lessers, and the lessersfor 
their part are content to be loyal vassals. If this sounds overly 
servile — well, take a look at the behavior of the average family 
dog. 

Additionally, while a werewolf group's hierarchy is crystal- 
line at any given moment, it can change like quicksilver as 


35 


| 


challengesare given and received. Yesterday's pack leader may 
well be today's underdog (and tomorrow's pack leader!). 
Social structure is integral to Garou interaction; tribes that 
emphasize individuality, such as the Stargazersand Silent Striders, 
are looked upon with bafflement or suspicion by other Garou. 
Members of these tribes don’t fit into the system, and thus other 
Garou often don’t know how to deal with or relate to them. 
When two Garou of widely disparate Rank or Renown 
interact, each Garou's relative position is fairly apparent. 
When Rank or Renown is roughly equal, however, things are 
notsoclear-cut. When two Garou of roughly equal status both 
claim dominance, the situation becomes both problematic 
and dangerous. Thus, one of the most important functions of 
Garou society is to provide a way for Garou to struggle for 
leadership positions without killing each other. The elaborate 
protocol involved in such struggles has served admirably, 
allowing each Garou to excel in her specialty. Thus, the 
greatest warrior among the Garou might lead the tribe or sept 
in battle, only to be subsequently defeated in a mental chal- 
lenge by the most cunning Garou during a situation in which 
wits and cleverness were important. If the situation required 
negotiation, a Garou who excelled at verbal interplay would 
promptly defeat the aforementioned Garou in a debate, thus 
becoming leader in time to use her skills for the benefit of all, 
Ideally, leadership is a temporary gaining of 
privileges in return for service to the rest of the Garou. 
Recently, however, the above has begun to change. Per- 
haps this is caused by the sudden predominance of human 
blood in the Garou's veins, perhaps by the subtle taint of the 
Wyrm. In any event, leadership is increasingly sought for its 
ownsake, for the perks and the sense of control it brings, rather 
than for the good of the group. For the first time in werewolf 
history, certain Garou septs and tribal groups are ruled by 
“permanent” leaders — often bloody-clawed dictators who 
hold their positions through intimidation and violence. 


Politics 


Garou are not inherently devious creatures. Even the 
political masters among werewolves — the Glass Walkers and 
Shadow Lords — are as children beside the Kindred and their 
centuries-old machinations. Garou tend to rely on themselves 
to get what they want. 

Garou politics have long been simple. The Garou with the 
most wisdom, Renown or expertise on the subject at hand is 
consulted, and the group as a whole listens to her advice, 
generally following it. The above approach worked while the 
land was wide and open, and the Garou ranged its length 
without disharmony or conflict. 


and so on. 


Inthe last century, however, decreasing wilderness area has 
forced Garou to dwell in close proximity to each other. Garou 
has begun to battle Garou, and tribe turn against tribe. With 
external distrust comes intratribal dissension, as Garou begin 
to question the wisdom and veracity of their leaders. 

As the young scorn the old and the old revile the young as 
a lost generation, as the noble Silver Fangs become more 
unstable by the year, unscrupulous Garou have been able to 


turn the turmoil to their advantage, wresting personal power 
from Garouand human society. The Glass Walkerssit in their 
data havens and dictate policy down the chain of command; 
the Get of Fenris rule by raw, brutal force; and the Shadow 
Lords daily become downright Machiavellian in their at- 
tempts to control all the Garou. 


(Dominance 


Garou hierarchy constantly fluctuates, thus ensuring that 
the werewolf most fit to lead the others in a given situation 
does so. Werewolves forever test one another, and Garou 
society has evolved a variety of contests to establish domi- 
nance. 

Dominance is central to Garou existence. Formal and 
informal challenges compose a large part of many moots. 
Usually, the werewolf being challenged may decide the specif- 
icsofthecontest. There are three primary means ofestablishing 
dominance: the facedown, the gamecraft and the duel. 


The facedown is a contest of wills. Two Garou stare into 
each other's eyes until one looks away. It is the simplest of the 
contests, but is not without peril; frenzy is not unknown during 
such contests. 

The gamecraft is favored by Stargazers, Glass Walkers and 
other mental sorts. In gamecraft, the Garou compete in a 
contest of skill or wits: a riddle contest, a chess match, or the 
like. Gamecraft is usually considered a valid means of est 
lishing dominance when facing mental conundrums; it i 
favored when the impending situation calls for a strong 
warlord. 


The duel is exactly that: a combat. The winner becomes 
leader. Duels are rarely intentionally fatal, but frenzy during 
duels is all too common. Certain tribes, such as the Get of 
Fenris, rely exclusively on duels. 

Theloserofa dominance contest must immediately display 
submission: falling to the ground, exposing the throat, display- 
ing the buttocks, urinating or what have you. Generally, the 
closer to Homid form the Garou is, the less visible the 
response. If some sign of acquiescence is not made, the winner 
is by tradition free to attack the loser. 


Language 


The Garou have a language of their own, invented by the 
Fianna tribe in the dim mists of the past. All Garou are taught 
it immediately following the Rite of Passage, and while there 
might be differences in regional accent and dialect, any 
member of Garou society may communicate with any other. 
Many newer words, however, may be misunderstood by par- 
ticularly isolated Garou. Additionally, Lunatics and lost cubs, 
those who have never had their nature revealed to them, do 
not know the Garou tongue. 

The Garou language contains many interesting philologi- 
cal features. It places as much emphasis on body language and 
toneasonactual words. There are as many metaphors for smell 
as there are for sight. Finally, certain words cannot be pro- 


36 Werewolf: The Apocalypse 


p/m. am, EN EEE ZT -——————— 


nounced by a human or wolf throat and thus require a degree 
of partial transformation; most Garou view these particular 
words as “high-falutin’.” 

As mentioned above (see Wolves), Garou in Hispo or Lupus 
form may freely communicate with wolves. Garou in other 
forms may try todoso, but might be misunderstood. Unlike the 
Garou language, the ability to communicate with wolves isan 
innate ability. 


Howls 


Werewolves’ howls are their most powerful and evocative 
means of expression. By howling, Garou may condense enor- 
mous amounts of information into a few notes. Mastering the 
howls is the life's work of a Moon Dancer (much to the 
irritation of her sharp-eared friends if she is less than gifted). 

Howls are usually begun by one Garou, but often joined by 
others. Whatever howl is employed, harmony is disdained and 
cacophony is sought. When two Garou hit the same note, one 
instinctively alters pitch, thereby remaining in discord. 
Through such tactics the pack is made to seem larger than it 
is, and foes are thereby intimidated. 

There are many howls; here are a few of the more common: 

* Anthem of War — Moon Dancers raise this inspiring 
battle cry to muster their brethren for battle, or to rally them 
if their spirits have fallen. 

* Call for Succor — Used to call a Garou's pack to his aid. 
Embarrassing, but occasionally necessary. The howl sounds 
somewhat like the bark of a puppy for its mother. 

* Call to Hunt — A long, low ululation used to alert the 
pack to the position and type of prey. 

* Chant of Challenge — Invented by the Fianna, the 
Chant isa systematic recital of one’s name, pack, sept, lineage, 
tribe and deeds, followed by a creative insult of the challenged 
one's personal habits, ancestry and deeds. Obviously, this is 
used to initiate duels. 

* Curseof Ignominy — This snarling whine is used by the 
sept or tribe to dishonor and mock those who have fallen from 
favor. 

* Dirge for the Fallen — This is a somber, low-pitched, 
drawn-out howl. It is used as a requiem for the honored dead; 
the volume and length depend on the status of the deceased. 

* Snarl of Precedence — This is howled by a Garou who 
wishes to go one-on-one with a foe. The Snarl does not have 
to be honored by those of higher Renown, but generally is. 

* Song of Mockery — This is a particularly infuriating 
pitch that Ragabash add to any other howl. It is sure to enrage 
Ahroun, Shadow Lords, etc. It is an insulting gesture — the 
Garou equivalent of "the finger." 

* Symphony of the Abyss — A reverberating, mad whine 
used by Black Spiral Dancers while hunting. The song is 
designed to terrify quarry, and it does. 

* Wail of Foreboding — The Wail is a general danger 
signal, often used to warn of natural disasters. 

* Warning of the Wyrm's Approach — A very sharply 
pitched howl, emitted in a series of brief staccato bursts. This 


mm 12 SS Er arms CU 


howl is used only to announce the presence of the Wyrm's 
minions. 


Honorifics 


Greater in station: -rhya 
Honored equal/near-equal: -yuf 
Lesser: no honoric need be used 
Of the Wyrm, traitor: -ikthya 


The Packs 


Their's not to make reply, 

Their's not to reason why, 

Their's but to do and die: 

Into the valley of Death 

Rode the six hundred. 

— Lord Alfred Tennyson, “The Charge of the 
Light Brigade” 

Garou are intensely communal creatures and gather into 
groups reflexively. The pack is the most basic, and the oldest, 
werewolf social unit. It is also the most closely knit. A pack 
comprises between two and 10 Garou joined by a common 
purpose and totem spirit. A pack's purpose can be specific and 
finite, such as, "Stop Pentex expansion into Happy Acres 
National Park," or general and long-lasting, such as, "Destroy 
the minions of the Wyrm wherever they are found." Some 
packs last for weeks; others last for lifetimes. 

While a pack exists, its members are bound by very deep 
ties. Human friendship combines with lupine instinct to forge 
nearly unbreakable bonds. In most situations, the pack is very 
nearly of one mind; other creatures who observe a werewolf 
pack in action often wonder if its members share a telepathic 
link. Individual members of a pack may feel rivalry or even 
animosity toward other members, but rare indeed is the 
werewolf who will not defend her packmate to the death. 

When a pack is first created, a special totem spirit is often 
bound to that pack in a great rite. The spirit serves the pack as 
guardian, guide and envoy to its fellows in the Umbra. When 
the pack breaks up, its purpose accomplished, the spirit is 
released. 


Lineage 


The old adage, "You can choose your friends, but not your 
relatives," is a truism among the Garou. If the members of a 
pack are the friends a werewolf chooses, the lineage is the 
family he never escapes. A werewolf's lineage largely deter- 
mines the initial respect a Garou receives. Members of a 
lineage are quick to chastise and punish errant Garou who 
"bring shame upon the line" — i.e., do anything the elder 
members of the lineage find distasteful. 

Certain ancient lineages, particularly those among the 
Silver Fangs, are powers in and of themselves, with hordes of 
Kinfolk, palatial estates and many Purebred members. These 
lineages can be very useful, but are incredibly demanding of 
their young. Lineages are often major links between humans 


Chapter Two: Setting 37 


AI Ps ARTI RR E ——— 


and Garou, and in coming days the lineages may well attempt 
to assume positions of importance in human society. 


The Sept 


Garou who live near and guard a particular caern are 
collectively known as a sept. Most septs originate from one 
tribe, but in recent years, as the number of caerns dwindles, 
multitribal septs have formed. These multitribal septs are 
bastions of tolerance amongan increasingly xenophobic race, 
and may be the only hope for the werewolves' salvation. 

The sept performs social, political and religious functions, 
but its primary task is to guard its caern and Moon Bridge from 
harm. Because many of the sept's members are older Garou 
who have settled down to remain on permanent vigilance, the 
septoftenemployspacksof younger Garou to perform missions 
for it. The good will of the area's sept is vital, for its members 
are the region's eyes and ears, and often know of trouble long 


before the packs do. 


The Tribe 


The tribe is the largest social unit among Garou — the 
"species" of Garou, if you will. A werewolf's tribe determines 
her cultural outlook, upbringing and, often, physical traits. 
Different tribes control different areas and have different 
philosophies. A werewolf'sauspice isoften interpreted through 
the lens of her tribe — a Ragabash from the Bone Gnawers 
might be a transient scrounger, while one from the Glass 


—-—-—-——^^^^^-«-—»—»—--———————— 


38 Werewolf: The Apocalypse 


u | rn E 


Walkers might be aslick con man, one from the Silent Striders 
might be a cunning scout, one from the Shadow Lords might 
be a Machiavellian politician, and one from the Get of Fenris 
might be a deadly assassin. 


The Thirteen Tribes 


Once there were many tribes of Garou, each with a particu- 
lar purview, but time and the Wyrm have whittled down the 
werewolves’ numbers. Today there are but 13 tribesextantand 
uncontaminated. These are: 

Black Furies — The avengers of the Wyld, the Garou 
known as the Black Furies are almost entirely female. The 
Black Furies originated in ancient Greece, where their par- 
ticularly harsh enforcement of the Impergium inspired a body 
of horrible mythology among the people of the region. They 
dwell in the deepest wildernesses and are staunch worshippers 
of the Wyld; they emerge only to carry out surgical strikes 
against those who would desecrate the dwindling magical 
places of the world. 

Bone Gnawers — The lowliest of the tribes, the Bone 
Gnawers live precariously on the streets of the urban slums. 
Often resembling jackals more than wolves, scorned and 
despised by the other Garou, the scrawny and mangy Gnawers 
are nonetheless survivors without peer. They are perhaps the 
most cunning of their species. Pragmatic and cynical, the 
Bone Gnawers long ago forsook the lofty ideals of the other 
Garou; they do what they have todo tosurvive from day to day. 

Children of Gaia — Ofall the Garou, the Children of Gaia 
are the ones most in harmony with the collective will of the 
planet. TheGlass Walkersseek toalter the planet, the Shadow 
Lordsseek to dominate it, and the Stargazers seek to transcend 
it; only the Children of Gaia seek true unity. They prefer a 
peaceful, harmonious existence, but when necessary they can 
be as merciless as the natural order they serve. 

Fianna — Masters of language and song, the Celtic Garou 
known as the Fianna are the preservers of the werewolves" 
history and lore. Collectively, they are the most creative of the 
Garou. They prefer to occupy their days with wordplay, song, 
drinkandrevelry. Whenangered, however, these descendants 
of the mighty dire wolf can be among the most savage and 
relentless of the Garou. 

Get of Fenris — It is said among the Garou that the Get of 
Fenris would gladly allow themselves to be devoured by a 
‘Wyrm demon just so they could rip out its tongue before they 
died. The harbingers of war and destruction, the Get of Fenris 
are savage berserkers who live for combat. The Get are shock 
troops, always on the front line in the war against the Wyrm. 
Their bloodlust and rage unnerves even other Garou, who 
note with shock how they throw themselves heedless and 
howling into their foes. 

Glass Walkers — Most Garou find the city to bea concrete 
abyss gaping to swallow them whole. Not the Glass Walkers. 
These quirky and rebellious Garou long ago adapted to the city 
and are now purveyors of technology and wealth. Willing to 
accept the changing urban landscape and involved in various 


dr A A AAN rr 


less-than-savory activities therein, the Glass Walkers are 
perhaps the least trusted Garou. Their connections, their 
wealth and their hordes of urban elemental servants ensure 
that few dare to express that distrust openly. 

Red Talons — Composed entirely of lupus Garou, the tribe 
known as the Red Talons sees only one way to preserve Caia. 
The homid despoilers — every last one — must be extermi- 
nated. Of all werewolves, the Talons are most in touch with 
their bestial natures — for good and for ill. They remember 
many of the wilderness's secrets, secrets even the other Garou 
have forgotten. 

Shadow Lords — Cold, regal, vengeful and ruthless, the 
Shadow Lords are the dark warriors of the Garou. Mighty in 
battle and cunning in peacetime, the Shadow Lords follow the 
path of ambition and conquest wherever it leads. Their 
courage and tenacity are unquestioned, but neither is their 
arrogance, and the Shadow Lords will stop at nothing less than 
total domination of Garou and human alike. Although the 
Shadow Lords do not care to admit it, more than one member 
of the clan has been lured to the Wyrm by the promise of 
power. 

Silent Striders — The most mysterious of the Garou, the 
Silent Striders hold no permanent homes, but wander from 
caern tocaern and throughout the urban, wilderness and spirit 
realmsas they choose. Travelis theirexistence, and few know 
the secrets of both the mortal and spirit lands like they do. The 
Silent Striders are a laconic people, and little is known about 
them, yet they always seem presciently aware of impending 
events. 

Silver Fangs — No werewolves are more revered than the 
members of the aristocratic tribe known as the Silver Fangs. 
Find a mighty hero, a wise sage or creative virtuoso in the 
Garou epics, and as often as not that mythic figure is a Silver 
Fang. In recent years, however, a strange malady has stalked 
thenoble line. Fewerand fewer children are born to them, and 
many of these children display disquieting traits that other 
Garou have only recently dared to call madness. Though the 
Fangsare pure and beautiful on the outside, sickness slowly rots 
the Garou's greatest lords. 

Stargazers — Mystic spiritualists and contemplators, the 
Stargazers wander hither and yon seeking enlightenment. 
Perhaps the most attuned to their inner nature, the Stargazers 
roam the dark and lonely places of the world, protecting the 
weak from the Wyrm. In this they are unexcelled, for their 
inner understanding allows them to perform lupine martial 
disciplines and feats of will unknown to other Garou. 

Uktena— The Uktenaare the remnants ofone of the three 
great North American Garou tribes. Sly, reticent and devious, 
the Uktena certainly understand the spirit ways better than do 
most other Garou. The use to which they put their knowledge 
islesscertain. The tribe's moots and ritualsare secret and dark, 
conducted in shadowy places. Some wonder if the Uktena are 
not already corrupted. Only superstitious fear (reinforced by 
the Uktena's formidable magical might) keeps the other 
Garou from gaining more forceful answers. 


Wendigo — Gray ghosts of the deep forests, the Wendigo 
once ran free across the face of North America, as did the 
Native Americans from whom they took their human flock. 
Masters of survival, spirits and war, the Wendigo were none- 
theless nearly exterminated by the genocidal practices of the 
Europeans. The remnants of the tribe now lair in the deep 
Canadian taiga, where they struggle unceasingly to win back 
the lands that were theirs. 


The Lost Tribes 


Once the Garou’s numbers were far greater, but the 
Wyrm’s genocide has taken its toll. Entire tribes of 
werewolves have been wiped out through the Wyrm's 
machinations. The litany of the dead is long, but three lost 
tribes stand out among the others. 


The White Howlers 


Garou bards sing dirges lamenting the loss of the White 
Howlers. Once the guardians of the north, the White Howlers 
walked into a Wyrmpittoslay the horrors therein. When they 
emerged, they had themselves become horrors: twisted mu- 
tants calling themselves Black Spiral Dancers (see Black Spiral 
Dancers). The White Howlers are rarely spoken of, lest their 
curse be called upon the other Garou's heads. 


The Croatan 


Garou bards sing epics celebrating the valor of the Croatan. 
This tribe was once the proud guardian of North America’s 
shores. It gave its collective life to banish the Wyrm beast 
known as Eater-of-Souls, which had traveled to the New 
World with the Roanoke colonists. Only the carvings on a 
gnarled tree memorialize the Croatan’s valiant deeds, but the 
Garou remember. 


The Bunyip 


No song is sung for the Bunyip, for the Garou are too 
ashamed. In many ways, the fate of the Bunyip is the most 
tragic of all the lost tribes. The Bunyip were slain not by the 
machinations of the Wyrm, but by their own brethren. 
European Garou and Kinfolk, desperate for a new land far 
from the Wyrm, invaded the Bunyip’s homeland. Over the 
next few centuries, the Bunyip and their flock, the Tasma- 
nian wolves, were hunted to extinction. 


Ronin 


Throughout the ages, despite the great stigma attached to 
so doing, certain Garou have always chosen (or been forced) 
to walk their own path, free from the constraints of pack, sept 
ortribe. Such Garou have been given many epithets down the 
years; the most recent is the Japanese word ronin, or “wave 
man.” The Garou ronin, like his samurai counterpart, bobs up 
and down on the sea of life without purpose or direction. 

Ronin hold no position in Garou society; they may gain the 
Gifts and other trappings of a given Rank (though it is very 


Chapter Two: Setting 39 


yor, 


ie 1 


difficult — Mentors can be found, but they are the sort who 
require bribes) but have neither the status northe responsibili- 
ties of their Rank. Ronin are scorned by most other Garou, but 
lately their numbers have been increasing. 

Some ronin go insane or become Wyrm-tainted. These 
lonely night stalkers are responsible for many legends of *man- 
eating werewolves” and the like. 


Kinfolk 


No, I am not Prince Hamlet, nor was meant to be — 

Am an attendant lord, one that will do 

To swell a progress, start a scene or two. 

— T.S. Eliot, "The Love Songof]. Alfred Prufrock” 

To reproduce, Garou must mate with either humans or 
wolves. Because the Garou gene is recessive, most of these 
matings produce children who are, by and large, normal 
members of their species. However, such children are immune 
to the Delirium and can interact with werewolves. These 
humans or wolves are known as Kinfolk. 

Kinfolk, particularly human Kinfolk, are vital to Garou 
existence. Because they suffer neither frenzy nor Delirium, 
Kinfolk may freely enter human society to perform missions for 
their Garou cousins. Certain tribes, such as the Glass Walkers 
and Shadow Lords, have extensive networks of Kinfolk. Many 
of these Kinfolk hold positions of power among mortals, 
though the opposition of the vampires has checked Kinfolk 
dominance to an extent. 

Most Kinfolk have no special powers beyond their ability to 
fraternize with Garou. However, it is rumored that a few 
exceptional Kinfolk have rudimentary levels of Gnosisoreven 
Rage. Such exceptional Kinfolk could conceivably learn Gifts, 
though few werewolves would teach them. 


Moots 


Garou assemblies are known as moots. Moots combine 
social, religious and political functions, and are thus tremen- 
dously important. At moots, Garou bond with one another 
and reaffirm their commitments to their species and to Gaia. 
Garou who frequently avoid moots are viewed with suspicion 
by their brethren. 

Moots are generally called on the full moon. They are 
always held at caerns, and many moots involve the summon- 
ing of spirits. At moots, questions of policy are debated, plans 
for the future are discussed, heroes are honored, violators ofthe 
Litany are reviled and, most importantly, the caern is re- 
charged via the passion (and Gnosis) expended during the 
ceremony. Moon Bridges often open during moots, permitting 
passage between caerns. 

Philodox handle the “business” aspects of the moot, while 
Galliards organize the social and storytelling aspects. 


Types of Moots 


There are many types of moots, varying by size, purpose and 
the Garou in attendance. 


40 


Werewolf: The Apocalypse 


[PPO CEPA ET i ET ER —€— 922 


* Sept Moot: Sept moots are the most common kind of 
moot, and are generally held monthly at the sept’s caern. Any 
Garou can attend, but Garou not of the sept are often viewed 
with suspicion. 

In addition to their other functions, sept moots help re- 
charge the sept’s caern. 

* Grand Moot: A grand moot is called to discuss very 
important matters affecting an entire tribe. All nearby 
werewolves of the tribe are expected to attend. 

* Concolation: Concolations are the greatest moots. All 
werewolves, regardless of pack, sept or tribe, are welcome (and 
expected) to attend a concolation. Concolations are called 
only to discuss the weightiest and most critical matters. 
Accordingly, they are extremely rare. 

A concolation must be called for by five elder Garou from 
five different tribes. Concolations are usually called for during 
anormal moot; the concolation is then scheduled to take place 
on the moot site, exactly three months hence. Meanwhile, 
messengers traverse the region (or the continentor, rarely, the 
world), going from caern to caern and spreading word of the 
impending gathering. 


Tribal Moots 


* Black Furies — The Furies hold their moots in idyllic, 
isolated locales such as distant glades and still pools. Many of 
their verbal rituals revolve around choral chants and re- 
sponses. The Furies also hold sacred hunts during their moots, 
and any game animal or human (particularly a human male) 
in the vicinity of a Black Fury moot is in serious jeopardy. 

* Bone Gnawers — Formal moots are rare among this 
tribe. Most of the time, the city's Gnawers scrounge up what 
cash they can, hit the local liquor stores and McDonalds, and 
proceed to stuff themselves and get trashed. Caia's name is: 
rarely invoked save via creative profanity. Occasionally the 
Gnawers do call a moot to trap or kill particularly dangerous 
urban spirits; such moots are often called "Orkins." 


* Children of Gaia — Children of Gaia moots range from 
the calm and serene to the wild and joyous. One never knows 
what to expect at a Children of Gaia moot: eight hours of 
staring motionless at the moon, or an orgy of hallucinogens 
and sex with any humans and wolves present. 

e Fianna — Fianna moots generally fall intotwo categories. 
The first type of moot is a solemn affair held on the holidays 
of the Celtic calendar — Samhain, Beltane, etc. Here, bards 
recite the history of the Garou (often from memory), and great 
epics are sung. 

The second type of Fianna moot is a wild party. Other 
Garoustrive to be invited to these parties, wherein song, dance 
and drink combine in a mix certain to loosen up even the 
stuffiest Red Talon or Shadow Lord. Moon Dancers of all 
tribes use these moots to display their latest compositions. 

* Get of Fenris — The Get's moots are wild affairs 
involving howling, eating, drinking and, of course, fighting. 
Indeed, to an outsider, the entire moot might seem like a giant 
brawl, though the Getareactually followingrigid rulesofform. 


k A 
EN DL, > My 
Herein, dominance and submission, pie ‘and shame, are 
determined for all the region's Get. The Ger's revels are 
particularly chaotic, usually involving slamdancing to speed 
metal or industrial music. 

* Glass Walkers — The Glass Walkers meet on the 23rd 
of every month, at precisely 12:37 a.m. according to the sept 
leader's Rolex. They generally gather in abandoned ware- 
houses and corporate offices, using burglar alarms to deter 
intruders. Walker moots are fairly rigid and corporate, with 
minutes and an agenda. Besides discussing tribal business, the 
Walkers also trap their spirits and elementals in floppy disks 
and storage batteries. 

Lately, the younger Walkers have been calling moots of 
their own. These events are similar to raves and are primarily 
social affairs, with drink, drugs, and music ranging from 
ambient house to punk. 


* Red Talons — Red Talons' moots often revolve around 
hunting and howling contests. An effort is made to "lose the 
: to divorce oneself of sentience and become as much a 
creature of instinct as one's lupine progenitors. Indeed, Red 
Talon septs often find the nearest wolf pack and run with it, 
unquestioningly obeying the will of the wolf alpha. 


man”: 


Red Talons also hold other, darker moots. Here, humans 
are sacrificed, their blood seeping into the earth to nourish 
Gaia's roots. Some of these moots mock human rituals; the 
Talons are infamous for their “Yuletide rites,” in which a 
human is pinned to a tree and eviscerated. The hapless 


Chapter Two: Setting 


fA, A RT ——— 9A 


7 Ui le 7 


TA wu e Lh A^ 


human's skin and entrails are then strung around the tree 
branches, while her head is placed at the top of the tree. 

* Shadow Lords — Shadow Lord moots are most often 
held in gloomy, isolated locales, preferably while storm clouds 
rumble in the sky above. The moots are conducted with great 
pomp and circumstance; much ado is made about Rank, 
hierarchy and the like. The ranks of werewolves are rigidly 
stratified, and the young are expected to pay homage to the 
elder members of the tribe, who actually perform the rites. 
Drums and Gregorian-style chanting are common features of 
the moots. The moots are very somber affairs, and human 
sacrifice is occasionally practiced. 


* Silent Striders — Silent Striders rarely congregate, and 
thus their mootsare extremely rare. Storytelling and recount- 
ing past travels occupy a good deal of the Striders' moots. 
Striders also make extensive forays into the Umbra during 
their moots. Rarely do Silent Striders stay in one place 
throughout their moots; indeed, races, relays and the like are 
common activities during Strider moots. 

* Silver Fangs — Silver Fang moots are marked by 
elaborate, beautiful dances and singing, as well as litanies to 
the spirits. The Silver Fangs hold their moots in isolated, 
idyllic locales. They favor the use of candles and often wear 
white robes during the ceremonies. 

+ Stargazers — Stargazer moots, when they are held at all, 
are simple affairs. Several members of the tribe gather to 
exchange information, engage in riddle contests, or simply 
meditate. Often, not a word is spoken during the moot. 


4 


L 


o BAINS 


Uktena — The ceremonies of the Uktenaare very strange. 
Much emphasis is placed on mysticism and spirit summoning. 
The Uktenasupplement these activities with elaborate dances, 
incantations and chants, and passages read from ancient books 
the tribe has collected over the eons. The Uktena insist that 
no other Garou be allowed to view their rites. 

Wendigo — Wendigo moots derive much of their content 
from Native American rites, complete with fire dancing, pipe 
smoking and peyote ingestion. Garou often undergo 
visionquests at these moots, hoping to discover their purpose 
in life. Umbral travel and ritual combat are emphasized. 
Wendigo Theurges often capture and bind a powerful spirit so 
that it can be hunted by the tribe as a whole (after first 
placating its brethren-spirits with sacrifice and prayers). 


Revel 


The end of a moot is usually celebrated by a revel. During 
the revel, Garou transform into Crinos shape and lope about 
the area, clearing away all that threaten the caern. This run is 
so strenuous that elders occasionally die in their efforts to keep 
pace. 


Once the Garou start their revel, they continue until dawn 
oruntil they drop from exhaustion. The exultation of the revel 
often sends the Garou into frenzy — a Garou revel is a very 
dangerous thing. 


Garou Cosmology 


Above all, say the Garou, stand the lords of the Triat — the 
Weaver, spider-mistress of perfect order; the Wyld, ever- 
changing maelstrom of mad chaos; and the Wyrm, blighted 
serpent of entropic decay. In the Time Before Time, these 
three beings maintained balance. The Wyld would randomly 
ejaculate raw, shapeless creation. The Weaver would then 
bind the Wyld’s effluvia into forms and patterns, thus creating 
matter and energy. Finally, if either order or chaos became 
dominant, the Wyrm would catabolize the excess and thus 
restore balance. 


Thensomethinghappened, a cosmic catastrophe that warped 
the Triat into its present imbalance and forever ruined the 
world. Some Garou believe that the Weaver went mad and 
attempted to bind the entire universe in her webs; when the 
Wyrm intervened, it was partially crystallized. Mad from the 
pain, the Wyrm forever after attempted to destroy not just 
excess creation, but all creation. 

Other Garou feel that the Wyrm corrupted the Weaver, not 
the other way around. In any event, the Wyrm has since been 
the Garou's greatest foe. The Weaver, too, has waxed overly 
strong; her human agents seek to transform the universe into 
a stagnant, motionless stronghold of utter rigidity. 


Below the Triat are the Celestines, godlike spirits of tre- 
mendous potency. Luna isa Celestine, as isthe sun-god Helios. 
Celestinesare often worshipped, and certain septs are devoted 
entirely to the worship of a single Celestine. 


Below the Celestines are the Incarna, spirits who fill the 
roles of demigods in the Garou pantheon. Tribal totems such 


42 Werewolf: The Apocalypse 


Zo ———— a 


as Chimera or Grandfather Thunder are considered Incarna. 
Incarna are revered, but rarely worshipped outright. 

Garou also believe in a host of lesser spirits, elementals and 
other beings; these creatures are often called Jagglings or 
Gafflings. Those spirits corrupted by the Wyrm are called 
Banes (see Banes, below). 


Geography 

Oh, East is East and West is West and ne'er the twain shall 
meet 

Till Earth and Sky alike shall stand ‘neath God's great 
judgment seat. 

— Rudyard Kipling, "The Ballad of East and West" 

Garou civilization is much older than that of humanity, 
and the Garou have ranged far and wide across the globe. 
Many tribes cling to their ancestral homelands, while 
others have colonized distant reaches of the world. Garou 
demographics vary from region to region, though in general 
Garou stay close to the ranges of their wolf brethren. 


North America 


North America's vast pine forests and rolling plains have 
long provided dwelling places for the Garou. Here, Garou and 
human coexisted harmoniously. Native Americans’ respect 
for nature and relatively low population kept the claws of the 
Impergium largely at bay. Indeed, many humans of Native 
American descent are able to look upon Garou without 
suffering the effects of the Delirium. North America long 
provided its three indigenous Garou tribes — Wendigo, 
Croatan and Uktena — with a refuge from the Wyrm. 

TheinfluxofEuropean immigrantsdestroyed thecontinent's 
tranquillity, for the Wyrm came with them. One of the first 
incursions — the Roanoke settlement — unleashed a great 
Wyrm beast that completely destroyed the Croatan tribe. 
European Garou followed, and their “manifest destiny” im- 
pulse mirrored that of their human flocks. Unable to compete 
successfully with the Europeans' overwhelming numbers, the 
native humans and Garou were slowly pushed into the inte- 
rior. The native Garou fought back savagely, but there were 
simply too few to turn the tide, and their efforts were largely 
spent against their cousins among the Get of Fenris and 
Shadow Lords. To this day, Wendigo and Uktena werewolves 
loathe the Get and the Lords. 

Recently, the threat of the Wyrm has forced an uneasy truce 
between native and colonist werewolves. Today, members of 
every tribe may be found in North America’s cities and rural 
tracts, and by and large they tolerate each other. Tensions flare 
from time to time, however, particularly in areas dominated by 
the Wendigo. 


South America 


Few Garou call South America home. The continent has 
long been a bastion of the world’s other lycanthropes — the 


— SL 


shapeshifters who were driven into the wastes by the Garou's 
WarofRage. A variety ofcreatures— werejaguars, werecaimans 
and others — dwell in the shrinking jungles of the Amazon. 
The Garou, concerned about the rain forests destruction, 
have made overtures of alliance, but the other creatures well 
remember the days of the War of Rage. Garou trespassing on 
the others' territory are often punished with death. 


Recently, Pentex's depredations have forced the Garou to 
invade the Amazon en masse. The two-front war against the 
Wyrm’s agents and the other lycanthropes has seriously weak- 
ened the Garou. 


Europe 


Europe has long been a Garou battleground. The peasants 
of France, the serfs of Hungary, the cotters of England — all 
told chilling tales of the werewolves in the dark. Europe, 
because of its small size and large population, was where the 
Impergium was most harshly enforced. 

Many werewolf tribes, including the Fianna, Get of Fenris, 
Silver Fangsand Shadow Lords, originated in Europe and have 
been quite active there. Unfortunately, so has the Wyrm. 
Various Wyrm minions are responsible for legends of dragons 
and the like; the first fomori were created here to battle the 
Fianna. Furthermore, Garou and mages sporadically war for 
possession of Europe's dwindling mystical sites. 

The Garou of Europe are among the foremost proponents 
of war with the humans, for they are running out of room. 
Already, Get of Fenris packs have made commando raids into 
European cities. Though the Veil masks such incidents as 
terrorist attacks and the like, it is only a matter of time before 
the Garou are discovered. 


Alrica 


Like South America, Africa remains a stronghold of the 
other species of shapeshifters. Silent Strider Garou traverse 
thecontinent, andafew packs of Red Talons feed on Ethiopia's 
misery, but by and large the Garou are unwelcome in Africa. 
Werewolf incursions into the heart of the Dark Continent 
have been savagely repulsed by packs of wereleopards and 
reptilian shapeshifters (these latter beings may well be respon- 
sible for the Congo dinosaur legends). 

Certain Garou whisper of a great Garou caern-city lost ages 
ago in the Congo, but the few packs who quested for the city 
have never returned. 


Asia 

Though much of Asia remains a mystery to the Garou, they 
have traveled throughout the continent over the centuries. 
Many of the more warlike tribes ran with the Mongol and Hun 
hordes. 

Packs of Silver Fangs dwell in Siberia, and a number of 
caerns dot the region, though in recent years both packs and 
caerns have begun to disappear. Caerns have been “deacti- 
vated,” their spiritual essences drained. Entire Silver Fang 


packs have disappeared withouta trace. The very acts of Moon 
Bridge and Umbral travel to Russia are difficult; a “spirit fog" 
shrouds the land, inhibiting travel. 


Elsewhere, the Garou are more numerous. India houses 
many Children of Gaia; they spend the majority of their time 
preventing the region's Red Talons (known as “dholes”) from 
decimating the overpopulated peninsula. Stargazers wander 
China, Southeast Asia and Tibet (a Tibetan Garou's frenzy 
may well have inspired the yeti legends). 

Japan has become a major Garou battleground. The 
Japanese's austere bushido code pleases the Garou. The tech- 
nological base of the islands attracts Glass Walkers, while the 
enormous corporate zaibatsu are veritable playgrounds for 
Shadow Lords. Garou of all tribes seek footholds into the 
region, wishing to ascertain whether the Black Spiral Dancers 
are at the root of Japanese legends depicting malevolent 
transforming foxes. 

The Indonesian jungles house the last remnants of Asia's 
other shapeshifters. Garou, fearing the shapeshifters’ ven- 
geance, hesitate togothere. The marketsand bazaarsof Jakarta 
have recently been rife with tales of weresharks, shapeshifting 
pythonsand enormous, sentient orangutans. Something big is 
evidently happening in the jungles, but its precise nature 
remains a mystery to the Garou. 


44 Werewolf: The Apocalypse 


JI n UR, EEE ET AT TE A 


Australia 


Australia’s connection to the Umbra is deep and abiding, 
resulting in the phenomenon known among the Aborigines as 
the Dreamtime. In the Dreamtime, Earth and Umbra juxta- 
pose, allowing creatures to cross the boundaries between 
worlds. 


Australia was long the home of the Bunyip (see The Lost 
Tribes), Garou who bred with the marsupial Tasmanian wolves. 
The Bunyip’s totem, the Rainbow Snake, gifted the tribe with 
tremendous powers over reality and Dreamtime alike. The 
Bunyip were longdeemed the wisestand most powerful Garou. 

Alas, neither wisdom nor power enabled the Bunyip to 
withstand the greed of their brethren. European Garou, subtly 
influenced by the Wyrm, coveted the rich spiritual tapestry of 
Australia. Silver Fangs, Fianna, Shadow Lords and others used 
the colonization as an excuse to invade the lands of the 
Bunyip, citing potential Wyrm corruption. The Bunyip de- 
fended themselves ferociously, but were no match for the 
European Garou's superior numbers. The Bunyip had also not 
reckoned with the hordes of Garou Kinfolk that began todrive 
the Tasmanian wolf to extinction. The last Bunyip fell in 
1934; the last Tasmanian wolf died in captivity soon thereaf- 


LA 
ter. 
Now the Australian Garou (who breed with dingoes in the 
absence of wolves) live with shame and fear. Recently, septs of 
Garou have begun to vanish outright, and tracks of the 
supposedly extinct Tasmanian wolf have been found encir- 
cling the caernsites of these lost septs. Many Garou whisper of 
the Bunyip's vengeance, and fear of these ghosts keeps most 
Australian werewolves off the Outback at night. 
Antarctica | 


There are no known Garou caems in Antarctica. Indeed, little 
is known about the continent. Most Garou view the land as a 
barren, icy wasteland, and indeed seem afraid to travel there. 
Certain Garou, claiming that the continent is actually the Thule 
of their myths, urgea massive exploratory expedition. Most Garou 
elders, however, say Antarctica is a land best left alone. 


The Wyrm 


I am the spirit that denies forever! 

And rightly so! What has arisen from the void 

Deserves to be annihilated 

Tt would be best if nothing ever would arise 

And thus, what you call havoc, 

Deadly sin, or briefly stated: Evil, 

That is my proper element 

— Johann Goethe, Faust 

Above all else, Garou hate and fear the Wyrm. God, 
demon, monster-spawner, personification of decay, manifes- 
tation of the Garou’s darker side — whatever the Wyrm’s true 
nature, the Garou have held it in horror since the dawn of 
time. 


— G————A——— XD (REN 


It is ironic, then, how few specifics are known concerning 
the Wyrm. Though the Garou have battled the minions of the 
Wyrm through the eons, the werewolves still know nearly 
nothing about their foe. Certainly, no Garou (save perhaps a 
Black Spiral Dancer) has spoken to or met with the Wyrm 
itself. It is known only through the deeds of its servants. 
Indeed, certain werewolves question the existence of the 
Wyrm as an entity separate and distinct from its legions of 
savage minions. Still, there doesseem to bean evil intelligence 
of some sort guiding the Banes, fomori and other creatures. 
Most Garou accept the existence of the Wyrm, if not on faith, 
then on the horror and destruction it routinely wreaks. 


Recent discoveries imply the existence of three major 
aspects of the Wyrm, each with its own faction and minions. 
These are: Beast-of- War, a savage aspect that seemingly exists 
only to spread violence and entropy; Eater-of-Souls, the 
devourer of matter, energy and spirit alike; and the Defiler 
Wyrm, an insidious aspect that concentrates on the corrup- 
tion of human society. 


@anes 


Skulls are smashed and bones are bending, 

Joints are popping, claws are rending 

Groveling, sniveling, driveling horde 

To worship scaly overlord 

— GWAR, “Gor-Gor” 

The Wyrm most often acts through mortal agents, but it 
also has legions of evil spirit servitors; the Garou have named 
these minions Banes. Some Garou Theurges postulate that 
Banes are actually avatars of certain aspects of the Wyrm; most 
Garou, however, believe Banes to be separate entities with 
individual sentience. This is reinforced by the fact that Banes 
often speak of the Wyrm with dread, and evidently fear it. 

Banes most often dwell in the Umbra, for they are spirits 
and thus indigenous to that realm. Here, they use their spirit 
Charms to corrupt all whom they encounter. Banes may also 
possess mortals or Garou, urging them to commit evil acts. 
Occasionally, Banes manifest physically, most often to fight; 
when they do, they generally create as loathsome a form as 
possible, the better to unnerve opponents. 

There are countless varieties of Banes. Some Banes appear 
to be manifestations or personifications of malevolent forces 
orphenomena; others are freakish monsters seemingly created 


with neither rhyme nor reason. There are Banes of pollution, 
Banes of hate, Banes of terror, and myriad others not so easily 
categorized. Certain human mages have advanced the theory 
that Banes are mere byproducts of the Garou’s shamanistic 
faith, personifications of negative concepts too abstract for the 
Garou to comprehend otherwise. This theory is often dis- 
proved most violently, for Banes are quite capable of attacking 
mages as well, and have no qualms about so doing. 


Chapter Two: Setting 


Wyrm Caerns 


Here are the young men, a weight on their shoulders 


Here are the young men, but where have they been? 

“We knocked on the doors of Hell’s darker chambers 

Pushed to the limit, we dragged ourselves in.” 

— Joy Division, “Decades” 

Just as there are caerns dedicated to Gaia, so there are sites 
dedicated (or perhaps desecrated) to the Wyrm. At these 
unholy places, the vilest magic is evoked, and the very air and 
soil are often poisonous. 


The Wyrm's original caerns lay far underground, in deep 
caverns. Here the Wyrm first spread the poisonous balefires 
that humans have named radiation, biotoxins, et al. In these 
places, the Wyrm’s minions first gathered, oozingand flopping 
around the balefires’ sickly gleam. Here the Wyrm’s priests, 
and later the first Black Spiral Dancers, learned to channel the 
sites’ unholy energies. 


But while Gaia’s interior was riddled with evil, her surface 
remained relatively unmarred, thanks to the Garou's vigi- 
lance. Occasionally a horror, goaded by the Wyrm, crept tothe 
surface on a mission of desecration or a simple killing spree. 
The Garou were ever watchful for such, and great battles were 
fought in the dark. The Veil h: 
fog of myth, and humans hi 
such names as Beowulf and Grendel, Hercules and the Hydra, 


s obscured these fights in the 


handed down the tales under 


and St. George and the Dragon. 


| 


The advent of nuclear and biochemical technology, how- 
ever, proved disastrous to the Garou. The very ichor of the 
Wyrm, so long buried, began to be mass-produced by humans. 
The Wyrm saw its chance to gain a foothold on the surface. 
Careless dumping procedures, “a need for more weapons to 
preserve national security," and suspiciously lax safety inspec- 
tors led to the creation of Wyrm caerns on the surface — 
landfills, atomic test sites, buried waste and the like. 

At these places, the minions of the Wyrm congregate. 
People livingnear these sites gradually disappear. More distant 
residents become suspicious and sullen, if they don't leave 
outright. The energies emitted by the caern often cause defects 
among those born or living near the area; these defects range 
from the subtle to the grotesque. 

The Wyrm loves nothing more than to capture a Garou 
caern and seed it with toxins and balefires. In one fell swoop, 
an already potent mystical site is rechanneled and the Garou 
are further weakened. 


Wyrm Corruption 


Secrets I hide 

They twist me inside 

And make me weaker. 

— The Cure, "Sinking" 

The Wyrm loves to lure one of its implacable foes, the 
Garou, into its service. By and large the Garou stand firmly 
against their enemy, but such treason is not unknown. Indi- 
vidual Garou, packs and even entire tribes (see Black Spiral 
Dancers, below) have succumbed to the Wyrm's allure. 

The Wyrm often begins its temptation by finding a dis- 
graced or disgruntled Garou, one who is more concerned with 
mortal dilemmas than an abstract.battle with evil. Its minions, 
in various cunning guises, then offer the Garou something to 
even the odds — a rite, a minor power, secret lore — in 
exchange for “a little favor" such as seemingly trivial informa- 
tion orafetish "that noone will miss." When the catastrophic 
results of this deed ensue, the Garou in question is now dubbed 
traitor and hunted. Of course, Banes or Black Spiral Dancers 
are happy tohelp the hunted one — for another, slightly larger 
favor...and so on, and so forth. At this point, spiritual decay 
is inevitable. 


Garou who have turned to the Wyrm are perhaps the most 
dangerous threats to the race as a whole, for they know the 
locations of the caerns, the times of the moots, and the secrets 
of the tribes. As the might of the Wyrm waxes, treason 
becomes more and more common. This in turn leads the tribes 
and septs to grow more and more paranoid, more and more 
xenophobic. In their vigilance against hidden foes, the Garou 
alienate potential allies. Misunderstanding breeds misunder- 
standing; irritation turns to hate and then to violence. And in 
its dark dens, the Wyrm hisses its pleasure... 


46 Werewolf: The Apocalypse 


Gn ee y a 


Black Spiral Dancers 


He fell into no well, though he did descend into a well he 
found, and came out with a strange expression which has not 
since left his eyes. 

— Robert E. Howard, “The Scarlet Citadel” 

The Black Spiral Dancers are not spoken of in Garou 
society save with a curse, a shudder and a wary glance over the 
shoulder. The Black Spiral Dancers are those Garou who 
turned tothe Wyrm. Once the noble tribe known as the White 
Howlers, the Dancers today are loathsome and evil, delighting 
in torture and pain. They were long ago driven into deep caves 
by their former brethren, but they occasionally emerge from 
their tunnels to murder and devour. They especially delight in 
feasting on the flesh of other Garou. Black Spiral Dancers are 
ferocious in battle, and love to rend and slay, but their greatest 
joy stems from corrupting other Garou to the ways of the 
Wyrm. 

The Dancersserve the Wyrm well. This is not surprising, for 
they are madness incarnate. All werewolves of this tribe are 
taken deep into the Dancers’ cavernous lairs at an early age. 
They are immured deep in the pits and, after suitable priva- 
tion, are brought before a certain pool of slick, still water and 
forced to gaze within. In this pool is reflected the face of the 
Wyrm, in all its loathsomeness. Many Dancers-to-be die of 
horror in that moment. Those who survive crawl up from the 
depths to join their tribe as full members. Hereafter, they see 
the world from a shattered mind. This insanity is the tribe's 
greatest weakness; Black Spirals have been known to attack 
imaginary foes or, laughing, destroy themselves in the midst of 
battle. 

But from madness also comes power. The Black Spirals’ 
tricksters can open gates between this world and the realm of 
the Wyrm. Their mystics can summon horrors to aid the tribe 
in battle. Their judges can blast foes with the Wyrm’s maledic- 
tion, their Moon Dancers can warp reality into the stuff of 
nightmares, and their warriors can rend reality asunder with 
their talons. 

Even the Dancers’ bodies have been befouled by centuries 
of exposure to the underground and the balefires. Dancers 
often display bizarre deformities. Black Spirals’ human forms 
are usually gnarled and albinoid, while their animal forms 
resemble bizarre hybrids of hyenas and bats. Hypertrophied 
eyes and ears; patchy, grayish-green fur; wrinkled, baggy hides; 
and sharklike teeth are common, though hardly uniform, 
among the Dancers. 

When Garou meets Black Spiral Dancer, quarter is neither 
asked nor given. The Dancer is an abomination on the face of 
Gaia, while the Garou knows a hideous end of torture and 
depravity awaits should she surrender. 

The Dancers can be found all over the world, plotting to 
advance the cause of the Wyrm, but most commonly make 
their dens in deep tunnelsand crypts. These underground lairs, 
called Hives, connect to caverns yet deeper, and the Dancers 
use these caves to travel between the humans cities on errands 
of evil. Some Garou whisper that the Dancers have allied with 


^ 


other creatures that inhabit the deepest bowels of the earth. 
The Dancers hold their moots and rites in the deep caves, 
where the balefires glow and strange creatures crawl from the 
depths to join them. The Dancers occasionally kidnap hu- 
mans from the surface world to participate in their rituals and 
"meet their friends"; needless to say, none of the guests 
survives, for there is usually a post-ritual snack. 

The Dancers’ totem is Whippoorwill; they often emulate its 
cry when hunting. 


Pentex, Jnc. 


One of the largest corporations in the Gothic-Punk worldis the 
shadowy fiscal entity named Pentex. This monolithic holding 
company controls countless subsidiaries and producesa staggering 
variety of products — from the computers of Sunburst Enterprises 
to the drugs of Magadon, Inc. to the roleplaying paraphemalia of 
the Black Dog Game Factory. Through its subsidiaries, Pentex 
holds virtual monopolies in certain industries and possesses signifi- 
cant market shares in most others. Pentex is a leader in the global 
economy. It provides jobs for countless people around the world. 
It is also thoroughly riddled by the Wyrm. 

Pentex's vast wealth and powerare merely the meanstoa much 
greater end — planetary corruption in the name of the Wyrm. To 
thisend, the corporation attempts to create as many Wyrm caerns 
as it can. Pentex manufactures, spreads and dumps radioactives, 
pollutants and carcinogens whenever and wherever it can — 
preferably, ofcourse, onaGaroucaem. Pentex relentlessly buysout 
tracts of land containing places sacred to the Garou, subsequently 
transforming those places into blighted wastelands. 

Pentex also seeks to corrupt the human populace as a whole. 
Many of Pentex’s products contain weak Wyrm poisons. The 
effects of these poisons are subtle, but the end result is usually the 
spiritual decay of the human consumer. Certain Pentex products, 
when used repeatedly, even transform humans into fomori. Natu- 
rally, Pentexdoesnot wish tocallattention toitself in sodoing, and 
thus the products’ effectsare very gradual and insidious. Yes, Junior 
hasindeed become more violent, and his grades have dropped, but 
who would attribute this behavior to the Action Bill doll (made 
from Pentex plastics) that he received for Christmas? 

Pentexand itssubsidiaries have often been accused of question- 
able activities, but neither the main branch nor the subsidiaries 
have yet been convicted of any serious ethics violations. This is 
largely because of "real-world" corporate tactics such as good 
lawyers and underworld ties (thus ensuring the disappearance of 
overly curious individualsa la Karen Silkwood). However, Pentex 
mayalsocall upon vastspiritual resources tosilence threats. Pentex 
routinely employs fomori and Black Spiral Dancers as agents and 
guards. It also bonds various Banes to important sites. Garou 
venturing onto Pentex installations are usually unnerved, for they 
can literally smell the taint of the Wyrm. 

Notall of Pentex’s actions are evil, nor are all of its agents tools 
of the Wyrm. Most of its employees and many of its managers are 
ordinary people goingabout ordinary jobs. However, many of these 
“ordinary” jobs do have ulterior purposes unbeknownst to the 
workers who perform them. The contrast between Pentex’s often 


— rd SD INTI ATADO CE 


Chapter Two: Setting 47 


innocent employees and the vileness of the corporation itself has 
led more than one Garou to a moral quandary. 


Fomori 


Thou poisonous slave, got by the devil himself 

Upon thy wicked dam; come forth. 

— William Shakespeare, The Tempest 

In its continuous struggle against the Garou, the Wyrm 
often finds itself in need of foot soldiers. The Wyrm can, albeit 
with difficulty, create monstrous creatures or breed Banes. 
However, the Wyrm is nothing if not a corrupter. The Wyrm 
finds it easiest and most satisfying to take a creature of Gaiaand 
warp it into a monster. The means by which the Wyrm 
accomplishes this are manifold: exposing the creature to 
mutagens or balefire, tricking the creature into ingesting a 
Wyrm-tainted drug or liquid, or seducing the creature to its 
side with the promise of power. 

In the past, when animal life was more plentiful and the 
wilds more extensive, the Wyrm chose its servants indiscrimi- 
nately, mutating all manner of creatures into loathsome 
war-beasts: dragons, manticoras and the like. Thus were many 
myths and legends founded. In the current, rational age, 
however, the Wyrm prefers to use human agents. The Fianna 
have named such creatures fomori. 

Fomori are specifically designed to face Garou in combat. 
While a single fomor is rarely a match fora Garou, packs of fomori 
can be quite deadly. To heighten fomori'seffectiveness, the Wyrm 


bestows various powers upon its tools. These enhancements range 
from superhuman strength to chitinous carapaces to the ability to 
induce mystical paralysis (a list of fomor Attributes, Abilities and 
powers is given in Appendix One). 

Naturally, such power has a price. A human so corrupted 
undergoes a terrible transformation of the soul, and often the 
body as well. The Wyrm does indeed grant power, but at the 
price of eternal damnation. Most fomori are mindless, de- 
formed cannibals who lurk in the woods or near landfills. A 
few, however, retain some semblance of sentience and human 
appearance; these the Wyrm uses to infiltrate human society. 

Wyrm-controlled corporations, Pentex in particular, often 
deliberately plant mutagenic toxins around their worksites 
and offices, thus triggering their employees’ transformation 
into fomori. 


Other Antagonists 


Would that the Wyrm were the Garou’s only foe, for it is 
enemy enough. The Garou are not that fortunate. Countless 
other beings, from mortals to mages to vampires, desire the 
Garou's hides — figuratively and all too often literally... 


Hunters 


For I'm weary with huntin' , and fain would lie doon. 
— anonymous, "Lord Randall" 

Suicidal asthe idea might seem, there exist certain mortals who 
would hunt the Garou. The reasons for so doing are manifold: a 
loved one slaughtered by a Garou's rage, a conviction that Garou 
are creatures of evil, or simple scientific curiosity. A few madmen, 
such as the infamous Samuel “The Skinner” Haight, even believe 
that one can gain the power of a Garou by ritually slaying it. 

Garou huntersare very rare. Most humans refuse even toaccept 
the existence of werewolves. The Delirium clouds humans’ per- 
ceptions to such an extent that they mentally block even a direct 
werewolf sighting. To see the Garou for what they are, a human 
must either be Kinfolk (a human with inert Garou genes) or have 
a will of iron. 

Successful Garou huntersare rarerstill. It is nearly impossible for 
a human to best a werewolf in combat — and combat is what all 
who hunt werewolves inevitably face. Even given werewolves’ 
well-known vulnerability to silver, the strength and speed of the 
Garou virtually ensure victory. 


Developmental Neogenetics 
Amalgamated 


The biotechnology firm incorporated as Developmental 
Neogenetics Amalgamated is on the cutting edge of genetic and 


medicinal research. The corporation maintains a respectable 
facade, butthescientists whorun DNA areruthlessintheextreme. 
Anymeansto DNA’sendofbetteringthe world isacceptable, and 
the scientists of DNA have performed clandestine research upon 
human subjects. 

While DNA is certainly capable of developing such things as 
germ weapons and wide-scale defoliants, the corporation has not 
yet engaged in active environmental despoliation. Thus, DNA 
would normally be of little interest to the Garou. However, two 
years ago a careless Garou was captured by agents of DNA. The 
hapless werewolf was taken to DNA' labs, studied, subjected to 
experiments and vivisected. 

Thus, the corporation is aware of the Garou and desires to learn 
more. In particular, the biological processes governing the Garou’s 
regenerative properties fascinate the scientists. The heads of DNA. 
scoff at superstition and believe the Garou to be mutants respon- 
sibleforthe werewolflegends, notactual werewolves. Nonetheless, 
they know much about Garou physiology. DNA has captured 
another werewolf and fought two more. 

DNA agents are highly trained and have access to advanced 
weaponry; DNA has even developed biochemical weaponry 
capable of inflicting aggravated damage upon Garou. DNA is 
aware of the Garou “allergy” to silver, but prefers to take Garou 
alive. The corporation has developed variants of tear and knock- 
out gas capable of incapacitating Garou. 


Dampires 


You were a vampire, and baby, I’m walking dead. 
— Concrete Blonde, “Bloodletting” 

The vampires are the lords of the cities and the Garou's etemal 
foes. Garou view vampiresas embodiments of the Wyrm’scorrup- 
tion and mockeries of Gaia’s cycle. Thus, Garou attack vampires 
unceasingly. Many a Garou warband has loped howling into the 
city’s heart, seeking vampire heads and skins. 

Still, such missions are dangerous undertakings at best. 
While the walking dead are rarely capable of besting the Garou 
in clean combat, they have great power to beguile, mesmerize 
and corrupt. Furthermore, by trading Gaia’s mantle for the 
Wyrm’s gift of life-in-death, vampires gain the luxury of 
longevity. A single vampire’s plans can encompass whole 
generations of Garou. The shameful howl of a Garou who 
realizes that her “noble” actions were all along the results of a 
vampire’s manipulation is a terrible thing to hear. 


Mages 

The Garou bear little love for human mages. At best, magesare 
seen as arrogant, devious and inscrutable; at worst, they are 
marauders who rape the Garou’s caerns and siphon the very life 
energy of Gaia for their own ends. The Garou have occasionally 
allied with mages, and hold a wary respect for the mage fraternity 
known as the Dreamspeakers, but in general the Garou prefer to 
keep mages at claw's length. The members of the Red Talon tribe 
particularly despise mages, and the tribe often organizes war parties 
for the specific purpose of taking mages’ skins. 


Not that such is accomplished lightly. The Garou know to 
their chagrin that mages are mighty foes, particularly when 
they have time to prepare for an assault. Mages have made 
many pacts with the stranger spirits of the Umbra, and often 
employ these “Umbrood” to attack Garou totem spirits. 


Suggested Books and 
Films 


The following list should provide some beginning sources on 
wolves or the environment. Also given are some recommended 
werewolf books and films, to help provide a good mood for game 
sessions. Most works in the werewolf genre, however, portray 
werewolves as mindless, ravaging beasts — Garou during a frenzy. 
Unfortunately, this is how Garou are perceived by humans who 
witness them, thanks to the Delirium. 


Books 


* Of Wolves and Men, by Barry Lopez. One of the best 
introductory books on wolves and their behavior, proving that 
wolvesare not the monsters they have so long been portrayed to be. 

* Never Cry Wolf, by Farley Mowat (or see the film). A 
naturalist’s first-hand study of wolves. 

* American Indian Myths and Legends, selected and edited by 
Richard Erdoesand Alfonso Ortiz. Anexcellentcollectionoftales. 
This is a good source for the feel and color of Garou myths. 

* Call of the Wild and White Fang, by Jack London. Classic 
books with wolves as protagonists. 

* Moon Dance, by S.P. Somtow. European werewolves 
immigrate to America, and territorial conflict ensues with the 
native werewolves. A very good horror novel. 

+ Earth in the Balance: Ecology and the Human Spirit, by Vice 
President Al Gore. A good, basic book on modern environ- 
mental concerns, well grounded in scientific fact. 


Films 


* The Wolfen (or read the book by Whitely Streiber). 
Native American werewolves secretly living in Manhattan. 

* ACompany of Wolves, directed by Neil Jordan. Werewolves 
in folktales. 

* An American Werewolf in London, directed by John 
Landis. One of the best in the genre. See it. 

* The Wolf Man, screenplay by Curt Siodmak. The old 
classic, wherein Lon Chaney Jr. deals with the curse of 
lycanthropy and ravens across the misty moors of Wales. 

* The Howling (the first one—not the sequels! ), directed by Joe 
Dante. An amusing tale of New Age psychology and werewolves 
—and how they don’t mix. The first major film to feature the half- 
man/half-wolf (Crinos) form, with a wolf head and human body. 

* Wolf, directed by Mike Nichols, starring Jack Nicholson 
as the werewolf. 


Chapter Two: Setting 49 


pmi en ee ee ————À 


Sing in me, Muse, and through me tell the story. 
— Homer, The Odyssey 


Telling stories has always been one of humanity's main 
methods of entertainment. Stories have been incorporated 
into books, songs, movies, poems, art and more. They have 
depicted individuals, groups, events, morals, emotions, nature 
and more. One would think that after 10,000 years of this, 
people would tire of stories, but more appear every day. 

These stories may be fresh and exciting, or repetitions of old 
ideas, but their audiences still enjoy them. They sit in rapt 
attention, absorbingas much ofthe story as they can. They read or 
listen and, provided the storyteller was skillful, they leave with an 
understanding of the point the storyteller was trying to make. 

For the most part, however, these stories have been 
nonparticipatory; that is, one person or group made them up for 
other people to enjoy. This audience played little role in deciding 
how the story went or what the outcome would be. Ifthe audience 
didn't like the end ofa movie, its only choice was to walk out. If it 
didn'tlikethedirectionabook took, its best option was toclose the 
book. In Werewolf, this is not the case. 


Interactive Storytelling 


Stories in Werewolf are interactive. That is, the audience 
(the troupe) plays as big a role in the story's outcome as the 
Storyteller does. While the Storyteller gives it shape, the 
players give it substance. The Storyteller may decide that in 
order tosave their pack, the characters must defeat Zenubis, an 
ancient spirit of the Wyld who is possessing them and forcing 
them to fight amongst themselves. The players, on the other 
hand, decide how the characters solve this problem. 


Chapter Three: Storytelling 


[LE Te ————P 


Do they seek the creature in the spirit world? Do they force 
itto possess something other than the charactersand then lock 
itaway? Do they trick it into possessing their enemies and then 
destroy it? Do they bargain with it? 

No matter how the Storyteller sets the scene, it is up to the 
characters to decide the outcome. The audience is as instrumental 
as the Storyteller. No longer do the players require the Storyteller 
to tell them everything. Now they can create the story they like. 


«Che Storyteller 


Still, characters cannot exist without a world full of people 
and events to define their personalities and existence. For 
characters to come to life, a world must be created. Such is the 
role of the Storyteller. The Storyteller is responsible for 
everything, besides the characters, that exists in the world. 
This may seem like an impossible task, for developing even 
one player character can be a daunting and time-consuming 
endeavor. 

Butstorytelling is really not so difficult as it sounds. Because 
the world of Werewolf is largely based on the real world, 
Storytellerscan permute their own experiences intostories. Of 
course, there are some minor differences between the World 
of Darkness and our own, but these differences are based on a 
few simple concepts. Moreover, the only strange culture in 
which the characters are likely to get involved is the Garou 
culture, and that is described in detail throughout this book. 


51 


N rn err nr rr ann en rra rd 


The Storyteller can draw on everyday mysteries to enter- 
tain the players. Is that old warehouse on Main Street really 
abandoned? Whatactually happened to that old farmhouse by 
the side of the road? Why did the only good radio station on 
the dial go off the air? For whom do the police work? What 
really goes on in that office building after dark? 

Ofcourse, the above are only rudimentary. One of the most 
important and enjoyable aspects of storytelling is the act of 
creation. The Storyteller has an excuse to create more than 
one character and can let her imagination run free to create a 
whole world. The Storyteller develops a plethora of charac- 
ters, from vile minions ofthe Wyrm to noble elders protecting 
a caern, and decides the direction the chronicle will take. 

Though the freedom to create may be the reason someone 
decides to be a Storyteller, the overriding goals should always 
be toentertain the playersand have fun. Certainly, storytelling 
requires the Storyteller to invest both time and effort, but it 
also requires an investment of time on the part of the players. 
Instead of playing the game, they could be reading a book, 
watching a movie, out on a date, or spending time with their 
families. In order to make the storytelling experience worth- 
while for the players, the Storyteller needs to make their 
investment profitable and fun. 


The Story 


Developing a story requires the Storyteller to juggle many 
different elements. Players can be temporarily mollified with 
frills (like an especially diabolical villain they must defeat, or 
a nifty fetish they may add to their belongings), but to 
maintain the interest of the players over the long term, the 
Storyteller must do some hard work. 

The most basic tenet of good storytelling is ample preparation. 
This does not mean the Storyteller should create an inflexible 
agenda that forces characters to perform certain actions. Remem- 
ber that the players must be able to interact with the story through 
their characters, and the players also have a responsibility to help 
make the story succeed. Ifthe Storyteller denies the characters free 
will at the outset, not only will the players enjoy the story less, but 
the story will suffer. 

Instead, the Storyteller should create a flexible outline of 
probable events and characters. Start the story with the first 
event on the outline. Maybe the characters witness a dump 
truck unloading foul-smelling barrels behind an abandoned 
gas station near their caern. The characters’ reactions deter- 
mine the next step in the story. 

When the players’ reactions are not what you, the Story- 
teller, expected, you may either adapt the elements of your 
story or decide to discard some of the immediate notes and see 
where the players can take the story. Neither choice is better 
than the other, though one may work better for you. If you are 
not skilled at changing the story on the spot, then you must 
find a way to get things back on course. If you cannot think of 
a way to repair the story, then you'll simply have to hope you 
can get back on course later. 

Ifthe players don’t seem to be able to keepa story going, you 
must excite the players’ imaginations and get them involved. 


Don’t make them do anything; instead, hold out a carrot and 
see what happens. Tempt the players into action; never force 
them. 

You can also decide to let the story continue without 
immediate intervention on your part. Either follow the play- 
ers’ lead and improvise based on their actions, or just wait until 
the next point on the outline would normally occur. For 
instance, if, when the aforementioned dump truck pulls out, 
the characters wait down the road instead of following the 
truck or checking out the barrels, rule that the Bane-honey 
inside begins to seep out and infect the ground. While the 
characters notice nothing odd that night, tell the players that 
over the course of the next week, the greenery near theircaern 
wilts and begins to die. If they still do nothing, the Banes 
attracted to the honey destroy both their caern and their land. 

On the other hand, the players may undertake another course 
ofaction you had never expected, but which works just as well. For 
instance, maybe the characters decide to contact local environ- 
mental officials about the dumping. You might want to delay the 
effects of the Bane-honey and let the characters discover just how 
extensive the Wyrm’s corruption of the local government is. The 
players will soon discover that battling a bureaucracy can be even 
more frustrating than fighting fomori. 

Storytellers often find stories more entertaining when even 
they don’t know what’s going to happen next. This variety of 
freeform storytelling can be taxing, but it allows players and 
Storyteller great creative leeway. Storytellers may discover 
new levels of storytelling skill while reacting to what the 
players do. Plots the Storyteller would never have otherwise 
conceived become apparent, and the players usually become 
more involved when they feel theiractions affect the chronicle. 

On the other hand, you may find that on-the-spot improvisa- 
tionis too difficult orjustnot the best method for your group. In this 
case, you will have to create detailed outlines, giving a lot of 
thought to possible tangents the characters may pursue. 


Creating a Story 


While Storytellers get their ideas from any number of 
sources, three are most common. These are: the character- 
based story, the event-based story, and the atmosphere-based 
story, so named to reflect their respective inspirations. 

Forthe character-based story, the Storytellercentersevents 
around a character, generally an antagonist or archvillain. For 
instance, the Storyteller might decide he likes the idea of a 
powerful Wendigo who despises all other tribes of Garou and 
wants to drive them from North America. Once the Story- 
teller has a firm grip on what he wants the character to do, he 
develops an accompanying story. Perhaps the Wendigo cuts a 
deal with the Wyrm, promising the Wyrm an important caern 
if the Wyrm gives him a mighty werewolf-killing fetish. 

Of course, the character does not necessarily have to be 
opposed to the troupe. It could be neutral to the characters, 
allied, or even a member of their pack. A Storyteller may well 
craft a story around a player's character if he feels that the 
character has been overshadowed by the rest of the troupe. 


52 Werewolf: The Apocalypse 


p mmn am, 


————— 


| 


| 


uf SL 


“The event-based smicy follows the opposite pars. The Story 
teller begins with a situation and then populates the story with 
characters who bestexemplify it. In thiscase, the Storyteller might 
like the idea thatall the caerns in New 
power. Aftershe hasformu 
characte 


fork suddenly begin losing 


red the event, she creates appropriate 


: a Weaver spirit that has developed a taste for caem 
power, and a mage who has set it loose. 

The atmosphere-based story is the hardest to conceive, but is 
oftenthemosteffective, The Storyteller, 
ambience, bases the characters and events around that mood. In 


eekingtocreateacertain 


Werewolf, this usually takes the form of the horror story, but that 
is not the only atmosphere Storytellers can create. 
Perl 


reflect the players’ own lives in the game. For instance, if he 


ps the Storyteller wants to illustrate a moral or to 


wants the players to take a more objective look at their own 
lives, he might have them rescue characters much like them- 
selves from a fiendish DNA scientist. Instead of thanking the 
troupe for rescuing them, however, the characters, horrified at 
the existence of fiendish werewolves, turn on the troupe. At 
this point, the real story begins. 

Storytellers may even create an atmosphere based on the 
players’ desires. If one player seems to thrive in combat 
situations, but loses interest elsewhere, the Storyteller may 
devise a story of fast-paced, pulse-pounding combat scenes. 
On the other hand, if a player likes the social interaction 


among werewolves, the Storyteller can create a story of 


intrigue at a moot. Maybe the characters have to convince 
rival packs to stop fighting amongst themselves, but this goal 
issecondary to the roleplaying possibilities the story provides. 

White Wolf often includes stories in its supplements; these 
stories are often useful examples of how to design your own. If 
you have trouble with freeform storytelling, these books 
provide complete stories covering many possibilities. Even if 
you prefer to create your own stories, prepackaged stories may 
provide new fuel for your storytelling engine. Not that our 
books a 


> necessary or required. Just watch a movie or read a 
good book and you'll find yourself inundated with ideas. 


Story Elements 


While there are millions of stories, all good ones have a 
number of factors in common. A good story has a single 
theme and a single mood. The setting somehow involves 
the audience. Some sort of conflict takes place. There is a 
beginning, middle and end. There is both a climax and a 
resolution. Finally, the Storyteller had some kind of pur- 
pose in mind when she devised the story 


Theme 


Stories tend to become unraveled if the Storyteller does not 
keep an eye on things. A story in which the characters must 
solve an important mystery can be ruined should the charac- 
ters begin attacking the suspects, the police and each other. 
An easy way to keep events coherent and help the Storyteller 
come up with ideas for the story is to develop a theme for it. 

A theme can be as innocuous as “there is no ‘I’ in team” or 
as sophisticated as “the increasingly industrialized society of 


the 20th century has mechanized mankind.” The former 
theme allows the Storyteller to make the simple sublime, 
showing how the characters can succeed only by working 
together; the latter allows the development of plots wherein 
humans are used as tools by other people. 

While the Storyteller should strive to center most of the 
story’sevents around the theme, most players will never realize 


what the theme is. However, the right theme can give a story 


a lasting value — an internal strength and consistency — that 
it may otherwise have lacked. Don't get carried away trying to 
make the theme noticeable. Players can be easily turned off by 
what they perceive to be a morality lesson from their Story- 
teller. Present the theme and explore it in the story, but leave 
the lesson to the players. 

Werewolf: The Apocalypse itself has an overall theme, 
which can be integrated into stories. The game embodies the 
collision between the self and the outside world. The Garou 
embody the struggle to balance the inner and outer aspects of 
the psyche. Just as people must struggle to realize their inner 
hopesand drives, they must also heed the society around them 
and adjust to some degree. So must Garou heed the dictates 
of their culture and the will of Gaia while simultaneously 
fulfilling their own needs. 


Mood 


Astory witha tangible mood may provide much more than 
entertainment. By creating a mood, Storytellers evoke an 
emotional response from their players. If players both under- 


Chapter Three: Storytelling 53 


——^———^——»——»—»———————— NN 


stand and feel what is happening to their characters, the 
emotion of a scene can transcend the game. 

Different moods enable the creation of different kinds of 
stories. Some Storytellers are adept at creating a particular 
kind of mood, be it dark and brooding or light and fanciful, but 
this should not limit their experimentation. Not every story 
requires a "light" feel, and telling stories that evoke only that 
kind of mood severely limits the chronicle. "Light" wouldn't 
work, for example, when telling the story of a Garou pack's 
tragic destruction. 

Thebest way toestablish the mood ofa story is to evoke the 
desired mood early in the story — preferably during the first 
moments. If you want a light mood, try a trick like playing a 
cheerful song and telling the players that their characters are 
listening to their car radio. Then tell them that they are racing 
down the road in a luxury car on a sunny day on their way to 
a party thrown by another pack. Such an introduction should 
place the players in the right frame of mind to deal with the 
werecoyote who has been playing practical jokes on the local 
Garou. 

Even after the players are immersed in the story, reinforce 
the mood every chance you get. If things are going well, the 
players will perpetuate the mood on their own. Everything the 
characters experience or do will be viewed through the “lens” 
of the mood. 


Setting 


While the players may never know with certainty what the 
theme and mood of a story was, the setting is readily notice- 
able. An interesting, realistic setting makesall other aspects of the 
story seem real and believable; indeed, the players’ imaginations 
will often provide any details the Storyteller may have omitted. 
Conversely, a contrived, boring setting will detract from an 
otherwise acceptable story, forcing the players to focuson its faults. 

Of course, a story will likely have a number of different 
settings. It may begin at a caern, move to a remote cabin, 
meander through the Umbra and conclude in downtown 
Chicago. Telling a story set in just one place can occasionally 
be an interesting experiment or dalliance, but even a short 
story is likely to involve movement from location to location. 

While not all settings require a great deal of detail, the 
Storyteller should accurately and completely describe what 
the characters perceive, thus ensuring that the players have 
few questions later in the story. Physical objects, weather, 
smells, sounds and other factors all play a role in this. 

The fact that the world of Werewolf is so similar to our own 
world facilitates such description. Most settings (forests, buildings, 
etc.) are identical, orat least similar, to their real-life counterparts. 
There’snoneed toleam detailsofsomestrange, make-believe land 
(except when the characters journey to the Umbra, and the 
Storyteller can describe this area however she likes). 


Conflict 


The core of every story is conflict. Note that conflict is not 
synonymous with combat. In fact, the best conflict is often 
resolved without violence. Conflict refers to the opposition 


54 Werewolf: The Apocalypse 


a u + / 


the characters face in accomplishing their goals. When a 
Garou of higher Rank insists that the pack destroy a group of 
human campers, theconflictcomesnotfromanyfightbutfrom 
the pack’s refusal to obey. The characters must find out why the 
elder feels so vehemently about the campers and create an 
alternate solution. While this should involve no combat, it will 
include a great deal of conflict. 

Conflictcan be subdivided into literary themes. In Werewolf 
terms, types of conflict include: Garou versus individuals, 
Garou versus society, Garou versus nature, Garou versus the 
unknown, and Garou versus self. A decision about which type 
of conflict to use makes creating a story many times easier. 

Garou versus individuals is the most common Werewolf 
story —forexample, when the characters fight Pentex hitmen, 
powerful spirits and the undead to thwart the schemes ofa vile 
Black Spiral Dancer. 

Garou versus society is the second most common Werewolf 
story. The society in question is usually, though not always, 
that of humans. Garou culture, strict and regimented as it is, 
can also provide a unique stumbling block. Characters can 
easily find themselves at odds with the mores of their people. 
Battling society can be a frustrating but ultimately rewarding 
experience. 

While Garou versus nature appears contradictory at first 
glance, volcanoes, earthquakes and floods are as fatal to 
werewolves as they are to humans (well, almost). These types 
of conflicts are often subplots of other conflicts — for example, 
when the pack must make its way through a raging snowstorm 
to discover if a mad werewolf has escaped his asylum. 

Garou versus the unknown is a common conflict in the 
Umbra. However, every lupus has experienced such conflict 
upon first entering a city, and imagine the pack’s confusion 
when it meets a wereshark for the first time. 

Garou versus self may well be the least-used conflict, but it 
enables the creation of fascinatingstories. It appears most often 
when a character must subdue the Beast within himself, 
avoiding frenzy to achieve some important goal. It can also 
appear when a character must overcome her own weakness to 
solve some problem. 


Plots and Plotting 


A story does not just move randomly from place to place. 
Every story has phases within it: a beginning, middle and end. 
Like that of any other storytelling medium, be it a movie or a 
book, the plot in games like Werewolf: The Apocalypse is the 
series of events that forms a given story. Plotting is the way the 
plot comes together. 

In most cases, a story develops over a number of scenes; each 
scene somehow advances the story as a whole. As a general 
tule, the opening scene attracts the players’ interest and gives 
them an idea of what is happening. The middle scenes expand 
and develop the conflict. The final scene allows the characters 
to resolve the story in one way or another. 

Thus, if a story can be defined as a series of events, the plot 
is the order in which these events occur. Things should not be 
so simple that the characters merely go from Point A to Point 


B. The difference between a good plotanda bad plot, however, 
is not the difference between complication and simplicity. It’s 
okay to wrap a plot in layers of mystery, but unnecessary 
complications weigh down what could otherwise be a better 
story. 

A good plot also requires proper pacing. Don't feed the plot 
to the characters in an orderly, predictable fashion. Shake 
things up with "excesses" like plot twists or interesting sub- 
plots. Such excesses can often advance the main plot, not 
hinder it. Build up slowly to a climax that resolves the story. 

The bare outlines of one successful plot could look like this: 

First, set the scene, thereby allowing the players to slip into 
the roles of their characters. Then provide a hook — some- 
thing that sets the plot in motion. Perhaps a fomor the 
characters have previously fought appears mortally injured on 
their doorstep and only has time to croak out, *Beware the 
golden mule,” before dying. You've hooked them. 

Next, begin the process of ups and downs that gradually 
increases tension and expectation. Build up thesuspenseas the 
characters discover what has transpired. Using the aforemen- 
tioned example, the characters discover that the Wyrmhole 
the fomor had guarded has become extremely active, and 
Wyrm creatures emerge from it every night. When the time is 
right, you can spring the climax — a Get of Fenris metis with 
a golden coat has taken over the Wyrmhole and plans to 
unleash its fury on a nearby city. 

Now the players decide how they want their characters to 
handle the situation, and the climax determines how well 
their plans work. Do they try and talk the Get out of its mad 
plan, or do they fight it and its army of Wyrm beasts? Do they 
enlist outside help, perhaps discovering the only surviving 
member of the Get of Fenris pack, or do they handle things on 
their own? Do they win, lose or draw? 


Climax and Resolution 


If the plot ofa story is analogous to a roller-coaster ride, the 
climax is the biggest hill ofall. Prime the players with suspense- 
ful hints of what is to come, but don't reveal anything to them 
until the plot requires it. 

The climax is the penultimate moment of the story, juxta- 
posing all the characters, emotions and events and allowing 
the players to realize their significance. Here the characters 
succeed or fail, fight or compromise. There may well have been 
otherhighs in the game, but the climax should surpass the rest. 

Itcan be rewarding to continue play foran additional scene 
after the climax. This restful period at the end of the story 
allows the players to consider the story while they are still in 
the midst of it and to wrap up any loose ends. Known as the 
denouement (de-nu-ma), this is the point where any final 
details are resolved. Of course, there may still be a number of 
loose ends, thus providing the troupe with a host of future 
stories. 


The Goal 


As mentioned earlier, the main goal of any story is to 
entertain the audience and the Storyteller. However, the 


Chapter Three: Storytelling 


fA Um, PA Ts m ———— 


Storyteller and players may also have other objectives. Per- 
haps the Storyteller wants to illustrate the dangers of 
environmental neglect. 

The goal, while in many ways similar to the theme, is the 
actual purpose of the game rather than the thread running 
throughout it. Focusing on the goal as well as the theme will 
make the story easier to develop and tell, and hopefully make 
the game more enjoyable for all. 


Telling the Story 


Afterall thehard work preparingasessionofastorytellinggame, 
nothing is more rewarding than watching the players have a 
genuinely good time. Still, the best-developed story can be ruined 
inthe telling. Emphasis must also be laid on the act of storytelling. 


Work with Players 


The most important storytelling advice concerns the play- 
ers. Dealing with the players can sometimes be difficult 
(especially when they do something that completely disrupts 
your plans), but your goal should be to integrate them as 
smoothly as possible into the flow of the story. This means 
involving everyone in as many aspects of the story as you 
possibly can. 

In most troupes, certain players try to dominate play and 
direct everyone’s attention toward themselves. Do not reward 
this sort of behavior. Try to involve everyone, especially the 
new or quiet players. If you don't involve them, they won't 
have as much fun as they could, and entertaining the players 
is your primary goal. Remember, the characters in Werewolf 
almost always make up a pack; they should have to work 
together to survive. While you may want to base some stories 
on specific members of the pack, everyone should play a role. 

Itcan be difficult to balance the desires of all the players, but 
it is usually a simple matter to give each player a little bit of 
what she most enjoys. If a player is neglected because of the 
events of a given story, try to plan the next story's events and 
situations specifically around that player. 

Players can have very diverse motivations: to accumulate 
power, to become someone else, to gain a sense of accomplish- 
ment, to solve problems, to experience strong emotions, to 
compete, or just to be with friends. You need to balance the 
desires of all the players; if you exclude someone, that person 
will tend to disrupt the game for everyone else. 

The desires of a single player are likely to be a combination 
of twoor more motivations. One player may roleplay primarily 
to be with her friends, but may also want to play a character 
who gains great powers and can combat the Wyrm better than 
anyone else around can. 


Maintain the Mood 


Because storytelling games are designed to be fun, players often 
make light of the situations in which their characters find them- 
selves. Players joke, make bad puns, and soon. While this is usually 
fine, it may not always be what you, the Storyteller, want. 


55 


Forinstance, if youare trying to create an atmosphere of horror, 
you do not want one of the players breaking the tension at the 
wrong moment. If the climax of the story is to be a race out of a 
Wyrm-corrupted mansion with unknown horrors hiding behind 
every corner, the players should not be relaxed and at ease. They 
should be tense and on the edges of their seats. 

If you want to build the tension and drama, you should take 
the lead in setting the mood. Don't start cracking jokes 
yourself. Have the antagonists be dour and somber; describe 
themas vile and malevolent. If you evoke the mood early, the 
players will be less likely to break it later. 


Know the Systems 


It is the Storyteller’s duty to know the game systems. Rules 
can sometimes be very confusing. The minor inconsistencies 
inevitable in every game don't help either. In the end, it's your 
job to be the final interpreter of the rules and to decide in a 
practical way how the rules apply in your game. Remember 
that you control everything save the players’ characters. If you 
decide that the players must score five successes to scale the 
cliff and escape the slavering horde of Banes, then that's how 
many successes it takes, regardless of how any of the players 
may interpret the rules. 

However, as the arbiter of the rules, it's also your duty to be 
fair. Act impartially and reasonably for all involved. A Story- 
teller must be an umpire of clear and sound judgment. 


Sometimes, the story's events will require you to transcend 
the rules, or even break them. Breaking rules is often necessary 
to tell the best story or to make sense out of the story. In order 
to maintain the players' trust, breaking the rules should 
probably not occur regularly; otherwise, the players may rely 
on you to break the rules whenever they are in a jam. This will 
destroy the free will of the characters and eliminate the drama 
of every scene. Of course, you may decide to change the rules 
permanently in some way; this we encourage, so long as 
everyone knows a given rule has been changed. 

Going beyond the rules is just as important as knowing 
when to break them. This book cannot possibly predict every 
eventuality that will arise during play. At times, you must 
create new rules on the spot. You can make a snap decision to 
fill the hole for the moment, but before you play again, 
evaluate the problem and decide whether your solution was 
the best one. If not, change your ruling. Either way, you need 
to tell the players how such situations will be handled in the 
future. Consistency is a major virtue in a Storyteller. 


The Chronicle 


A chronicle isa series of connected stories that collectively 
tell a tale of larger scope and greater content. If a story is a 
chapter in a book, then a chronicle is the entire novel. (Or 
trilogy. Or 10-book series.) Chronicles can continue for sev- 
eral years, and the characters may last for decades of game time. 

A chronicle takes care and inspiration to create. In order to 
succeed, achronicle must have the same vitality asa character. 
The chapters of a book cannot be placed in any random order 


56 Werewolf: The Apocalypse 


y ERR, URP ERIT ID BP ———— À 


ifonedesiresa work worth reading and admiring. Each chapter 
must build on the last, just as the stories of a chronicle must. 

Storiesare obviously important to a storytelling game, but the 
chronicle provides scope and strength to the stories being told. A 
carefully constructed chronicle can helpaplayersuspenddisbelief, 
can fill holes individual stories might create, and can provide 
subsequent reasons for any discrepancies or contradictions. If the 
players trust your chronicle, they will soon trust that most features 
of your story have a reason, or at least a valid excuse. Players will 
not besoquick to point out flaws, for they will trust you to address. 
their concerns sooner or later. 

Additionally, a chronicle helps players see the big picture. 
It enables them to understand the Storyteller's purpose and 
lets the Storyteller build bigger and grander stories. The 
villains become more awe-inspiring. The events become more 
world-shattering. The atmospheres become more compelling, 
and the individual stories become that much better. 

Finally, a chronicle gives both the players and Storyteller a 
sense of accomplishment. The players see the effect their 
characters’ actions have on the world. They begin to make 
plans for the future, perhaps creating and maintaining their 
own caern. The Storyteller sees his stories blossom over the 
long haul and takes pride in what she has nurtured. Indeed, the 
Storyteller may want to name his chronicle, to give the players 
an idea of the scope of the undertaking in which they are 
involved. 


Common Stories and 
Chronicles 


A comprehensive list of the myriad story possibilities for 
Werewolf would be impossible to compile; however, the 
following section details some of the most common ones. 
Some of these concepts can also structure a chronicle, and 
Storytellers should feel free to develop their own ideas. 

* Preludes: Early in the chronicle, the Storyteller and 
troupe may want to explore the characters’ lives before they 
joined their pack. These preludes are usually set before the 
characters even became aware that they were werewolves. 
Preludes increase players’ empathy for their characters and 
allow the Storyteller insight into what the players want out of 
the game. Many groups like to run preludes during the very first 
session of play. 

* Rite of Passage: Another story, one generally set early in 
the chronicle, allows the characters to come to grips with their 
Garou nature. This “Rite of Passage” often takes the form of a 
mission given the characters by their elders shortly after the 
revelation of the characters’ Garou nature. A Rite of Passage 
canalso involve any type of discovery that causes deep change 
in a character. Of course, the Wyrm and other forces often 
attack such young and theoretically helpless pups, so what 
should have been an easy mission may turn into a harrowing 
battle for survival. 

* Garou vs. the Wyrm: This battle is the most important 
to the Garou asa race. Unless the corrupting influence of the 


— IR 


Wyrm can be negated, Gaia Herself will be destroyed. Pollu- 
tion and deforestation from the Weaver and war from the 
Wyld are the results of the corruption of the Wyrm. In many 
cases, battling the Wyrm involves seeking it on its own ground 
— even venturing into the radioactive wastelands of the 
Wyrm caerns. There, bold Garou must face both spirit crea- 
turesand mortal minions suchas Black Spiral Dancers, fomori, 
foul corporations, mortal assassins, vampires and mages. 

Characters may be called upon to invade Wyrm strong- 
holds, defend caerns from attackers, stop the kidnappings of 
young Garou, rescue a werewolf captured by a Bane spirit, or 
anything else the Storyteller can think of. 

+ Garou vs. the Weaver: The Weaver has casther glass and 
steel webs over much of the world. Her human tools have 
inflicted great damage to Gaia in the name of “progress.” The 
spider-spirit must be prevented from growing any stronger 
(and indeed must be weakened) lest the planet asphyxiate. 

While the Wyrm controls many of the human institutions 
the characters will battle, many more are Weaver creations. 
Some Garou argue that the Weaver's encroachment is more 
dangerous than that of the Wyrm, for it is more covert. 

* Garou vs. the Wyld: While the Garou largely support 
the Wyld, some Wyld spirits are simply too uncontrollable and 
must be stopped from spreading random chaos. 

* Garou vs. Humans: This struggle can be traced to the 
Impergium. Even today, some Garou consider themselves the 
rightful masters of the human race, but most know better — 
the humans pose the greatest threat (in a physical sense, 
anyway) to the Garou. The inexorable tide of civilization isthe 
Garou’s greatest enemy. As urban blight eats their lands and 
caerns, the Garou are forced to battle among themselves, like 
starving wolves in winter, for a share of the dwindling re- 
sources. Many Garou advocate outright genocide, and certainly 
all agree that something must be done to quell overcrowding 
and pollution before it is too late. 

* Garou vs. Vampires: In many respects, Garou and 
Kindred are natural enemies. The Kindred actively promote 
urban expansion, the very thing that most Garou dread, in 
order to replenish their human herds. While the Garou- 
Kindred war is not so all-pervading as some believe, it is still a 
common event. Much of the material in Vampire: The 
Masquerade and its supplements applies to Werewolf: The 
Apocalypse. The political wars of the Kindred can involve the 
Garou in any number of ways. 

* Garou vs. Garou: While the Garou supposedly share the 
same goals, this has not stopped them from battling amongst 
themselves. The Native American tribes hate the invaders. 
Black Furies despise the Get of Fenris, and nobody trusts the 
Shadow Lords. These fights often take the form of formal or 
quasiformal challenges, but they can turn extremely violent at 
a moment's notice. 

* Packmate vs. Packmate: The environment of a pack is 
a volatile one, for it is formed from strangers who have 
discovered that they are not who and what they thought they 
were. A pack can be a crucible for stress, and intrapack 
conflicts can be as brutal as any war against the Wyrm. 


* Pack vs. Pack: Instinctual Garou competitiveness fo- 
cuses outside the pack once the packmates have established 
internal order. Each pack wants the duties and quests that offer 
the most Renown. Additionally, most packs have territory 
they consider their own, and they do not like trespassers of any 
kind. 

* Tradition vs. Change: Garou society is based on follow- 
ing and perpetuating the traditions of the past. Some Garou, 
however, demand that this aspect of themselves be discarded, 
foritis obviously why the Garou have failed in their tasks. New 
times have created new traditions and forced the revocation of 
oldones, but the pace of change is always hotly debated among 
the Garou. 

* Exploration: No matter how much the Garou think they 
know, there is always more to learn. The Umbra is an unex- 
plored land of incredible possibilities. Anything can happen 
there, and Storytellers should take advantage of that fact. Still, 
even Earth can provide innumerable opportunities for explo- 
ration. The wilderness is an alien environment to homids, and 
cities are the same for lupus. 

Additionally, some caerns have been lost to the corrupting 
powers ofthe Wyrm. Normally, caerns simply disappear, never 
to return. Sometimes, however, the Wyrm is only able to 
smother a caern temporarily. Such caerns fade ... and out of 
existence either randomly or at regular intervals. Caerns that 
return can hold secrets and powers heretofore thought lost. 

* Love: Garou are emotional beings, and the passions 
evoked by love can be felt as strongly among them as among 


Chapter Three: Storytelling 57 


humankind. Because theirnumbersare dwindling, some Garou 
feel that it is their duty to find a mate and produce offspring. 
Others can’t help but heed these emotions. Stories can be built 
around the active search for a mate or even the happenstance 
of meetingsomeone who can return your love. But what if your 
love is another Garou? 

* Moot: These gatherings of the Garou provide rich oppor- 
tunities for a variety of stories. Not only are there the events 
of the moot itself — the contests, meetings and socializing — 
but strange events could occur to disturb the routine of the 
moot. Perhaps one pack, sept or tribe tries to use the moot as 
a forum to instigate dramatic change in Garou society. Myste- 
rious events like disappearances and escaped spirits can also 
generate excitement. Finally, moots allow characters access to 
elders willing to instruct them in the ancient powers. 

* Nature: Just as there are stories dealing with the human 
half of the Garou, so too may stories be told about Garou in 
their wolf forms. Because the composition of the stories is so 
different from that of other storytelling or roleplaying games, 
the stories themselves need not be so complex as ones set 
within civilization. For example, simply accompanying a 
dying wolf to his final resting place could be a learning 
experience for the players. Multitudinous story possibilities 
can be drawn from the juxtaposition of civilization and nature. 
Why are the animals dying when they drink from the regular 
waterhole? 

* Past Lives: Justas the history, traditions and rituals of the 
Garou affect modern Garou society, so too can individual 
Garou be intimately connected to the past. Garou have a 
tendency to recall their previous incarnations. Discovery of an 
ancestral success or failure can spark an interesting story, or at 
the very least an engaging parallel story or flashback. 

* Visionquest: The spirit world isa vital part of the Garou 
cosmology. Within the Umbra dwell the spirits the Garou 
claim compose the very fabric of our reality. The spirit world 
holds secrets, powers that the Garou must sometimes contact, 
and danger. The visionquest story involves an Umbral search 
for knowledge. The spirit world is vast and untamed; many 
exhilarating discoveries await those who seek its truths. 

* Penance: An especially powerful kind of story, penance 
involves the characters’ attempts to atone for some past 
misdeed. The mistake need not be theirs; they may have to 
bear the sins of the entire sept or fulfill the dying wish of a 
Silent Strider. 

* Becoming a Beast: This type of story usually involves a 
Garou coming to grips with her frenzies and their effects. For 
instance, a werewolf who fled battle in a frenzy of fear might 
later have to deal with the fact that her cowardice caused the 
death of a pack member. Forgiving herself might require a 
penance-type story, but will more likely involve the character 
accepting her animal nature. 

* Insanity: Some Garou never learn of their true heritage, 
instead discovering their horrifying powers without guidance. 
Such Garou are called Lunatics, for they lack the control and 
knowledge that allow Garou to become a part of the environ- 
ment, not deviate from it. This type of story usually involves 


58 Werewolf: The Apocalypse 


(ee ee ee —— ı/ 


the players stopping rogue Garou. On the other hand, a 
Storyteller may have the characters begin the chronicle as 
Lunatics or even go insane during the game. 

* Renunciation: According to the tenets of their culture, 
Garou are allowed to relieve themselves of responsibility for 
who and what they were in the past. This process is called 
renunciation; a Garou who announces it becomes a new 
person. All honors and position held in his previous life are 
voided. The character then has the chance to make herself 
anew. The Storyteller may opt to begin achronicle with all the 
characters having just renounced their pasts. 

* Superheroes: The Garou do not have to fight their 
traditional enemiesall the time. Afterall, they have incredible 
powers and may decide to fight crime, corruption or whatever. 
Who knows why those supervillains keep popping up? 

* Uncles: All successful Garou are expected at some point 
to provide for the support and development of a new genera- 
tion of Garou. As the character was once kidnapped and 
shown her true heritage, so must she now become an Uncle. 
The formation of a new pack is an important task and 
obligation in Garou society. Because the Garou "gene" some- 
times skips many generations, and Garou are often not alive 
whenchildren of their makingare born, this isa fine substitute 
for raising a family. 

* Dying Breed: The Garou are dying. This is the sad truth 
inany chronicle, but in this story the situation is driven home. 
The pack of player Garou may well be the last pack of 
werewolves left on Earth. The pack is the last hope to save 
Gaiaand the Wyld. The characters will have to be bolder and 
more outrageous in their methods, and this will force them 
into conflict with the older Garou who still live (if any). The 
characters will also be more heavily targeted by the enemies of 
Gaia. 


Storyteller Characters and 
Antagonists 


No elements of a chronicle are more evocative than the 
characters the pack encounters. Of course, not all characters the 
pack meets will prove memorable, nor should they. After all, most 
ofthe characters will only have bit parts and appear infrequently. 
Some will not survive their encounter with the characters. 

This does not mean the Storyteller can ignore these minor 
characters. The morereal he makes them, the more the players will 
enjoy the story. So what if the only function of the gas station 
attendantistogive the pack directions? He hashisown history and 
background. He can be helpful or rude, talkative or silent. Maybe 
he has a New England accent or a habit of never looking anyone 
in the eye. Give him a spark of life and a bit of individuality; the 
story will be that much more interesting. 

The more important thecharacter, the more the Storyteller 
should develop her. A good starting point is the character's 
motivation. Why is she doing what she does? Why is that 
banker financing a team of mercenaries to kill the characters? 
What reason could the Black Fury possibly have for asking that 
the pack stop its investigation of a human hunting lodge? 


Once the Storyteller has the character's motivation, other 
details can be constructed to support it. Perhaps the Black Fury 
is nervous and fidgety, looks around a lot, and smokes a 
cigarette. Sheacts very concerned about children and goes out 
of her way to help them. When the characters discover that 
hersonisoneofthe hunters, they will begin to understand why 
she does not want them involved. 

Most characters the Storyteller introduces are not evil. 
Indeed, many antagonists are simply individuals or groups 
whose goals conflict with those of the characters. Other 
characters will not oppose the characters, but will have their 
own reasons for doing what they do. 

The antagonists that are usually the most fun, however, are 
the villains — individuals the pack knows are malevolent or 
evil. Some villains should recur time and time again, becom- 
ing greater and greater threats each time. This provides 
continuity tothe chronicle and gives the playersa familiar face 
that they may well love to hate. Players will always remember 
the rogue Silver Fang who began his strip-mining company 
with the proceeds garnered from selling his old pack to the 
Wyrm, or Deysered, the corpse-spirit who sent legions of 
undead against them. 

Villains in Werewolf can take many forms. Some of the 
most likely villains include Kindred, mages, fomori, other 
Garou, and humans, especially CEOs or small-minded politi- 
cians. Other antagonists can include faeries, spirits, and other 
supernatural beings such as mummies. 

See the Appendix for examples of antagonists. 


Advanced Storytelling 


The above gives the basics of being a Storyteller. Every 
Storyteller develops his own techniques and style, doing what 
is most necessary to improve his stories. This section details a 
number of ways the Storyteller can transcend the norm and 
thereby make his stories even more memorable and exciting. 


Flashback 


A flashback is a scene from the past that relates to the 
present. Flashbacks are especially popular in movies, but 
storytelling can also take advantage of this technique. The 
flashback technique is often used to explain the history of 
some element of the story at hand. 

During the flashback, players take the roles of characters 
involved in the flashback. These characters will usually not be 
the players’ regular characters, but the participants should 
have immediate relation to the main story. If the players’ true 
characters are not involved in the flashback, the players 
should not use any information gained therein to affect the 
“teal” story. The flashback is designed to give the players a 
glimpse of the behind-the-scenes incidents that spawned the 
current events. 


The flashback may also be from one of the true characters’ 
pasts. In that case, how well the characters do will havea direct 
bearing on the game, for at least one of the characters will 
know exactly what led to the current situation. 


Parallel Story 


Parallel stories differ from flashbacks in that they are not 
connected to the “real” story. Only the theme need stay 
constant. In a parallel story, the players take control of a 
completely new group of characters (often similar to their 
original characters), usually ones created by the Storyteller. By 
playing through the parallel story, the players will get a better 
grasp of what is transpiring in the main story. 

Players often enjoy parallel stories because they give them the 
chance to play characters they would otherwise never have used. 
They are usually set in completely unexpected environments, and 
the players uncover surprises everywhere they tum. While Story- 
tellershave tobe freer with information ina parallel story, there will 
be plenty of new things for the players to discover. 

Every story has a parallel story waiting to be told, but don’t 
overuse this technique. Parallel storieshave the most impact when. 
they are used infrequently to impart a new facet of the theme. 


(Dream Sequence 


Many fantasy stories have been told asdream sequences. In fact, 
the clichéd ending, “...and then he awoke to discover that it had 
only been a dream...” may have soured this advanced story 
concept. Still, dream sequences can be extremely effective, espe- 
cially in the context of storytelling games. 

A dream sequence is actually just what the cliché says. It's 
adream that is either shared by all the characters or is specific 
to one of them. In the dream, the characters are either 
themselves or parodies of themselves. If the dream is that of 
only one character, the other players may still participate in 
the dream by assuming the roles of their own characters or, as 
in parallel stories, entirely new characters. 

Adreamisan interesting format for storytelling, for itallows 
the Storyteller to be much more liberal in her treatment of 
storytelling conventions. For instance, the Storyteller can 
exert more control over the characters, or she can nullify the 
laws of physics and ignore the Werewolf systems. Characters 
may suddenly demonstrate new Gifts or forget old ones. 

The dream need not be that of a character. A person 
completely unknown to the characters may have a vision that 
somehow relates to the characters. The players need never 
know whose dream they entered, but the story of the dream 
should always be important to their characters. 

The dream should somehow reflect the "real" story, illumi- 
nating an aspect of the story deemed important by the 
Storyteller. For example, if the "real" story involves the 
characters’ hunt fora human who indiscriminately kills beings 
of all races, including humans, then perhaps the dream story 
is one of the hunter's own dreams. His dreams are likely to be 
frightening, as he lashes out against everything in his environ- 
ment. The players may be amazed to see their characters as 
villains—grotesque monstrosities chasing the hunter through 
a surreal landscape. 

Dreams are very important to Garou, who see them as 
primordial connections to the spirit world. Garou, particularly 
those with the Background Trait of Past Life, often have 


Chapter Three: Storytelling 59 


Y/O TIA EN A A —————— MÀ 


precognitive or otherwise important dreams, and an entire 
pack may share dreams. Consequently, these dreams should 
have great impact on the characters. 


Foreshadowing 


Haveyoueverbeenreadingabookorwatchingamovieand 
suddenly gotten a sense of what is going to happen next? This 
has happened to everybody at some time or another, and 
there's more to it than seeing through a poorly constructed, 
clichéd plot. It’s called foreshadowing, and authors, at least the 
good ones, do it on purpose. 

When you gain a sense of what's going to happen, you are 
at the mercy of the Storyteller. Even though you know 
something is going to happen, you don’t know exactly when. 
This timing is the power the Storyteller has over you. By 
wielding this power well, the Storyteller can hold you inastate 
of suspense. When the expected is finally sprung, you are still 
surprised. 

Foreshadowing is a wonderful element to use in storytelling 
games, The characters will often know in advance that things 
are going to happen, so you, the Storyteller, need to use your 
power of timing to keep the excitement at a peak. You should 
make a conscious effort to foreshadow impending events or 
situations by giving subtle hints to the characters. If they pick 
upon the hints, then great. If they don't, well, they had their 
chance. Now they'll be surprised not by the timing, but by the 
event itself. 

You don't want to foreshadow everything that's going to 
happen. When used with restraint, however, it's an effective 
technique. The characters may even know at the very begin- 
ningofthestory exactly how things are going to end. Sure they 
know Pentex is using kidnapped children as bait. They still 
have to go rescue them. 


Repetition 

Repetition is more than just the blatant recurrence of certain 
events or characters. The most innocuous elements, when re- 
peated, may help provide depth to a story. At first, only the 
Storyteller may be aware of the repetition. Something as minor as 
speech patterns or an ever-present corporate logo can get the 
players thinking and involve them that much more in the story. 

Repetition is also a great way to instill paranoia in the 
players. Why are so many people "accidentally" spilling sodas 
on them? Everyone apologizes profusely. No one tries to pick 
a fight. The characters just keep getting spilled on. Maybe 
there is some greater conspiracy. More than likely there isn't, 
and the Storyteller is simply having fun at their expense. 


Pack Conflict 


Intrapack fighting should usually be discouraged. Nothing 
slows down a game or is so likely to upset players as constant 
friction within the group — unless the Storyteller hasan ulterior 
motive. 

Sometimes, however, the story demands such strife. Get the 
characters insulting one another, staring each other down, and 


60 Werewolf: The Apocalypse 


Ama. UR, EPA SEDA D E ————Á—74 


throwing punches. Why do this? Because it will pay off at the end 
of the story. 

Perhaps the story centers around a spirit that is possessing 
one of the characters. Maybe some other Garou is using a Gift 
to provoke such animosity. Maybe one of the characters is 
being blackmailed into destroying the pack. In these ex- 
amples, one player must be in on what the Storyteller is doing. 
Of course, if one player fails to show up for a story, then her 
character is fair game for Storyteller manipulation. 

There are a number of ways to encourage such discord. 
Begin passing secret notes to select players. Surreptitiously 
inform one character that another has been criticizing him 
behind his back. Forceasituation where one character frenzies 
and attacks another. Remember, however, that pack conflict 
should not be a common event; in almost all cases, the pack 
should actually become stronger in the end. When the char- 
acters understand the cause of the strife, they will realize that 
they must work together as never before. 


Symbolism 


A powerful element in literature, symbolism can also be used 
effectively in storytelling. Whilesymbolscan work onasmall scale 
withinasinglestory, theirtrueusefulnessbecomesapparent during 
anextendedchronicle. Withinasinglestory, afomorcan represent 
the price someone will pay for power. In a chronicle, the sheer 
numbersoffomorican represent the alienation somany peoplefeel 
and their need to find identity — any identity. 

Symbols can connect otherwise disparate stories, but cer- 
tain symbols have a more metaphorical aspect. The dove 
symbolizes peace. A torch or flame often represents the quest 
for knowledge. Sand can symbolize time. The Garou them- 
selvesare an importantsymbol, for they represent the instinctual 
aspect of human nature, the Beast humans have not yet 
completely overcome. What a Garou does, he does to survive; 
he is as unblemished by this life, as heedless of “higher 
morality,” as Nature herself. 

If we humans are savages who have adopted society to temper, 
or sometimes further, our aggressive tendencies, then the Garou 
are “humans” who never accepted society. They are savages who 
denied that the dawning of intelligence and reason necessitated 
the conquest of the environment. Werewolves’ lives are still very 
ritualized, for this is the form through which society has en- 
croached upon them. There are Garou who treat these rules with 
disdain, just as there are people in our world whorebel, but the elder 
Garou accept this as the ever-honored Garou philosophy of 
balance being maintained. 

Ofcourse, all symbols are open to interpretation. The moon 
can symbolize the inner self or soul of the Garou, or madness, 
ora number of other things. The spirits can be likened to our 
consciousness, so when the moon is full, spirits are most 
accessible to shamans. Garou born under the new moon can 
most readily hide from the harshness of Garou culture. Thus, 
when Garou howlat the moon, they honor not only its nature 
but their own nature as well. 

Silversymbolically represents the brightest of truths. These 
are the elements of our lives that can most hurt us, even when 


we fancy ourselves invulnerable. Silver is the weapon we use 
against one another, but which can also be turned against us. 
In caring hands, silver can be gloriously beautiful and nobly 
useful, but in hurting hands our most intimate secrets can also 
sear our hearts. 

The meanings of the Wyld, Weaver and Wyrm are very 
accessible, for the Triat asa whole deals with one of the greater 
symbolic elements in the game — spirits. Spirits form the basis 
for how Garou structure reality. Such categorizations auto- 
matically include a cultural bias; thus, spirits can be seen as 
reflective of the deep thoughts of the Garou. Each spirit 
representsa very particular aspect of reality. The nature of the 
aspect varies from spirit to spirit, but it is something specific, 
like greed, strength or compassion. The interaction between 
these spirits and the Triat speaks volumes. 

The Wyld is an optimizing of reality. It is the aspect of reality 
that permits freedom, or mutability, to the rest of reality. So long 
as the Wyld exists, change is possible. No system, no matter how 
vain, practical or evil, can long exist where others have hamessed 
the Wyld. No matter how good the Wyld seems, though, it must 
be stabilized. Otherwise, its dynamic functions will quickly under- 
mine the capacity for anything at all to exist in a discernible form. 
Only chaos would remain. 

The Weaver is just the opposite. It represents tradition, ritual, 
and practice — the immutable elements of reality. The Weaver 
attempts tocodify everything that exists or that could exist. In fact, 
the very process ofexistence and nonexistence is what the Weaver 


S 
Pan 


/ Wy 


A 


seeks to control. Only those things the Weaver has structured can 
exist. While life requires stabilizing factors lest everything run 
amok, the Weaverseekstoo muchstability. There mustbe change, 
for without change there is stagnation. 

The Wyrm is the worst of both of the others. It iscorruption, 
stagnation and eventually the nothingness of the void, for the 
Wyrm twists and catabolizes otherwise pure functions. The 
Wyrm is what happens when a system cannot properly defend 
itself from either too much or too little form. 


Advanced Chronicles 


Just as stories have advanced concepts that can be utilized 
once the basics have been mastered, so too do chronicles. 
Advanced concepts in chronicles, however, require a great 
deal of planning and preparation to use effectively. 


Historical 


Though this book assumes that a Werewolf chronicle will be 
setinthe WorldofDarkness, there isnoreasona Storytellercannot 
set a chronicle in the past. What role did the Garou play in the 
American Civil War? For that matter, what were tribal conflicts 
like during the prehistory of the Impergium? While this requires 
theStoryteller to learn something about the period during which 
thechronicle isset, italsogiveshim greater freedom, for the players 
know less about their characters’ world. 


Other Realms 


Though the stories of Werewolf: The Apocalypse are 
intended to be set against the backdrop ofa world much like 
ourown, the Garouare vital and interesting enough to offer 
possibilities in other settings as well. Stories can be set on 
a post-holocaust world; here, the Garou's battle is truly 
desperate, for the machinations of mankind's wars have 
brought the world perilously close to ruin. Perhaps the 
troupe prefers a fantasy setting wherein the Garou are but 
one of many strange races of the world. Still other stories 
can be set in a science fiction setting where the Garou have 
the opportunity to thwart the power of the Weaver on 
other planets before it even poses a threat. 


Troupe-Style Play 


In troupe-style play, players control more than one 
character and, usually, share the storytelling duties. For 
instance, one member of the troupe may be interested in 
telling Umbra-oriented stories, while another prefers more 
physical ones. Thus, the players create two packs within the 
same sept, and while they have many opportunities to mix, 
usually each is off doing its own thing. 

Another way to handle troupe-style play is to have each 
character create both Garou and Kinfolk characters. The 
Kinfolk can be the basis of the story, investigating odd 
occurrences and battling the Wyrm, but they may call on 
the Garou in times of trouble. 


> 
IS 
| 
b 
b 
y 
h 
£ 
> 
B 


T VINST ar 


Kur hes men 
CNN 


Narr tofmendlandimendl End mend!) 
Mad! er m All 
No thread divlll aero hate 


xl mill Y 
= di SIE {riat Weaver,” 
ek ar f 


2 \ A 
; | Y Uy 
HIH | AX 


LA Abst KA MA T AN 


Å 


It must have a competition with us, my preciouss! If precious 
asks, and it doesn't answer, we eats it, my preciousss. If it asks 
us, and we doesn't answer, then we does what it wants, eh? 

— J.R.R. Tolkien, The Hobbit 


All games have rules. Some have only a few and are fairly 
simple, such as Chutesand Ladders. Others have many andare 
extremely complicated, like bridge. Werewolf has something 
in common with both types — it has only a few simple rules, 
but these few rules have a large number of permutations. You 
need only learn the basic rules, but their permutations evoke 
the flavor of the game, allowing it to simulate the complexity 
of real life. This chapter provides the basic rules of Werewolf; 
the number of permutations is for you to decide. 

Rules are like the myths that shape and describe a culture. 
They define what is important and delineate the possibilities 
of existence. Though these rules may seem somewhat strange 
and exotic, they really aren't all that complicated. Once you 
understand them, you'll understand how to play this game. Just 
concentrate on learning these basics; everything else will 
come naturally. 


Chapter Four: Rules 


ee en a 


Time 

A word of the faith that never backs, 

Here or henceforth it is the same to me, I accept Time 

absolutely. 

It alone is without flaw, it alone rounds and completes all. 

That mystic baffling wonder alone completes all. 

— Walt Whitman, "Song of Myself" 

The first thing you need to learn is how time passes in 
Werewolf. There are five different ways to describe time, 
progressing from the smallest unit to the all-encompassing 
one. 

* Turn — One unit of time within a scene, anywhere 
from three seconds to three minutes in length. A turn is 
enough time to take one action (discussed below). 

* Scene — One compact period ofaction and roleplaying 
that takes place in a single location. A scene is made up of 
a variable number of turns (as many as it takes to complete 
it); it can also be completed strictly through roleplaying, 
which requires no use of turns. 


65 


* Chapter — One independent part of a story, almost 
always played in one game session. It is made up ofa number 
of scenes connected by periods of downtime. 

* Story — A complete tale, with an introduction, 
buildup and climax, that often takes several chapters to 
complete. 

* Chronicle — A whole series of stories connected by 
the lives of the characters and perhaps a broadly conceived 
theme and plot. It is simply the ongoing story told by you 
and the players. 


Actions 


Besides acting out their characters' speeches and con- 
versations, players will want their characters to perform (or 
at least attempt to perform) actions they describe to the 
Storyteller. An action can be anything from jumping over 
a gorge to glancing over one's shoulder to see if anyone is 
following. The player tells the Storyteller what her charac- 
ter is doing and details the procedure she uses. 

Many actions are automatic — for instance, when a 
player tells the Storyteller that her character walks across 
the street toward the warehouse. All the Storyteller needs 
to do is keep track of where the character is and what she 
is doing. However, certain actions require a dice roll to 
determine success or failure. 


Rolling (Dice 


There is always chance in life. There's a chance you'll 
win the lottery, a chance you'll be audited, and a chance 
you'll die in a plane crash. Chance plays a role in Werewolf 
aswell. However, Werewolf players use dice to simulate the 
duplicity of Lady Luck. 

Werewolf requires the use of 10-sided dice, which you can 
buy in any game store. If you are the Storyteller, you will want 
a lot of dice, at least 10, all to yourself. As a player, you'll also 
want dice, but you may share dice with other players. 

Whenever the success of an action is in doubt, or the 
Storyteller thinks there is a chance your character might 
fail, you will have to roll dice. This gives your character an 
opportunity to let weaknesses and strengths exhibit them- 
selves, thereby revealing something of the character's true 
nature to both you and the other players. 


Ratings 

A character is described by her Traits — the innate and 
learned abilities and aptitudes she possesses. Traits are defined 
by numbers; each Trait hasa rating from 1 to 5, which describes 
the character’s ability in that particular Trait. A 1 is lousy, 
while a5 issuperb. This scale of 1 to 5 is the “star” rating system 
made famous by movie and restaurant critics. 

The normal human Trait range is from 1 to 3, with 2 
being average. However, exceptional people can have Traits 


———^^^(——Ó— rra 


of 4 (exceptional) or 5 (superb), or even have a zero in a 
Trait (which is extremely rare, but not unheard of). 

x Abysmal 

. Poor 

Average 

Good 

Exceptional 
* Superb 

For each dot your character has in a particular Trait, you 
get to roll one die. Thus, if you had four dots in Strength, 
you would get to roll four dice. If you had one dot in 
Perception, you would only get to roll one die. However, 
you almost never simply roll the number of dice you have 
in an Attribute, which defines your intrinsic capabilities. 
Usually you get to add the number of dice you have in an 
Attribute to the number of dice you have in an Ability — 
things that you know and have learned. 


SoiftheStoryteller wants the players to roll to see if they 
notice the patrol car creeping up behind them, he would 
have them roll Perception + Alertness — an Attribute + an 
Ability. They would take as many dice as they had dots in 
Perception and put them in their hands. Then they would 
take as many dice as they had dots in Alertness and put 
those in their hands also. 

These dice are collectively called the Dice Pool. A 
character's Dice Pool delineates the total number of dice a 
player may roll in a single turn — usually fora single action, 
though a player can divide a Dice Pool in order to allow her 
character to perform more than one action. A player almost 
always rolls a number of dice equal to a Trait's permanent 
rating (the circles), not its current score (the squares). 

Certain actions don't require or even have an appropri- 
ate Ability. An example of this is when a player soaks 
damage from an attack. In such cases, the player uses only 
an Attribute, rolling the number of dice listed for that 
Attribute — in this case, Stamina. 

There is absolutely nosituation where more than two Traits 
can combine to form a Dice Pool. Only one Trait can be used 
ifithasa potential value of 10 (suchas Willpower). Thismeans 
that a Trait like Willpower can never be combined with 
another Trait. It is generally impossible for a normal human 
being to have more than 10 dice in a Dice Pool. 


Difficulties 

It is easy, the descending down to Avernus. 

But to climb again, 

To trace the footsteps back to the air above, 

There lies the task, the toil. 

— Virgil, The Aeneid 

Now you've got to figure out what you need to look for 
when you roll the dice. The Storyteller assigns each task a 
difficulty rating, a number that quantifies the challenge 


posed by the task. A difficulty is always a number between 
2 and 10. You need to roll that number or higher on at least 


u 127 SS ee 


one of the dice in your Pool in order to succeed. Each time 
you do so, it's called a success. If the difficulty is a 6 and you 
rolla2,3,5, 6and9, you have scored two successes. Though 
you usually need only one success to succeed, the more 
successes you score, the better you perform. Scoring only 
one success is considered a marginal success, while scoring 
three is considered a complete success, and scoring five is a 
momentous event. 


Difficulties 
Easy 
Routine 
Straightforward 
Standard 
Challenging 

Difficult 

Extremely Difficult 
Degrees of Success 

One Success Marginal 
Two Successes Moderate 
Three Successes Complete 
Four Successes 


0 0 -) 0 c 


Exceptional 
Five Successes Phenomenal 

You can see that if the difficulty is lower, it becomes easier 
toscoreasuccess, while if it ishigher, it becomes more difficult. 
The Storyteller will assign high difficulties whenever the 
action you have decided to take is difficult, and will either let 
your character do something automatically (because her At- 
tributes and Abilities are so high) or assign a low difficulty if 
the desired action is particularly easy. 

Though they are not on the list above, you, as the Story- 
teller, can also assign difficulties of 2 or 10. However, these 
should almost never be used. Difficulty 2 is so pathetically easy 
that you might as well let the player succeed without wasting 
time ona roll. Difficulty 10 is so difficult that there is an equal 
chance to botch (described below) as there is to succeed, no 
matter how many dice the player rolls. A 10 is pretty near 
impossible. On the rare occasions when you do announce a 
difficulty of 10, be sure you realize how impossible you are 
making the chance of success. If a player ever rolls a 10, the 
result is automatically a success, no matter what. 

Unless the Storyteller says otherwise, the difficulty for a 
particular task is always 6. This is the standard difficulty, 
and 6 is assumed if a difficulty number is otherwise un- 
stated. 


The @ule of One 


The last thing you need to know about rolling dice is the 
“rule of one.” Whenever you olla 1, it cancels out a success. 
It completely takes it away. You remove both the "success! 
die and the “1” die and pay them no more heed. If you roll 
more “1's” than you do successes, a disaster occurs; some- 
thing called a “botch” takes place. Don't count the “1's” 
that canceled out successes, but if even a single "1" is left 
after all the successes have been canceled, a botch occurs. 


Chapter Four: Rules 67 


y mem. am, 


—————Z 


Getting a single “1” or five “1's” has about the same result 
in most ca: the circumstances surrounding the botch 
determine if it is catastrophic or a minor mishap. If there 
aren't any “1’s” or successes left, you've simply failed. 


Automatic Successes 


You don't want to be rolling dice all the time; it can get 
in the way of the roleplaying. Werewolf employs a very 
simple system for automatic successes, allowing players to 
avoid making rolls for actions their characters could per- 
form in their sleep. 

It works like this: if the number of dice in your Dice Pool 
equals or exceeds the assigned difficulty, your character 
succeeds automatically. Such a success is considered mar- 
ginal (the equivalent of scoring only one success), so a 


player will sometimes want to roll anyway in an attempt to 
gain even more successes. But for very simple and often- 
repeated actions, automatic successes can eliminate a lot of 
wasted time. (Note that certain actions, such as combat, are 
always problematic and should not be handled with this 
system.) 

The automatic success rules can be used to eliminate 
dice rolling completely, something you will want to do 
during Live-Action roleplaying. In such situations, auto- 
matic successes aren't a matter of choice. Either you are 
good enough to succeed or you are not. It is simple, but so 
was Cops ‘n’ Robbers and we liked it just fine. The story was 
what was important; the rules didn't matter. 


This simple system even has a twist, making it not quite 
so black-and-white. A Willpower point (see the Traits 
Chapter) can be spent to earn an automatic success. You 
won't want to do this often, but for certain actions it can be 
very advantageous to do so. Of course, the Willpower 
expenditure only counts for one success if multiple suc- 
cesses are required. 

When we play, we usually combine dice rolling and 
automatic successes. During mostscenes— especially when 
we're deeply involved in the story — we don't even roll 
dice, preferring to roleplay through scenes without inter- 
ruptions. However, when we get in the mood for 
playing-a-game rather than telling-a-story, we make lots of 
dice rolls and add many complications to the rules. 


Complications 


You may have already realized that it is quite easy to score 
a single success, even when you roll only one or two dice. 
You have a 7596 chance fora marginal success when you roll 
only two dice and the difficulty is 6. While that may sound 
too easy, there are various ways to complicate matters, some 
of which are discussed below. For troupes heavily into 
roleplaying, simple rolls and automatic successes are enough. 
Generally, complications are needed only if the players or 
you wanta break from the roleplaying, if you wanta realistic 
result or if you want to make a game out of the scene. 
Complications add drama to the story and create a depth of 
passion and focus. 


Extended Actions 


In order to succeed fully, you will sometimes need more 
than one success — you will need to accumulate three, or 
seven, or even (rarely) 20 successes. An action that requires 
only one success is called a simple action. An action that 


requires more than one success is called an extended action. 

An extended action allows you to roll over and over on 
subsequent turns in an attempt to collect enough successes 
to succeed. For instance, your character is climbing a tree. 
The Storyteller announces that when you roll a total of 
seven successes, your character has climbed to the top. 
She'll get there eventually, but the more times you roll, the 
more chances your character has to botch and injure 
herself. If she is attempting to climb down the tree because 
it is on fire, the amount of time it takes becomes exceed- 
ingly important. 

During an extended action, you can keep trying to 
obtain successes for as long as you want, or at least until you 
fail to score even one success. If you botch, your character 
may have to start over from scratch, with no accumulated 
successes. The Storyteller may decide not to let the charac- 
ter try again at all. 

This type of action is more complicated than a simple 
action and should not often be employed in the middle of 
intense roleplaying. As the Storyteller, you decide what 


68 Werewolf: The Apocalypse 


e ————— MANN 


type of action is appropriate. A little bit of experience will 
serve you well when employing these rules. 


Resisted Actions 


Sometimes you will act in opposition to another charac- 
ter. Both of you make rolls, with a difficulty often indicated 
by a Trait of the other character, and the person who scores 
the most successes succeeds. However, you are considered 
to score only as many successes as the amount by which you 
exceed your opponent’s successes. The opponent's suc- 
cesses eliminate your own, just as “1’s” do. Therefore, it is 
very difficult, and rare, to achieve an outstanding success 
onaresistedaction. Even if your opponent cannot beat you, 
she can diminish the effect of your efforts. During actions 
that are both extended and resisted, one of the opponents 
must collect a certain number of successes in order to 
succeed completely. Each success above the opponent's 
total number of successes in a single turn is added to a 
success total. The first opponent to collect the designated 
number of successes wins the contest. 


Teamwork 


Sometimes characters can work together to collect suc- 
cesses, mostoftenduringanextendedaction. At theStoryteller's 
discretion, two or more characters can make rolls separately 
and combine their successes. They may never combine their 
separate Traits for one roll. Teamwork is effective in some 
circumstances, such as when engaging in combat, shadowing 
prey, collecting information and repairing devices. During 
others, it can actually be a hindrance, such as in many social 
actions (where it can confuse the subject). 

The chart below may serve to dispel your confusion regard- 
ing some of the different types of rolls that can be made. 


Trying Jt Again 

It can often be frustrating to fail. If you are having trouble 
with your computer and can't figure out the source of the 
system error, then you're in for an angst-ridden time. This 
frustration is reflected in Werewolf by increasing the difficulty 
of any action if it is tried again after it's already been failed. 

Whenever a character attempts an action she has previ- 
ously failed, the Storyteller has the option of increasing the 
difficulty of the action by one. Consider a character who 
tries to intimidate someone. If the first attempt failed, it's 
going be harder the second time around, so the difficulty is 
one greater. If tried a third time, then the difficulty is two 
greater. In cases like this, though, the Storyteller might 
simply rule that the character cannot even make another 
try — how do you intimidate someone who has already 
called your bluff? 

Other examples of when to use the rule are: picking a 
lock (Repair), scalinga wall (Athletics), and remembering 
a word in a foreign language (Linguistics). 

Sometimes the Storyteller shouldn't invoke this rule. A 
notable example is during combat. Missing someone with 
a first gunshot doesn't necessarily mean that the gunman is 


p/m. am, 


Chapter Four: Rules 


The Golden Rule 


Remember that in the end there is only one real rule 
in Werewolf: there are no rules. You should fashion 


this game into whatever you need it to be — if the rules 
get in your way, then ignore or change them. In the 
end, the true complexity and beauty of the real world 
cannot be captured by rules; it takes storytelling and 
imagination to do that. Indeed, these rules are not so 
much rules as they are guidelines, and you are free to 
use, abuse, ignore and change them as you wish. 


frustrated and hasa better chance of missing again. But after 
the gunman has missed a couple of times, especially if they 
are easy, close-range shots... 

Other examples of when not to use the rule are: seeing 
something out of the corner of the eye (Alertness) and 
dodging an attack (Dodge). 


Try Jt Out 


Well, that's it. These are the rules. This system for dice 
is all you really need to know in order to play this game. All 
the other rules are just clarifications and exceptions. So 
long as you understand what’s been discussed here, you 
won't have any difficulty understanding anything else. If 
you don't think you've caught everything, just read the 
above again; you'll find it makes more sense the second time 
around. 

Now go ahead and make a few rolls, using the example 
character from Chapter Five. Walks-No-Road is scanning 
the room in an attempt to detect a malevolent Bane that he 
thinks has entered the physical world from the Umbra. The 
Storyteller decides the action has a difficulty of 6. Take 
three dice because of Walks-No-Road's Perception of 3, 
and three dice because of his Alertness of 3. You should now 
have six dice in your hand —a fair amount. You don't have 
a large chance of failing (you could even decide to accept 
an automatic success, because the number of dice you have 
matches the difficulty), but go ahead and roll; you never 
know. Tally your number of successes, making sure to 
subtract a success for every “1” you roll. Did you make it or 
did you botch? The more successes you score, the better and 
faster Walks-No-Road sees the Bane. Only one success 
might mean that, while Walks-No-Road senses that the 
Bane is nearby, he can’t really get a fix on it. Several 
successes could indicate that Walks-No-Road sees it clearly 
and can even identify it. 


Next, try out an extended and resisted action. An 
example of this is an arm wrestling match. It requires an 
indefinite series of rolls, each requiring different difficul- 
ties. You need to accumulate five successes more than your 
opponent in order to win. A botch eliminates all of your 
accumulated successes. 


SS A 


| 


* First roll: Each player rolls Strength; the difficulty is 
the opponent's Dexterity + 3 (speed is important at first). 

* Second and third rolls: Each player rolls Strength; the 
difficulty is the opponent's Strength + 3. 

* Fourth roll (and all subsequent ones): Each player rolls 
Strength; the difficulty is the opponent's Willpower. 


Examples of Rolls 


Followingare some examples of rolls, to provide you with 
some ideas on how to incorporate these rules into your 
roleplaying. Please note that each Attribute can work with 
each Ability, so there are 270 potential types of simple rolls 
that can be made. Admittedly, you will not often roll 
Stamina * Computer, but it might come up. 

* Youare standing watch while your companions catch 
a few hours of sleep. Make a Stamina * Alertness roll 
(difficulty 7) to see how awake and alert you are when 
intruders finally approach in the pre-dawn gloom. 

* A Black Spiral Dancer is creeping up behind you; roll 
Perception * Alertness (difficulty 9) tosee if you notice her 
approach. 

* A tough street punk refuses to take your commands. 
Roll Strength + Leadership (difficulty 7) in an attempt to 
dominate him physically and get him to do what you say. 

* Can you convince the gathering crowd to do as you 
have asked? Roll Charisma + Leadership (difficulty 7) as 


you attempt to give an off-the-cuff speech. You'll need four 
successes to convince them completely. 

* Your archrival is giving a speech to the assembled 
elders of the moot. Roll Perception + Leadership (difficulty 
6) to evaluate how good a leader she is. If you somehow 
score five successes, you'll know her exact rating. 

* After being questioned for hours, roll Stamina + 
Acting (difficulty 8) to see if you can maintain your story 
successfully. Five successes and you'll finally convince 
them. 

* You threaten the young man by trying to lift him up by 
his collar; roll Strength + Intimidation (difficulty 8). 

* Yelling and screaming at the taxi driver, you try to get 
him to drive even faster. Roll Charisma + Intimidation 
(difficulty 6). 

* You ask a series of rapid-fire questions in order to 
discover what threats will intimidate the subject. Roll Wits 
+ Intimidation (difficulty 6). 

* You attempt to use what you know about human 
feelings to calm the crazed woman down. If you can under- 
stand the meaning of that strange expression on her face, 
perhaps you can stop her from screaming. Roll Manipula- 
tion + Empathy (difficulty 6). 

e In order to stop the motor from blowing up, you've got 
to rip the whatchamacallit out of the thingamajig. Roll 
Strength + Repair (difficulty 6). 

* You try to decipher what's wrong with the car engine 
from the strange sounds it is making. Roll Perception + 
Repair (difficulty 6). 

Reining in the terrified horses takes a lot of force and 
expertise. Roll Strength + Animal Ken (difficulty 9). 

* You attempt to decipher why the ravens are crying so 
loudly and suddenly. Roll Intelligence + Animal Ken 
(difficulty 9). 

* You motion to the truck driver to pull over, pointing 
at his wheels and pretending to yell something out the 
window. Roll Manipulation * Drive (difficulty 4). 

* Suddenly, a man pushesa crate out of the van you have 
been chasing — roll Wits + Drive to see if you can avoid 
hitting it (difficulty 6). 

* How long can you remain motionless in the bushes as 
the two guards chat for hours on end? Roll Stamina + 
Stealth (difficulty 7). Each success indicates the passing of 
10 minutes. 

* You try to follow the intricate paper trail to the 
company that manufactured the biological contaminants 
in the first place. Roll Intelligence * Investigation (diffi- 
culty 9). 

* Isthestore clerk lying about what he remembers? Roll 
Perception * Investigation (difficulty 7). 

+ You need to add precisely 2.3 mg of nitrous oxide to 
the solution — no less, no more. Roll Dexterity * Science 
(difficulty 4). 


70 Werewolf: The Apocalypse 


^ 


* You foolishly attempt to break into Southern Bell's 
computers. Roll Intelligence * Computer (difficulty 3) to 
notice the fact that it is virtually impossible. 

* You try to convince the FBI agents that you really 
weren't involved with the hackers who broke into South- 
ern Bell's computers. Roll Manipulation + Computer 
(difficulty 10). (But they confiscate your computer regard- 
less of what you roll.) 

* The ritual takes three days to complete. Can you stay 
awake for 72 hours? Roll Stamina + Rituals (difficulty 8). 

* Youtry toslip out of your handcuffs (good luck!). Roll 
Dexterity + Streetwise (difficulty 10). You need to score 
three successes. 

© What language is she speaking? Roll Intelligence + 
Linguistics (difficulty 6) to figure it out. 


Game Terms 


Ability: A Trait that describes what a character knows 
and has learned rather than what she is. Abilities are Traits 
such as Intimidation, Firearms and Rituals. 

Action: An action is the performance of a consciously 
willed physical, social or mental activity. When a player 
announces that his character is doing something, he is 
taking an action. 

Advantages: This is a catch-all category that describes 
the Gifts and Backgrounds of a character. 

Attribute: A Trait that describes a character's inherent 
aptitudes. Attributes are such things as Strength, Charisma 
and Intelligence. 

Auspice: The moon under which a Garou was born; this 
determines her "profession" or role in werewolf society. 

Botch: A disastrous failure, indicated by rolling more 
“Ps” than successes on the 10-sided dice rolled for an 
action. 

Character: Each player creates a character, an indi- 
vidual she roleplays over the course of the chronicle. 
Though "character" could imply any individual, in 
Werewolf it is always used to describe the players’ charac- 
ters. 

Dice Pool: This describes the dice you have in your hand 
after combining your different Traits. It is the maximum 
number of dice you can roll in one turn, though you can 
divide these dice between (or even among) different ac- 
tions. 

Difficulty: This is a number from 2 to 10 measuring the 
difficulty ofan action a character takes. The player needs to 
roll that number or higher on at least one of the dice rolled. 

Downtime: The time spent between scenes when no 
roleplaying is done and turns are not used. Actions might 
be taken, and the Storyteller might give some descriptions, 
but generally time passes quickly. 

Extended Action: An action that requires a certain 
number of successes for the character to succeed. 

Gifts: The mystical powers of a werewolf. 


Chapter Four: Rules 


"nu E d ia -————— 


Gnosis: A measure of the spirituality of a werewolf. 
Gnosis (the circles) is a Trait used in various situations 
involving the spirit world, such as when a character "steps 
sideways." Gnosis points (the squares) are used to empower 
many Gifts. 

Health: This is a measure of the degree to which a 
character is wounded or injured. 

Points: The temporary scores of Traits such as Will- 
power, Rage and Health — the squares, not the circles. 

Rage: A measure of a werewolf's anger and inner Beast. 
Rage (the circles) is a Dice Pool used to determine a 
werewolfs chance to frenzy in stressful situations. Rage 
points (the squares) are used to gain extra actions in a turn. 
They are regained when the character faces setbacks and 
embarrassment. 

Rating: A number describing the permanent value of a 
Trait; most often a number from 1 to 5, though sometimes 
a number from 1 to 10. 

Refresh: When points are regained in a Dice Pool, it is 
said that they are being "refreshed." The number of points 
regained is the refresh rate. 

Renown: The measure of a Garou's worth in society. 
Renown is very important to the Garou, for they are 
concerned with how they are viewed within the tribe and 
by their people. Renown is divided into three different 
totals: Glory, Honor, and Wisdom. These totals can be 
raised by proper actions in the eyes of the tribe or lowered 
by infamous deeds. 

Resisted Action: An action that two different charac- 
ters take against each other. Both compare their number of 
successes; the character with the most wins. 

Scene: A single episode of the story; a time when and 
place where actions and events take place moment by 
moment. À scene isoften a dramatic high pointof the story. 

Simple Action: An action that requires the player to 
score only one success to succeed, though more successes 
indicate a better job or result. 

Storyteller: The person who creates and guides a 
Werewolf story. The Storyteller assumes the roles of all 
characters not run by the players and determines all events 
beyond the control of the players. 

System: A specific set of complications used in a certain 
situation; rules to help guide the rolling of dice to create 
dramatic action. 

Trait: A Trait is any Attribute, Ability, Advantage or 
other character index that can be described as a number (in 
terms of dots). 

Troupe: The group of players, including the Storyteller, 
who play Werewolf — usually on a regular basis. 

Willpower: One of the most important Traits is Will- 
power. It measures the self-confidence and internal control 
of a character. Willpower works differently from most 
Traits — it is usually spent rather than rolled. 


They had been bewitched because there were wolf-skins 
hanging over them, and only on every tenth half-day could they 
come out of those skins; they were both the sons of kings. 
Sigmund and Sinfjétli put on those wolf skins and could not come 
out of them to resume their human shapes and natures, until the 
time described before. Now they uttered wolf-howls, yet they 
could distinguish each other's voices. They betook themselves 
into the forest, each going his own way. They had agreed 
amongst themselves, however, that they would attack though 
there were seven against them, butno more, for then he who was 


being attacked should utter his wolf-howl. 


— Völsungasaga 


Before you can begin to play Werewolf, you must create a 
character. Werewolf, however, is not like make-believe; you 
don't just make up a character as you go along (though the 
Storyteller is regularly faced with this challenge). A certain 
amount of work is involved — characters are built, not born. 
Building a compelling yet honest character is a creative 
struggle even for the most experienced among us. 

This chapter describes how to create a unique character, 
beginning with a general concept and translating this concept 
into numbers that can be used in the game. This process is very 
simple; playerscan easily figure it out for themselves. However, 
the Storyteller should have a good grasp of the process in order 
to answer the players’ questions accurately and succinctly. 

The numbers on the character sheet may not seem particu- 
larly evocative. It is hard to imagine a novelist describing a 
character by saying, “She hasa Charisma of 4.” However, these 
ratings make it simple to describe the strengthsand weaknesses 


Chapter Five: Character 


JI. UR, EEE ET AT ER —— /// 


of a character. More importantly, these numbers allow the 
random factor created by dice to be employed in relation tothe 
character's Traits. A strong character has a better chance to 
break down a door than a weak character does. 

Character creation usually follows a pattern from the 
general to the specific. First, you develop a general concept of 
who and what your character is — is she more socially or 
mentally developed? — and then get specific by selecting the 
ratings of your Traits — how effective are your Charisma, 
Manipulation and Appearance? Do not use this process to 
create the "best" possible character; that defeats the whole 
purpose of making up a really interesting individual. These 
numbers are intended to enhance roleplaying, not open an 
avenue to some mythical character Hall of Fame. 


Charactercreation isa lot like cooking: you've got to gather 
the ingredients, stir and whip them together, and then let the 
mixture bake for a few hours. You start by deciding what kind 


73 


ora rich and somewhat spoiled debutante? Are you a precocious 
childprodigy, ordidthesecretsoflifereveal themselvessomewhere 
in the Appalachian Mountains? The background and personality 
of your character are the essential ingredients of his persona. From 
your basic concepts, youcan thenstart to work out the details, such 
as Attributes and Advantages. 


Getting Started 


You need to be aware of five concepts before you begin to 
create your character: 

You can create a character of nearly any age from any 
culture or nation; however, you begin the game as an inexpe- 
rienced and unsophisticated werewolf who has only recently 
undergone the First Change. Your character probably knows 
relatively little about werewolf society unless she was in- 
structed by a Mentor or by Kinfolk, or is metis. 

* This character creation process was designed as much to 
help you define your character as it was to provide you with a 
means to interact with the rules. The process of creating a 
character is meant to help you more accurately focus the 
concept of your character. Remember that a character cannot 
exist only as numbers; your roleplaying must shape and define 
an alter ego. 

* This character creation system is a purchase system with 
absolutely no dice rolling involved. By choosing Traits from a 
variety of lists, you decide who your character is. You will 


receive extra points called “freebies” at the end of the process, 
which you can then use to add dots to any Trait, so do not 
agonize over all your choices. Nonetheless, even with freebie 
points, you probably cannot buy everything you want. 

e A Trait of l is pooranda Trait of 5 is superb, so if youhave 
only one dot ina Trait, you are either not very good or only a 
beginner. Traits are based on an average human range. Re- 
member, werewolves' Traits often alter when they shapeshift: 
a Crinos has much higher Strength than a normal human. 
(See The Many Forms, pp. 216-218.) 

* It is your responsibility to create a character who fits into 
the group. If you fail to cooperate with the others and disrupt 
the story because of it, you will have to create a new character. 
Life as a werewolf is far too difficult for animosity to exist 
within a pack; sometimes survival itself depends on pack 
members' ability to work together. 


Role of the Storyteller 


As the Storyteller, you must guide the players through the 
character generation process. After your players arrive for the 
first game session, you need to introduce them to the basic 
premise of the game and describe the rules system. Your main 
goal should be to make things easy for the players. If they are 
beginners, keep things as simple as you can; let them discover 
the intricacies of the system on their own. 

Start by passing out the character sheets, and give the 
players a minute to examine them and ask questions about 
them. Then go through the character creation process step by 
step, filling in all the details of the characters' Traits. 

It is usually advisable to spend an entire game session 
creating characters. This ensures that players don't feel rushed 
and that they take the time to make complete, flesh-and-blood 
characters, not paper-thin stooges. Once you have finished 
the practical details of character creation, you can spend the 
rest of the game session conducting a prelude for each charac- 
ter. A prelude isa form of abbreviated storytelling in which you 
tell the story ofa character's life up to the present. Preludes will 
be the players' introductions to the chronicle and their char- 
acters, so make preludes memorable. Preludes are described at 
the end of this chapter. 


Step One: Character Concept 


Before you write down a single thing, you need to develop 
a concept for your character. This concept need only be a 
general idea of what your character will be like, something 
unique and interesting that will be enjoyable to play over the 
long term. During the character creation process, you may 
change and adjust this concept, but at least it gives you a 
starting point. For example, your concept could be, “I’m a 
deranged fur trader who hunts mink while in wolfform. I don't 
really get along well with humans." This concept needs to be 
unique and complete, and should be approved by the Story- 
teller. 

Next, you need to make three different choices to solidify 
your concept. You need to choose your breed (your subspe- 


74 Werewolf: The Apocalypse 


| 


cies), auspice (yourrole in Garou society) and tribe (the group 
that claims you as a member). The better you can interrelate 
these three aspects of your character, the more intricate and 
complete your character will be. 

+ Breed: Garou are torn between two different worlds and 
do not possess a place of their own. They are a people without 
a true home. This extends even to their method of reproduc- 
tion — alone they cannot perpetuate their race. They need to 
breed with humans or wolves in order to bear (or sire) healthy 
children. 

It isa violation of the oldest traditions for Garou to breed 
with one another. The product of such a union is invariably 
sterile and usually malformed: the metis. Garou must breed 
with humans or wolves in order to perpetuate the line. Even 
when a Garou interbreeds with a human or wolf, the progeny 
of that union is not always, oreven usually, Garou. Sometimes 
the recessive strain only surfaces several generations down the 
line. Each tribe identifies and keeps track of all humans and 
wolves descended from the tribe; those who exhibit the traits 
of the Garou are marked and tracked down just before they 
enter puberty. Only then are they told who and what they are, 
and made a member of the tribe. 

Youmay choose from the breedsofhomid, metisor lupus. Metis 
characters will have deformities; details can be found on pg. 86. 

* Auspice: Your character's auspice is the phase of the 
moon under which he was born —an astrological sign of sorts. 
It is very important to many of the Garou. Your character’s 
auspice indicates not only his profession in Garou society, but 
many of his intrinsic strengths and weaknesses. 

There are five different auspices. Each describes a particular 
type of personality, and each has different potentials and 
capacities. 

Though a short list is given herein, complete descriptions 
of the auspices can be found in the Traits Chapter (pp. 87-91). 

* Tribe: Packs once consisted solely of werewolves from 
the same tribe, but this is not always the case in these 
Apocalyptic times. Still, the tribe from which a werewolf hails 
says a great deal about who and what she is. There are 13 main 
tribes among the Garou. Each tribe has a primary spirit totem, 
which does much to describe it. Each player needs to choose 
the tribe to which his character belongs. The tribe determines 
much of the character's background. 

Player characters can choose from the 13 tribes that still 
respect Gaia; see the list below. For more information on the 
tribes and their salient characteristics, see pp. 91-102. 


Step Two: Choosing 
Attributes 


Now you start assigning numbers. The first step in this 
process is to determine your character's basic Attributes. The 
Attributesare everything acharacter naturally, intrinsically is. 
Howstrongisshe? How quick are her reflexes? How persuasive 
can she be? Questions such as these are answered by the 
character's Attributes. 


Chapter Five: Character 


fmm m EE m ———————— 


First, you must prioritize the three different categories of 
your character's Attributes — Physical, Mental and Social. 
You must decide in which category your character is best 
(primary), in which he isaverage (secondary), and in which he 
is poor (tertiary). Is your character more physical than social 
— is he stronger than he is handsome? 

* Physical Attributesembody everything that has anything 
to do with physical effort. They describe how strong, nimble 
and sturdy your character is, and are the primary Attributes of 
an action-oriented character — the Physical Attributes con- 
cem only the strengths and weaknesses of the body. Is your 
character powerful, quick-footed or hardy? 

* Social Attributes describe your character's ability to 
relate to (and sometimes use) others. Social Attributes are 
vital in determining first impressions, the character's ability to 
inspire and motivate people, and the nature of her interactions 
with others. Is your character charming, well-spoken or good- 
looking? 

e Mental Attributes represent your character's mental 
capacity, including such things as memory, perception and the 
ability to learn and think. Is your character insightful, astute 
or clever? 

The concept of your character may suggest to you what your 
priorities should be, but feel free to pick any scheme you please. 
For now, your character concept should be very general — it 
is necessary to paint a broad, sweeping outline before filling in 
the details. 

All characters start with one "dot" in each Attribute. Your 
priority selection determines how many dots you get to spend 
in each category. You may divide seven dots among your 
character's primary Attributes, five dots among her secondary 
Attributes, and three among hertertiary Attributes. Thus, you 
may choose to add seven dots to your character's Physical 
Attributes, five to her Mental Attributes, and only three dots 
to her Social Attributes. The dots may be divided among the 
Attributes of a category as you see fit — you could assign all 
three of your Social Attribute dots to Charisma, one dot to 
each of the three Social Attributes, or two dots to one and one 
dot to another. 

Later in the character creation process it is possible to 
increase these ratings, so don't worry too much. Let your 
intuition guide you. 


Step Three: Choosing 
Abilities 

Abilities delineate what your character knows rather than 
what he is; they describe the things he has learned rather than 
the things he can naturally do. All Talents, Skills and 
Knowledges are Abilities. 

Each Ability your character possesses is assigned a rating 
representing the character's aptitude in that particular area. 
This number is used to determine how many dice you roll 
when your character attempts to use an Ability. This section 


ofthe rulesguides you in determining what Abilities to choose 
and how high or low to rate each Ability. 


75 


Character Creation Chart 


Character Creation Process 


* Step One: Character Concept 
Choose concept, breed, auspice and tribe 
* Step Two: Select Attributes 
Prioritize the three categories: Physical, Social, Mental (7/5/3) 
Choose Physical Traits: Strength, Stamina, Dexterity 
Choose Social Traits: Charisma, Manipulation, Appearance 
Choose Mental Traits: Perception, Intelligence, Wits 
* Step Three: Select Abilities 
Prioritize the three categories: Talents, Skills, Knowledges 
Choose Talents, Skills, Knowledges (13/9/5) 
* Step Four: Select Advantages 
Choose Backgrounds (5; restricted by tribe), Gifts (1 each 
from breed, auspice, and tribe), Renown (by auspice) 
* Step Five: Finishing Touches 
Record Rage (by auspice), Gnosis (by breed), Will- 
power (by tribe), Rank (1) 
Spend “Freebie Points" (15) 


Breed 


See also Breeds, pp. 85-87. 

* Homid: You were raised as a human, by human parents. 
You did not know you were a werewolf until you were nearly 
an adult and underwent your First Change. (Nickname: ape) 

Initial Gnosis: 1 
Beginning Gifts: Persuasion, Smell of Man 

* Metis: Your parentsare both Garou, but you are malformed 
andsterile. You understand Garou culture more deeply than other 
breeds do, for you were raised by your tribe. (Nickname: mule) 

Initial Gnosis: 3 
Beginning Gifts: Create Element, Sense Wyrm 

* Lupus: You were raised in the wilds as a wolf. Until 
you were nearly grown, you did not know you were a 
werewolf. (Nickname: feral) 

Initial Gnosis: 5 
Beginning Gifts: Heightened Senses, Leap of the Kangaroo 


Auspice 
See also Auspices, pp. 87-91. 
* Ragabash: New Moon — The Trickster: questioner of 
the ways 
Initial Rage: 1 
Beginning Gifts: Blur of the Milky Eye, Open Seal, 
Scent of Running Water 
Beginning Renown: 3 in any combination 
* Theurge: CrescentMoon— TheSeer:searcherofthe ways 
Initial Rage: 2 
Beginning Gifts: Mother's Touch, Sense Wyrm, 
Spirit Speech 
Beginning Renown: 3 Wisdom 


76 Werewolf: The Apocalypse 


/ am, EN EEE EEE ER ———— 2 


amm 12 SS ANTI AERA PAPIAS CURE A A 


* Philodox: Half Moon — The Judge: keeper of the ways 
Initial Rage: 3 
Beginning Gifts: Resist Pain, Scent of the True 
Form, Truth of Gaia 
Beginning Renown: 3 Honor 
* Galliard: Gibbous Moon — The Moon Dancer: lover 
of the ways 
Initial Rage: 4 
Beginning Gifts: Beast Speech, Call of the Wyld, 
Mindspeak 
Beginning Renown: 2 Glory, 1 Wisdom 
* Ahroun: Full Moon — The Warrior: protector of the ways 
Initial Rage: 5 
Beginning Gifts: Razor Claws, Inspiration, 
The Falling Touch 
Beginning Renown: 2 Glory, 1 Honor 


Tribe 


See also Tribes, pp. 91-102. 
* Black Furies: Composed almost entirely of women, the 
Furiesare the servants of the Wyld and the avengers of the Garou. 
Initial Willpower: 3 
Backgrounds: No restrictions. 
Beginning Gifts: Heightened Senses, Sense Wyrm 
* Bone Gnawers: Livingas vagrantson thestreets of the city, 
the Gnawers are always well informed and universally despised. 
Initial Willpower: 4 
Backgrounds: Bone Gnawers may not buy Past Life, 
Pure Breed or Resources. 
Beginning Gifts: Cooking, Scent of Sweet Honey 
* Children of Gaia: The most moderate of all the tribes, 
the Children have become the mediators of the Garou and 
the defenders of humanity. Their young, however, often 
become radicals and join various subcultures, 
Initial Willpower: 4 
Backgrounds: No restrictions. 
"Beginning Gifts: Mother's Touch, Resist Pain 
+ Fianna: Every member of this tribe is of Celtic descent, 
and the Fianna are exceedingly proud of this heritage. They 
live wherever their Kinfolk make their homes and keep in 
close contact with them at all times. 
Initial Willpower: 3 
Backgrounds: No restrictions. 
Beginning Gifts: Persuasion, Resist Toxin 
* Get of Fenris: Savage and bloodthirsty, the Get are 
largely of Norse descent and proud of it. They tend to 
dominate the rural counties and towns where they live. 
Initial Willpower: 3 
Backgrounds: Get of Fenris may not buy Contacts or 
Mentor. 
Beginning Gifts: Razor Claws, Resist Pain 


* Glass Walkers: Of all the tribes, the Walkers are the most 
adaptedtothecityandthe least trusted by the other Garou. They tend 
tomix with the underworld and frequently employ high technology. 

Tnitial Willpower: 3 

Backgrounds: Glass Walkers may not buy Mentor, 
Past Life, or Pure Breed. 

Beginning Gifts: Control Simple Machine, Persuasion 

* Red Talons: Composed entirely of lupus, the Red 
Talons think that the best way to save Caia is to destroy the 
cancer — the humans — once and for all. 

Initial Willpower: 3 

Backgrounds: Red Talons may not buy Allies, Con- 
tacts, or Resources. Their only Kinfolk are wolves. 

Beginning Gifts: Beast Speech, Scent of Running Water 

* Shadow Lords: Very domineering and demanding, the 
Shadow Lords constantly strive to win the leadership ofthe Garou 
from the Silver Fangs. They would do almost anything for power. 

Initial Willpower: 3 
Backgrounds: Shadow Lords may not buy Allies or Mentor. 
Beginning Gifts: Aura of Confidence, Fatal Flaw 

* Silent Striders: Silent Striders live their lives on the road, 
constantly moving and traveling. They breed almost exclusively 
with gypsies, circus performers and other such wanderers. They 
know many secrets of both the mortal and spirit worlds. 

Initial Willpower: 3 

Backgrounds: Silent Striders may not buy Past Life 
or Resources. 

Beginning Gifts: Sense Wyrm, Speed of Thought 

* Silver Fangs: The most prestigious of the tribes, the Fangs 
Theyare inbred, however,and have become tainted with sickness. 

Tnitial Willpower: 3 

Backgrounds: Silver Fang characters must spend at 
least three of their Background points on Pure Breed. 

Beginning Gifts: Lambent Flame, Sense Wyrm. 

* Stargazers: Cerebral and contemplative, the Stargaz- 
ers wander the world in search of enlightenment and truth, 
but staunchly oppose the Wyrm nonetheless. 

Initial Willpower: 5 

Backgrounds: Stargazers may not buy Allies, Fetish, 
or Resources. 

Beginning Gifts: Balance, Sense Wyrm 

* Uktena: The sly and mysterious Uktena are the most 
capable magicians of the Garou and are thus widely distrusted. 

Initial Willpower: 3 
Backgrounds: No restrictions. 
Beginning Gifts: Sense Magic, Shroud 

* Wendigo: Theonly purely Native American Garou left, 
the Wendigo are fiercely independent and still determined to 
drive the invaders from the North American continent. 

Initial Willpower: 4 
Backgrounds: Wendigo may not buy Contactsor Resources. 
Beginning Gifts: Call the Breeze, Camouflage 


6 ackgrounds 


See also Backgrounds, pp. 111-113. 

* Allies: Your friends, be they human or wolf. 

* Contacts: Describes the contacts you possess among 
human society. 

* Fetish: You possess a magical object with a bound 
spirit within it. See the Appendix for examples. 

* Kinfolk: The number of Delirium-free human or wolf 
relatives and friends you possess. 

* Mentor: A powerful elder who advises and looks out 
for you. 

* Past Life: Describes your mnemonic connection with 
Garou ancestors and the past. 

* Pure Breed: Your lineage and pedigree among your people. 

* Resources: Describeshowwealthy youare; yourbelongings. 

* Rites: Describes the number and/or power of rites you 
have learned. See Rites, pg. 112. 

* Totem: The power of a pack totem varies depending 
on the total points invested in it. See Totem, pg. 113, fora 
list of point costs; see the Appendix for a list of totems. 


Gifts 

See Breed, Auspice and Tribe, above, for Beginning Gifts; 
choose one from each list. See also Gifts, pp. 114-137. 
Renown 


See Auspice, above, for Beginning Renown, and Re- 
nown, pg. 78, or Awarding Renown, pg. 189. 


Rank 


All characters begin at Rank One. See Rank, pg. 78, or 
Advancing in Rank, pp. 194-195. 


Rage, Gnosis and Willpower 

See above as follows: auspice (Rage), breed (Gnosis) and 
tribe (Willpower). See also Rage, pp. 78, 155-156; Gnosis, 
pp. 78, 156-157; and Willpower, pp. 78, 157-159. 


Freebie Points 


Trait Cost 
Attributes 
Abilities 
Backgrounds 
Gifts 

Rage 


5 per dot 
2 per dot 
1 per dot 
7 per Gift (Level One only) 
1 per dot 
Gnosis 


2 per dot 


Willpower — 1 per dot 


Chapter Five: Character 77 


[POE Ps ET a ER. ———" 


| 


—^(—^—€^—-«-—«—«—«—«-«—-—»——»—-————————RRBNS 


Abilities are divided into three different categories: Tal- 
ents, Skills and Knowledges. Each type of Ability has different 
characteristics. 

+ Talents describe all the intuitive Abilities. Talentsdo not 
need to be practiced per se and cannot be studied or learned 
from a book; they are most often gained through direct 
experience. Does your character possess a lot of common 
sense? 

* Skills are the Abilities learned through rigorous training. 
This category includes any Ability that must be learned step 
by step through actual practice, but that can be taught and 
studied (unlike most Talents). Is your character good at 
learning things through practice? (Note: Lupus characters 
have restrictions on the specific Skills they may select; see pg. 
87.) 

* Knowledges include all the Abilities requiring the rigor- 
ous application of the mind. These Abilities are generally 
learned through school, classes, books and teachers, but can 
also be acquired through experience. Is your character edu- 
cated; does he have a good memory? (Note: Lupus characters 
have restrictions on the specific Knowledges they may select; 
see pg. 87.) 

You must categorize these Abilities in the same way you 
categorized the Attributes. You must decide in what order to 
rank your Talents, Skills and Knowledges, choosing in which 
category your character will be above average (primary), in 
which she will be average (secondary), and in which she will 
be below average (tertiary). 

You get 13 dots to spend on your character's primary 
category, nine for the secondary category, and only five dots for 
the tertiary category. 

There is one additional restriction: you cannot give your 
character more than three dots in any one Ability (later, 
however, youcan use your “freebie” points to gain four or even 
five dots in a single Ability). 


Step Four: Advantages 


You do not prioritize or rank the different categories of 
Advantages. You instead have a designated number of dots to 
assign within each one. Though this number is fixed, you can 
purchase additional dots later with “freebie” points. 


B ackgrounds 


Every character gets five points to allocate among the 10 
Background Traits. You have only five points to allot, and 
some tribes restrict access to certain Backgrounds. Your Back- 
ground Traitsshouldfit into the general scheme ofthe concept 
originally chosen. 


Gifts 

Characters may choose their Gifts — the special secrets and 
abilities of the Garou. A character begins with one Gift from his 
breed, auspice and tribe (three total). He may purchase more Gifts 
with freebie points, but they must be Level One Gifts. 


78 Werewolf: The Apocalypse 


p/m am rtr m ————á 


Renown 


Renown is fundamental to Werewolf characters, for it 
describes how famous they are among the Garou. A character 
begins with a certain amount (determined by auspice) of 
permanentRenown in three different categories: Glory, Honor 
and Wisdom. Characters begin with no temporary points; they 
must earn these during play. 


Rank 


A character's Rank is determined by the amount of permanent 
Renown possessed. Rank determines the character's station and 
trustworthiness in Garou society, as well as her adherence to the 
virtues thereof. All characters begin at Rank One. 


Step Five: Finishing Couches 


Often the most important stage of character creation is 
applying the last touches — the little details and flourishes 
that complete the character. In this step you gain your 15 
“freebie” points, enabling you to add more dots to any of the 
Traits on the character sheet. Before you spend these points, 
however, you must record the base scores for your character's 
Rage, Gnosis and Willpower. 


Rage 
The Rage Trait quantifies the inner turmoil and anger of a 
character. A character's initial Rage is determined by auspice. 


Gnosis 


The Gnosis Trait measures how attuned a character is to the 
spirit world and to her own spirit. A character with no Gnosis is 
completely out of touch with the spirit world and cannot journey 
there. A character’s initial Gnosis is determined by breed. 


Willpower 


The Willpower Trait rates how much self-control a werewolf 
has. Willpower is essential for controlling the actions of your 
character, especially in times of stress when predatory instincts 
emerge. A character's beginning Willpower isdetermined by tribe. 


Freebie Points 


You now get 15 freebie points, which you may spend on any 
Trait you wish. However, this expenditure isnotsostraightforward 
as it might seem. Each dot added to an Attribute costs five freebie 
points, while a Background dot costs only one point. Costs are 
listed in the Character Creation Chart. 


Spark of Life 


Other aspects of a character can be detailed in addition 
to the above. You do not necessarily need to record these 
things, but you should certainly think about them — not 
only now but throughout your character's career. 


Appearance 


Your character's appearance makes her Traits visible to 
other characters. You should turn the concept and relevant 
Traits of your character into aspects of her appearance. High 
Intelligence can become a clear, piercing gaze. An explorer 
conceptcould mean the character wears khaki clothes and has 
a rugged appearance. It is much more evocative to say, "My 
eyes are always unfocused, so I always seem to be staring into 
space,” than to say, "I look absent-minded.” 


Specialties 


You may wish to give your character specialties in her Traits. 
Each Trait with a rating of 4 or higher can be given a specialty. 
Though most players select specialties for their Traits during play, 
you can pick them immediately. Specialties are particular aspects 
of Traits at which your character is especially good. Simply fill in 
the space next to the Trait with an appropriate specialty; sugges- 
tions are made with each Trait in Chapter Six. Though primarily 
used for roleplaying, specialties can give the character a bonus to 
dice rolls when performing certain feats. 


Equipment 

Ifthere are any possessions or pieces ofequipment you want 
your character to have, you should work out the details now. 
Otherwise, you will have to acquire the equipment during the 
game. This can take time and is not automatically successful. 
Almost any piece of mundane equipment that fits your con- 
cept can be obtained, provided your character has sufficient 
dots in the Resources Background. Certain items, like fetishes, 
can be gained only by possessing a particular Trait — in this 
case a Background. 


Quirks 


By giving your character quirks (interesting personal 
details and anecdotes), you can add a great deal of depth 
and interest to him. Write a few sentences on the back of 
your character sheet describing the strange and possibly 
interesting things that define your character. A quirk could 
beatwisted sense of humor, a gentleness toward animals, or 
a habit of grunting when answering yes to a question. 


Motivations 


Many werewolves are driven by the desire to fight the Wyrm, 
but even these werewolves have other motivating factors. You 
should decide why your character fights the dangerous war against 
corruption. The more evocative the motivation, the more it will 
define your character. Perhaps your character's father died while 
your character underwent his First Change, so your character 
neverhadfinal words with him. An important motive behind your 
character's travels in the spirit world, then, could be to find a way 
to speak with the deceased spirit of his father. 


Mormal J2entity 


A final important thing you should consider about your 
character is her identity in normal society, if any. Not all 


Chapter Five: Character 


frm m, p REPE u —— 


werewolves completely divorce themselves from society. 
Some tribes, like the Children of Gaia, remain very much 
in contact with the mundane world. Even members of 
tribes like the Stargazers could have normal identities. How 
do you manage to live this double life? 


Example of Character 
Creation 


Shane decides to make his first Werewolf character. 
With a copy of the character creation outline in front of 
him, he sets to work. 


Step One: Concept 


Shane must first develop a concept for his character. He 
decides he wants to play a wanderer, someone outside the 
bounds of normal society. He doesn’t want a character tied 
down to any kind of belief or lifestyle; he wants someone who 
seeks new paths. He chooses a wanderer concept. This way 
Shane can create a character who travels around seeking 
answers and truths in his own way. 

Next, Shane looks at his choices for breed. He decides it 
would be a neat twist to make his seeker a lupus, a Garou born 
of wolf. Next, for auspice, Shane chooses Galliard, because he 
sees his character as the type who likes to comment about his 
discoveries through the media of song and story. For tribe Shane 
chooses the Silent Striders, because they seem like wandering 
types, folks who aren't anchored down to any one place. 

What about a name? Shane thinks for a bit, deciding that 
his character wants a name that speaks of what he is. He 
chooses the name Walks-No-Road, a very Garou name, 
representing that he never walks the beaten path, but instead 
continually forges new paths. 


Step Two: Attributes 


The next step is to prioritize Walks-No-Road's Attributes. 
Shane makes the usual choice for werewolves, selecting Physi- 
cal as the primary Attribute category. He decides that 
Walks-No-Road's travels have made him a fairly smart man 
(well, wolf), so Shane selects Mental as the secondary At- 
tribute category. Social, then, is tertiary. 

Shane first divides the seven primary dots among Walks- 
No-Road's Physical Attributes. Because Walks-No-Road 
spends a lot of time outdoors, exposed to the elements, 
Stamina is the best choice for many of the points. In fact, 
Shane opts to put three points in Stamina, giving Walks-No- 
Roada score of 4 (remember the one free starting dot in every 
Attribute Trait). Walks-No-Road doesn't like heavy labor, so 
Strength doesn't seem very important for him; he only puts 
one dot here, giving him a score of 2. Shane thus places the 
remaining three Physical points in Dexterity, making Walks- 
No-Road a pretty agile guy (score of 4). 

The secondary Attribute category is tackled next. Going 
back to the idea that Walks-No-Road has learned to look 


79 


| 


where he’s going, Shane turns first to Perception. Here he 
places two points, making Walks-No-Road a fairly aware guy 
(Perception of 3). Two points go into Wits, to reflect the quick 
thinking he had to learn out there on the trails. The last point 
goes into Intelligence. 

The tertiary Attribute category of Social is easy to settle. 
Besides, with only three points to spend, he can’t do much. 
Shane places all three points in Charisma to reflect Walks- 
No-Road's likable nature and friendly disposition. Shane 
reasons that ratings of 1 in Manipulation and Appearance are 
okay; Walks-No-Road doesn't like to trick anyone, and he 
doesn't need a pretty face out where he's wandering. 


Step Three: Abilities 


Shane must now prioritize Walks-No-Road’s Abilities. 
Instead of doing this right away, Shane scans the character 
sheet and starts checking off Abilities he thinks Walks-No- 
Road should have (he does not have a free starting dot in every 
Ability Trait as he does with Attribute Traits). It soon 
becomes clear that most of the points are going to be spent in 
Talents, so Shane chooses it as primary. 

Walks-No-Road has 13 points to spend. He's learned to 
takecareofhimselfouton the road, sohe puts three points into 
Brawl. Though he doesn't interact with people very often, 
Walks-No-Road still knows how to wow them with a story or 
song, so three points go into Expression. He'sa wary person, so 
two points go into Alertness, the better to see what's coming 
at him. His travels have also taught him the underside of the 
citystreets, soone point goes intoStreetwise. Shane spends his 
four remaining points by placing one each in Dodge, Athlet- 
ics, Empathy and Primal-Urge. 

Shane chooses Skills as his secondary Ability category. He 
hasnine points to spend here. Walks-No-Road got his start as 
a werewolf by exploring the woods, so Shane figures the 
character must have a good score in Survival. Three points go 
there. Animal Ken also reflects some of Walks-No-Road's 
experience, so two points are spent there. Two points in 
Stealth and one each in Leadership and Performance round 
out Walks-No-Road's Skills. Because he's a lupus, he cannot 
start the game with Drive, Etiquette or Firearms, although he 
can spend “freebie” points to get those skills. 

With only five points to spend in Knowledges, Shane must 
choose carefully. As a lupus, there are many Knowledges he 
cannot have. Walks-No-Road's contemplative nature makes 
Enigmas a good choice, so three points go there. He then puts 
one point each in Investigation (reflecting Walks-No-Road's 
ability to search for things) and Rituals (so he can learn some 
basic rites). 


Step Four: Advantages 


Next comes the category that defines what Walks-No- 
Road can actually do as a werewolf. First, he has five points to 
spend on Backgrounds. Because he is a Silent Strider, how- 
ever, he may not purchase Past Life or Resources (he can gain 
these during the chronicle, but he may not even spend 


“freebie” points on them now). For now, Shane makes sure 
Walks-No-Road has the Backgrounds that most obviously 
define the character. Three points go into Contacts, because 
he hasmet many people in his travels. The other two points are 
spent on Rites, so he can perform rites. He chooses two Level 
One rites: the Rite of Talisman Dedication, adapting his 
clothing so it doesn’t rip every time he shifts form; and Rite of 
the Questing Stone, so he can find certain things when he 
needs to. Because he purchased a Rituals Knowledge of 1, he 
can learn Level One rites. 

Shane then moves on to Gifts. He starts with his breed 
Gifts, choosing Heightened Senses; this lupus power fits in 
well with his concept. He then checks his auspice Gifts, 
choosing Beast Speech so he can discover secrets of the trails 
from local animals. Finally, he checks his tribe Gifts list, 
choosing Speed of Thought, so he can travel quickly down the 
roads. 

Thenextstep is toassign beginning Renown. He checks the 
list for a Galliard and marks down 2 Glory and 1 Wisdom on 
his sheet. He is now a Rank One Garou. 


Step Five: Finishing Touches 


Shane records his initial Rage of 4 (because he'sa Galliard), 
his initial Gnosis of 5 (because he’s a lupus) and his initial 
Willpower of 3 (because he’s a Silent Strider). 

Now Shane gets to spend Walks-No-Road's 15 “freebie” 
points. First, Shane spends seven points and buys another Gift: 
Sense Wyrm, just in case he comes across any suspicious trails. 
Because he wants Walks-No-Road to be able to talk to 
humans, Shane decides to buy a level in the normally re- 
stricted Linguistics Knowledge (giving Walks-No-Road the 
ability tospeak English). He also decides to raise his character's 
Alertness Talent, to make sure he can see danger before it gets 
to him; he spends two points, giving Walks-No-Road a score 
of 3. Finally, Shane decides to spend his last four “freebie” 
points to increase Walks-No-Road’s Willpower to 7. 

Normally, more detail could be added to a new character, 
but Shane thinks he has a pretty good idea of who Walks-No- 
Road is and what he wants. Besides, too much information 
would actually work against this particular character; a large 
portion of Walks-No-Road’s strangeness involves his mysteri- 
ous yearnings for the road. Such details are best left to the 
imagination of the Storyteller and to future stories. 


Looking Ahead 


In the process of creating a character, you have hopefully 
become ready to roleplay that character. An important part of 
the character creation process is the attachment that develops 
between you and your character, enabling you to play the role 
creatively and with purpose. Nurture your empathy for your 
character— ifshe isatall different from you, it might not come 
naturally. 

The process of character creation does not end with the 
beginning of the first story, fora character never stops growing, 


80 Werewolf: The Apocalypse 


p/m am, 


———————À 


changing, developing and maturing. As the chronicle 
progresses, create new personality traits and historical details. 
Use your experience wisely to develop your Traits. Seek to 
build your character's Willpower and increase her Gnosis, and 
always, always add more and more flesh to the bare bones listed 
on the character sheet. The true essence of the character can 
only be captured in your roleplaying; it can never be listed 
upon the character sheet. 

Most importantly, you should think of ways in which the 
personality of your character might change because of the 
events that occur in her life, and then guide her accordingly. 
Let her determine her own fate. Never force her to conform 
to your earlier conceptions of who and what she should be. An 
angry Ahroun who learns to control his Rage or an aimless 
Ragabash who gainsa sense of hope can be a beautiful thing — 
especially if the Storyteller catches on to what you are doing 
and builds a subplot around it. 

If your character ever bores you, it’s probably because you 
have not developed and changed her enough over time. 
Ideally, the character simply grows more real as you play in the 
chronicle, developing as a character and as a person. The way 
in which a character changes reveals as much about that 
character as the way she is described. A character in a short 
story is rarely as real and complete as one in a novel — there 
simply is not enough time for proper development. Make your 
characters as complete, vital and interesting as you possibly 
can throughout the course of the chronicle. 

Novelists often speak of characters in their books coming to 
life, refusing to be manipulated or directed by the writer. This 
type of character stands out from the page and sa 
alone, I’m real.” He then does as he will, regardless of the 


ys, “Leave me 


author's original intent. We can learn much from this experi- 
ence — it is the epitome of what makes a great character. 


The Prelude 


Our past defines us most clearly, for it best indicates what we 
might become. The purpose of a prelude is to give each 
charactera past, thusallowing the future to be told. It is, in fact, 
a form of one-on-one storytelling in which the story of a 
character's life is told. 

The prelude is a way to create character biographies before 
the chronicle actually begins. It is quite similar to normal play, 
except that many years are compressed into a series of rapid- 
fire decisions. The personal biography a player creates in the 
prelude will be relevant throughout the chronicle, and you 
may well refer to it frequently. 


The Right Technique 


Each player undergoes the prelude alone. It is one-on-one 
unless two or more characters were friendsorspenta lot of time 
together before they were werewolves. While you, as the 
Storyteller, spend time with each player separately, the rest of 
the troupe can socialize and start to get excited about what lies 
ahead. Anticipation can make a story blossom. 


During the prelude youneed todirect the player much more 
than usual. Give him lots of decisions to make, but rush 
everything and don’t give him much time to think. You need 
to play through things quickly, unless you are willing and able 
to spend more time (which can enable the creation of very 
detailed characters). Characters almost never engage in com- 
bat during the prelude. If they do, you simply describe the 
results of any fights (youcan’t have the character die before the 
game even begins!). 

During the time you set aside for the prelude, be sure to let 
the player have a chance to interact with both the setting and 
the rules. If the player wants to change a few Traits during the 
prelude, you should let him, so long as it is done for a rational 
reason and not as an attempt to create a super-character. 

There are many ways to progress through a character's life; 
any way that helps mold a complete character is fine. During 
the course of the prelude, you will want to explain the full 
background of the character, including the origin of her fetish 
and the identity of her Mentor (both are Backgrounds dis- 
cussed in Chapter Six). The player should thoroughly 
understand the details of her Background Traits. 


You should play through one or more typical scenes from 
the character's life to give the player a sense of how the 
character lived. You can get the player into her life as a 
werewolf by showing her the bland tedium of the character's 
prior existence. Remember, it isthe mundane that gives scope 
to the magnificent. 


N —-—-——--————É NN 


A prelude can proceed something like this: “You walk home 
afteryetanotherdull day ofschool. When will the tedium ever 
end? They treat like you're a stupid kid — you're 14 already; 
when are they going to recognize that? You step through the 
back door and into the kitchen. There's a note from Mom on 
the counter: ‘Honey, had to work late. Frozen dinners in the 
freezer. Sorry. Love, Mom.’ Alone again. If only you had some 
friends you could hang out with. Wait a minute — what was 
that? A sound in the next room... A burglar?” 

‚As you describe things, let the player interrupt with her own 
ideasanddetails. Youare tellingastory together, so treat the player 
more like a partner. You can also include details that provoke the 
player into feeling the emotions of her character — “Your father 
is in a coma in the hospital.” Once the character joins a sept to 
becomea werewolf, she can't freely visit the hospital anymore. Her 
fathermay awaken or may die, but thecharacter may neversee him 
again. Theplayerneedstofeela profoundandoverwhelmingsense 
of loss in order for the true power of the prelude to manifest. 


Questions and Answers 


Described below are some questions that should be an- 
swered by the end of the prelude. If there is no time for a full 
prelude, you should at least make an effort to answer these 
questions. It often helps to write out the answers, even if you 
have undergone the full prelude. 

With each question we list what sorts of things the player 
should ask himself, as well as some advice to the Storyteller on 
how to run the prelude in relationship to the question. 

* How old are you? 

Howoldare you now? How many years has it been since you 
first Changed? 

It is often easier to apply dates to events in the prelude after 
the prelude is over, but it is also worthwhile to establish some 
important dates during the prelude. The prelude should begin 
atone of the important dates for the character, usually the First 
Change. One main purpose of the prelude is to put the 
character's life in perspective, so setting dates and establishing 
character age are very effective. 

Most werewolves have their First Change when they hit 
puberty, although a few may not change until well into 
adulthood. For homids, the average age when they undergo 
the First Change ranges between 12 and 16. For lupus, it is 
between two and three (Garou begin aging in human years 
after their First Change). 

* What was your family life like? 

Did your parent(s) misunderstand you? Did the other 
wolves shun you? Were you shunted from foster home to foster 
home, always unwanted? Was your birth pack hunted and 
killed, or captured by researchers? Or was your childhood 
idyllic? 

A young Garou’s family life is rarely ideal — even before the 
First Change, the Rage is within them, and others can subcon- 
sciously sense this. This tends to lead to family troubles and 
juvenile delinquency among Garou unaware of their heritage. 


82 Werewolf: The Apocalypse 


p——————— À 


Their Rage, finding no outlet, builds and builds until it 
explodes into the First Change. 

The character's childhood and family life are always important. 
Theyallow you, the Storyteller, tocreate many story hooks. Maybe 
you can create similarities among the childhoods of all the 
characters in the chronicle. Maybe they were all helped at some 
time or other by the same mysterious stranger. 

* When did you have your First Change? 

Where did it occur? Did others see it (what was the effect 
of the Delirium)? Did you injure anyone — or worse? Was it 
scary? Exhilarating? 

TheFirst Change is one of the most important experiences 
in a Garou’s life. It is the moment when he first shifts form — 
usually to that of the Crinos. He can never again be the same. 
He realizes his difference from the beings that raised him, and 
that he can no longer be a part of their lives. 

Most young Garou are watched from afar, usually with the 
aid of a Kin-Fetch spirit (see Baptism of Fire, pg. 143). Once 
they undergo the Change, members of their tribe seek them 
out and bring them back to the caern for initiation into the 
Garou ways. 


Ifthe character is metis, how well was she accepted into the 
tribe? Wasshe a continual scapegoat or was she given love and 
respect? (This latter almost never happens.) 

* When did you meet the others in the pack? 

Do you get along with the other characters? How long have 
you known them? Did you meet at a caern or another way? Do 
you share the same goals? 

It's important, but in the end not necessary, that characters 
be compatible. Many good stories can be based around 
werewolves' rivalries. 

However, few players will want to spend eight hours every 
Friday night arguing with characters played by their friends. More 
stories, and more entertaining stories, are possible if the characters 
cooperate. It’s important to establish meaningful connections 
among characters. Perhaps they share the same tribe or Mentor. 
These links have to be more than mere elements of the chronicle. 
Theyhavetomeansomethingto the characters, and the best time 
toestablish thiskind of depth and history is in the prelude. See The 
Pack at the end of this chapter. 

* Where do you live now? 

Doyouliveatacaern?Inacity apartment? A country cabin? 
Do others know where to find you? 

Many stories can be told about a character's abode or about 
events that take place nearby. Thus, it's important to establish 
this residence. If the character lives at a caern, where is it 
located? 

* Do you continue to lead a normal life? 

Do you still interact with people (or wolves) you knew 
before your Rite of Passage? Do any non-Garou or Kinfolk 
friends know that you are a werewolf? Do other Garou know 
about your moonlighting in normal life? 

Details of a character's normal life can be very important to the 
chronicle.Countlessstoriescanbebasedoneventsinthecharacter's 
mundane life, like the problems created by juggling more than one 


kind of life. If a werewolf is trying to keep his mundane existence 
asecret from other Garou, and his Garou life secret from mundane 
acquaintances, things can be difficult. 

* What motivates you? 

What guides your life as a werewolf? Do you seek ven- 
geance? Wisdom? Adventure? Do you wish to leave your life 
as a werewolf and return to your normal life? 

Characters’ primary motivations are central to understand- 
ing who and what they are. Once they Change, their priorities 
often change drastically. Things that were once important no 
longer are, and new values dominate their lives. If you want to 
have a real and complete character, you must have an under- 
standingof what keepsher from depression and total aimlessness 
(which can also be interesting to play — simply decide that 
your character has no motivations at all). 


The Pack 


The pack is united by sacred purpose and guided by sacred light. 
The pack is your family, the only ones you can trust. Those of us 
without a pack are the lost and lonely among us. They are the ones 
who will never amount to anything, and whom no one shall miss. 
Take pride and place trust in your pack; itis the only solace our kind 
can ever know. Do not squander your chance to unite with it. 

— Amara Windcrusher, Black Fury Philodox 

There is no single “winner” of Werewolf; the object is not 
to defeat the other players. The object is to survive, and, toa 
lesser degree, to gain more power, experience and fame. To 
win at all, you need to cooperate with the other players; 
indeed, you and they must unite as a pack. 

The pack is the most important concept to a Werewolf 
character. The pack is the fundamental unit in Garou society, 
just as the family is meant to be among humans. Playing a 
member of a group as tightly bound as a pack can be difficult 
for the more rebellious among us, but such rebel spirits can 
serve to make the process all the more interesting. 

The pack is the sum of its members. The pack, however, 
describes those Garou as a group —a group that holds in 
common certain motivations, enemies and background. 

Indeed, the pack can be seen as a character in and of itself. 
It is the character that all of the players share, and for the 
successof which they all strive. Even if you lose your character, 
the pack will remain, and your new character can join it. The 
pack can thus endure even beyond the grave, and has an 
importance to this game that cannot be underrated. 


Creating a Pack 


One ofthe most important tasks when creating a chronicle 
is to define the pack to which the characters belong. This is a 
difficult and delicate task, for you must think ahead and 
prepare for the type of stories you want to tell. 

It is very important for the players and Storyteller to work 
togetheron the pack. The pack can become the central character 
of the chronicle, the thing that unites the players over the long 
haul, so pay attention to it. The players should all agree on what 


kind of pack they would like to join, and thus what sorts of stories 
they would enjoy telling. Anything the Storyteller can do to 
empower the players and involve them in the story is good. 

Many packs are formed during a Rite of Passage as, in the 
interests of survival, the characters band together. Usually 
such packs comprise members from a single tribe, but as many 
caerns become more and more heterogeneous, it is possible for 
such packs to be composed of characters from different tribes. 
Increasingly in recent years, packs have been formed from 
Garou who met after they became full members of a tribe. 

There are also some questions that should be answered by 
all players, after all characters have completed their preludes. 
Get everyone together and tackle these: 

* Whereis the pack based? — Where does the pack range? 
What area does it consider its territory — its protectorate — 
if any at all? Does the pack actively patrol and protect this 
territory, ordoes it wanderabout withoutsuch responsibilities? 
Do all the members have their own homes or do they live 
together at one location? 

* What is the pack's mission? — What are the pack's 
uniting idealsand motivations? Do they simply seek to protect 
the territory of their family or tribe, or do they perhaps desire 
to wreak vengeance on those who have defiled the Earth? See 
Purpose, below. 

* Is there a pack leader? — How are decisions made? 
Some packs continually fight among themselves for the posi- 
tion ofalpha, while others don’t allow anyone within the pack 
to pick on another. 

* Whoisthe pack's totem? — Does the pack havea totem? 
Which is it? (This involves the Totem Background; see pg. 
113.) 

© What is their sept like? — What is the nature of the sept 
to which the pack belongs, if any? What spirits does it revere; 
what is its name; who are its leaders? For an example of a sept, 
see Central Park, pp. 276-288. 

* Friends and Allies? — Who are the friends and allies of 
the pack? More importantly, whom does the pack protect, and 
why? 

* Enemies? — Who are the enemies of the pack, and why 
do they oppose it? What are the motivations of their enemies, 
and, if they are not Garou, what are their powers? 


Purpose 


The pack is a concept lodged deeply in Garou thought. 
Garou society understands its member only in terms of the 
pack; those without packs are either pitied or cursed. Only the 
elders of the tribes live without packs, and they dissolve their 
sacred groups only after they have discovered, and hopefully 
fulfilled, their true purpose. 

According to Garou tradition, each and every pack has a 
purpose given to it by Gaia, a purpose for which its members 
were brought together, a purpose they are meant to serve. 
Indeed, packs sometimes share the same dreams when they 
sleep, and are guided by the same spirits; only when the 
purpose is fulfilled can they peacefully retire from active life. 


Chapter Five: Character 83 


J ums EEE zm a———— a 


In Werewolf, Traits are the basis of a character — they 
describe, conjure and delineate who and what a character 
really is. They enable you to detail your character's strengths 
and weaknesses, allow you to translate the character into game 
reality by usingdice, and, most importantly, help youfocusand 
understand your character. 

A character's Traits describe only the general parameters of 
her abilities. The essence of the character is created through 
roleplaying and imagination. Traits in Werewolf are inten- 
tionally left sketchy — at least the number-crunching part — 
so you will not concentrate on the character sheet too much. 
What is only crudely established during character creation 
becomes fleshed out in play. Don't look at your Traits thinking 
you have a complete character. Your roleplaying will create 
your character. 


Breeds 


“Garou” is not a name, but a state of being. Each of us 
embodies the best and worst aspects of both human and wolf. 
Our three breeds are no accidents of birth, but the will of Gaia 
incarnate, the stations given us at birth and the roles we must 
eternally play. 

Some are born homid, of human parents and human hungers, 
ignorant of the blessing and the curse they bear. They lack spirit but 
excel at cleverness. Others, the lupus, are born of wolf, pure and 
wild, yet fettered by the forest. They know not the ways of man, and 
this often proves their undoing. Those of the cursed breed, metis, 
bear the stamp of shame, the deformity that marks them as the issue 


Chapter Six: Traits 


BEE ME Ps SANT ET ee //. 


of a union never meant to be. Though they stand at the crossroads 
of our people, they are shunned before the Mother's grace. 
— BessaSings-in-the Mist, Children of Gaia Galliard 

The three breeds of Garou — homid, lupus and metis — 
represent the circumstances of the character's birth and rear- 
ing. Some Garou were born and raised by wild wolves, while 
others were born to human parents in human society. Most 
metis are born right into Garou society, but are brought up as 
outcasts, deformed and shameful. Each breed has strengths 
and weaknesses, and each may transform into its native form 
with little time or effort. 

A Garou's breed influences her behavior, outlook and 
approach to life in general. Other Garou will, rightly or 
wrongly, take her breed into account when dealing with her. 
Breed isn't just a biological affair, but a reflection of one's 
primal connection to Caia. Like the ancient Greeks, most 
Garou believe that the state of the body is linked to the state 
of the spirit. All the same, Garou are Garou, and each is worthy 
of respect. 


Homid 


Nickname: Ape 

You were raised a human by human parents, who may or 
may not have known about the wolf in the family fold. The 
Changing blood may have been passed to you generationsafter 
the seed was sown. In any case, your true nature was a mystery 
until puberty, and maybe forsome time afterthat. Nightmares, 
odd daydreams and wild urges plagued you. Then, one night, 
odd visitors appeared to usher you into your new life. Perhaps 


85 


you were kidnapped and taken to the tribe, or maybe you ran away 
and were tracked down by your Garou relations. Now your old life 
isgone, and you must start anew. Though you may well remain in 
contactwith yourold family, theyare unaware of yournatureunless 
you choose the Kinfolk Background. Trying to explain the truth 
might get you locked up, so it’s best not to try. 

Homids have many advantages: they are familiar with human 
society, can begin the game with any Ability and tend to be better 
at abstract thought and reasoning. Their connection to Gaia’s 
primal essence is thin, however, as evidenced by their low initial 
Gnosis, and their sensesare fairly dull by werewolf standards. They 
depend far more on sight and hearing than on overall perception. 
Opposable thumbs aside, the natural homid form is generally 
weaker than that of either lupus or metis. Homids may, however, 
handle silver without a Gnosis penalty in their native form. 
Unfortunately, many metis and most lupus resent homids because 
of their greater numbers and the devastation that their human 
cousins inflict on Gaia. 

Initial Gnosis: 1 

Beginning Gifts: Persuasion, Smell of Man 


Metis 


I take my fear, my humiliation, 

I crush it in my fist, 

I open my hand, 

I've got a diamond. 

My diamond is Rage. 

I've got diamonds in my eyes. 

— Rollins Band, "Just Like You" 

Nickname: Mule (among others) 

Your parents disobeyed the first tenet of the Litany, and you 
pay the price. Your body bears the stamp of Gaia's disapproval. 
Ostracized by most Garou, you have nevertheless been raised 
among them. Though familiar with the ins and outs of 
werewolf society, you know more about the dark side of the 
Garou than anybody ought to know. 

Many Garou see the metis as a symbol of the Mother's sick 
state. When the world was pure, they say, metis were few and far 
between, and usually died young (one way or another). Now your 
breed grows in number while the "pure" Garou dwindle, and the 
elders have to deal with you, whether they like it or not. Your 
suffering has shaped you; many metis are proud in spirit and tough 
in body. Some are noble, compassionate, and understanding, 
while others inflict their pent-up Rage on anyone they can. 

The assets of the metis are self-evident; your natural form is the 
powerful Crinos, and yourknowledge of Garousociety isprofound. 
Many elders feel responsible for you and will often teach you 
whateveryouneed toknow. Trainedfrombirth, most metis master 
both abstract thought and raw instinct. Metis characters may 
arrange their Abilities any way they like, and they need not worry 
about the initial confusion suffered by newly changed homids and 
lupus. (Some metis, however, are raised by Kinfolk, given to them 
by Garou too ashamed to acknowledge their offspring. These 
unfortunates quickly leam to hide their natural form, but learn 
little of Garou society.) 


86 Werewolf: The Apocalypse 


p mmm m mr mr rt o //, 


The disadvantages of this breed are also obvious; in addition 
to your pariah status, your body is twisted and deformed in 
some way. Some possible disfigurements are listed below, but 
don'tfeel confined to these disabilities. Additionally, all metis 
are sterile. These deformities are more than just physical 
hindrances; the Garou see them as outward reflections of 
Gaia's anger. The fact that many Black Spiral Dancers are 
metis (and suffer no stigma because of it) just reinforces this 
idea. The path of the metis is a long, hard road. 

Initial Gnosis: 3 

Beginning Gifts: Create Element, Sense Wyrm 

Deformity: The metis character must choose at least one 
deformity during creation. Some possibilities: 

* Hunchback: Yourback isbent; the difficulties ofall Dexterity 
and Social rolls are increased by one. 

+ Malformed Limbs: One or twolimbsare gnarled or withered. 
Add two to the difficulties of all Dexterity rolls, and reduce 
movement speed by half in Lupus and Hispo forms (and possibly 
the other forms as well, if the character's legs are malformed). 

+ Oversized Limbs: Your limbs are disproportionate to the rest 
of your body. Perhaps you have gorilla arms or kangaroo legs. Your 
balance is off kilter, and you look “odd” to others. The difficulties 
of all Dexterity and Social rolls are increased by one. 

* Madness: Your curse has unhinged your mind, and yousuffer 
from hallucinations, manic-depression, paranoia, a split personal- 
ity, or worse. Under stress, you must make a Willpower roll 
(difficulty 5) or succumb to madness. This can be fun for the 
Storyteller and hell on the pack. 

* Hairless: Your body hair is mangy, patchy, or totally nonex- 
istent. You take extra damage from cold and suffer from constant 
sniffles. In homid form, you look odd. In wolf form, you look 
downright vile. Dice Pools for Social rollsare reduced by one unless 
you are trying to intimidate someone. You may not take the "Pure 
Breed” Background. 

* Human Face: You retain your human face in wolf and near- 
wolf forms; your senses remain at the human level, and you look 
disgusting. Most Garou whodonotknow you will be horrified and 
might assume that you're a fomor or Black Spiral Dancer. 

* No Claws: You have no claws or teeth and cannot inflict 
aggravated damage. 

* Cleft Lip: A split in your upper palate malforms the front of 
your mouth. This cleft gives you a slight speech impediment and 
detracts from your appearance. For some Garou, this isn’t much of 
a problem. For Galliards, however, it may be a major handicap. 
Add two to the difficulties of Social rolls involving performance 
(especially singing) or seduction. 

* Musk: Your bodysecretesaheavy pheromone; it may take the 
form of a predator's scent, overpowering sweat, or an ever-present 
stink of fear. The difficulties of all Social rolls are increased by one 
when the character deals with humans, or by two when he 
confrontsanimalsor Garou. Dependingon the nature of thescent, 
the character may be considered dangerous or cowardly, even ifhe 
is neither. 

* Malformed Tail: Yourtail isstubby, overlong, ornonexistent. 
Though this deformity isn’t obvious in Homid form, it induces 


chronic lower-back problems and a marred sense of balance. Add 
one tothe difficulties of Social rolls when in wolfornear-wolfforms 
among Garou, and add one to Dexterity-based difficulties. 


Lupus 

Nickname: Feral 

Born and raised as a wolf, you puzzle over the antics of the 
humans and wonder why they refuse to fit into Gaia’s order. You 
probably made a high place for yourself in your pack before 
discovering your real nature. Then the great wolves came. They 
took youaway toreveal their mysteriesto you, and showed youwhy 
you never quite fit in. 

Yourfirstmeeting with humanity was probably violent, and you 
may very well carry a grudge for some past wrong. Human speech 
is difficult for you, and human manners are beyond your compre- 
hension. Human devicesstill make youedgy, and youtend tostand 
out in a human crowd. In the wild, though, you are a master, and 
can run circles around most homids. The advantages of your breed 
include a deep primal connection to Gaia, extraordinary senses, 
and a strong natural form. Your primary disadvantage is an 
unfamiliarity with humankind. Because of this, beginning players 
may notstart the game with certain Abilities. You often see things 
rms and tend to react instinctually rather than out 
of reason ot logic. 

Initial Gnosis: 5 

Beginning Gifts: Heightened Senses, Leap of the Kangaroo 

Restricted Abilities: The following Abilities are unavail- 
able to beginning lupus characters. They can, however, acquire 


in verysimple tei 


am 120 SL PA BID VAT AERA AULA. CURE VA: IÓ mr 


them with "freebie" pointsor through experience, although in 
the latter case the character will have to undergo training, 
perhaps providing some amusing roleplaying situations. 
("Watch outfor that truck! No — the clutch, not the brake!") 
Skills: Drive, Etiquette, Firearms 
Knowledges: Computer, Law, Linguistics, Medi- 
cine, Politics, Science 


Auspices 


Luna, the Moon, is sister to our Mother, and in her light we leam 
the path of our existence. As she battles the Wyrm in the skies above, 
we mirror her struggle, from pregnant fullness to the moonless nights 
of her deepest mysteries. These paths of moon-destiny are called 
“auspices,” and they will shape your role in the pack. 

— Miranda Wayfarer, Children of Gaia Galliard 

Luna, sister to Gaia, is mentor to all Garou. It is Gaia who 
nurtures, but it is Luna, the Garou’s wise and crazy aunt, who 
provides the children with paths to follow. The path, or 
auspice, of a Garou is his calling, his role in a larger pack. 

A werewolf's auspice is a general template of attitude and 
behavior. Garou believe that the phase of the moon under 
which a werewolf is born influences the Garou that he 
becomes. In this way, Luna teaches her sister's children their 
roles in life. Luna recognizes that no Garou can be all things 
at all times; each auspice is one fragment of a grand design. 
New players may think of auspice as a sort of “character class” 
for their Garou if they wish. Indeed, auspice defines a character 


A 


M 


in terms of who she is, what she does, and how she is viewed 
by other werewolves. 

Yourauspice also describes your place in Garou society. When 
you enter your tribe, you are assigned to a teacher sharing your 
moon-sign, who then instructs you in the ways of the moon. For 
simplicity, many teachers compare a Carou's auspice to an astro- 
logical sign, but the true significance of auspice goes much deeper 
than this. The moon-sign is seen as advice from Luna and as an 
integral part of each werewolfs being. 

Auspice may be renounced and another path chosen, but 
this is frowned upon as a grave insult to Luna. A renunciate 
mustundergo aRite of Renunciation, apainful stripping away 
of the Garou's old identity. The renunciate starts again at 
Rank 1, keeping all former Rage but losing a fair amount of 
esteem in the eyes of fellow Garou. Talesofsuch renunciates 
tend to circulate among the tribes; chose who refuse Luna's 
guidance are not often trusted. 


Ragabash: The New Moon; Trickster 


Annoying as he may be, the trickster is che bringer of wisdom 
tothosewhobelieve themselves wise. A Ragabashnotonly reveals 
that the emperor has no clothes — he dumps the pretentious snot 
in a puddle of mud as a lesson for other would-be kings. By 
undermining tradition and authority at every tum, the Ragabash 
keeps his fellows on their toes, teaching them the folly of self- 
importance and the wisdom of humility. Ironically, the trickster 
brings order with disorder. His pranks highlight the cracks in the 


sidewalk over which his packmates would otherwise trip. 


Though other Garou expect mischief from the Ragabash, they 
don't often appreciate it. The tricksters are tolerated but never 
really trusted. Ragabash tend to be fairly bizarre individuals; their 
packmatesdon'teven try tounderstand them. Theiraccepted path 
allows them a-freedom that few Garou enjoy. New Moons are 
flexible, and that flexibility is their strength. 

Like the foals of medieval European courts, Ragabash are 
regarded as necessary nuisances and given pretty free rein. This 
is not to say that triekstersbave no bounds; the Litany is sacred 
law, even to the children of the New Moon. Still, elders often 
look the other way while the tricksters work their pranks, 
trusting the innate wisdom of Luna to guide them. All the 
same, the Ragabash had best watch his back. Ahroun are not 
known for their sense of humor... 

Initial Rage: 1 

Beginning Gifts: Blur of the Milky Eye, Open Seal, 
Scent of Running Water 

Stereotype: Although the role of the clown is accepted, it 
carries little respect. Other Garou remain wary of the trickster, 
even when he's trying to be serious. Tricksters born beneath 
the waxing moon have a light, comic touch, while the humor 
of waningemoon Ragabash assumes a darker cast. Although 
Ragabash are usually dismissed as slapstick pranksters, their 
jests range from the comical to the surreal, leaving less sophis- 
ticated Garou scratching behind their ears in bafflement. 
Ragabash are enigmatic, hidden like their auspice moon, and 
they like it that way. 


Quote: Walk with me a while, under the light of... what? There 
is no light? Well, of course not! We are the shadow-dancers. Luna 
wreaths herself in mystery. Of course there's no light! Light would 
spoil the fun! Run with me a while, and you will see the method in 
my madness. I will take you beyond yourself, past the confines of 
your vision. 

Just don't slip in the doggie-doo. . 


Theurge: Crescent Moon; Seer 


The crescent moon shines likea blade. In its light, the Theurge, 
seer of the Garou, makes her peace with the spirit world. Noother 
Garou is so attuned to the Umbra. No other auspice shares her 
insight into the paths and perils of the spirit Realms. 

Theurges are the tribal guides. By the sliverofLuna's light, 
Theurges peek into the darkness of inner and outer mystery. 
Gaia’s sister leads them through mystic journeys that few other 
Garou could follow. Like the human shamans of native 
cultures, Theurge werewolves stand aloof and mysterious, 
touched and set apart by the insight they have gained. 

Theurges often keep to themselves, mutteringtothe spirits, 
and have little time for common foolishness. These seers are 
the planners, the thinkers, the diviners, the visionaries. Their 
Gifts reflect a keen understanding of the spirit world and the 
inner self. They may channel, heal, or harm with equal grace. 
Without them, the tribe might wander until the Wyrm 
swallowed them whole. Their packmates know this, but keep 
their distance. Who knows when the wise one’s eerie insight 
might turn in your direction? 


Initial Rage: 2 

Beginning Gifts: Mother’s Touch, Sense Wyrm, Spirit 
Speech 

Stéteotype: Spirits have left their mark on the Theurge. 
She is “touched” and more than a little weird. Her insight is 
both blessing and curse. Although her packmates value her 
powers, she makes them nervous. That chilling chant she 
recites in her sleep is enough to curl a Bane's tentacles! 

Theurges born under the waxing moon are thought to 
attune themselves naturally to the spirits, while those born 
under the waning moon are said to bind spirits to their service 
by force, in the manner of sorcerers. 

Quote: That whisper in the trees is not the wind! It is the crying 
of the ghosts of these lands. Shall I tell you what they say? It would 
tum your fur white! 

Can you see them dancing in my eyes? Closer! Closer! Can you 
see their laughing faces, cackling at me? You cannot? I do! Every 
instant, every day! Luna’s kiss brings them like flies to my ever- 
present gaze. I see them in my sleep. Are you laughing at me? Don't 
you laugh at me! I may set them on you... 


Philodox: Half Moon; Keeper of the 
Ways 

Asthehalfmoon balances light and darkness, the Philodox 
SOM: the line between wolf and man, Rage and Gnosis, 


passion and wisdom. The Philodox is the pack mediator, the 


one to whom the other Garou go for advice ora fair resolution 


Chapter Six: Traits 89 


p/m. am, mur LT TR ———ÁAÁ 


nmel 


to disputes. His honor is usually beyond question. As judge, 
lawgiver and Master of Challenges, the Philodox is without peer. 
Philodox often make the bestttibal leaders; Luñabids them 
follow the middle o doing they become the fulcrum 
Ragabash and Ahroun 
BF Ahroun may assume 
rest of the pack to valiant 
rative peace, however, a high- 
sumes the leadership mantle. 
e their spiritual center, savoring 
spirit. In personal matters, they 
el unless asked, but intervene 
otential threat to the pack. 
"best qualities of the Garou. Their 
be their undoing. Some waxing- 
t and aloof; conversely, many 
on have fragile, easily disturbed 
bringer's path is a tightrope, 


Resist Pain, Scent of the True Form, 
Truth of Gaia JE 

Stereotype: Philodox are known as the most honorable of 
Garou, although some whisper that they're too smart for their 
own good. Whenever problems arise, however, everyone 
looks to the Philodox. 

Quote: Put that away! Are you both mad? Infighting gets us 
nowhere! Now listen, both of you; let's sit down and work this out 
Grimgoth won't be any good to Gaia at all if he’s healing a split in 
his liver. Okay, no interruptions. 1 want to hear this from the 
beginning. And don't you try to lie to me.. 


Galliard: Gibbous Moon; Moon Dancer 


As Luna grows pregnant with Rage, she bids the Moon 
Dancer to sing her songs of bati dipaspglories. Heeding the 
call, the Galliard 
ing inspiration. 


ade | jintestines 
birthright. Those born under the 
sion of life and the joy of creation, 
the waning moon feel the pull of 
I darkness of their souls. Though all 
ies of the Litany and the ins and 
'e on spontaneous inspiration 
n nités their. veinssandthe dance 
of life and death matters. 
Initial Rage: 4 ee 
Beginning Gifts: Beast Speech, Calfofthe Wyld, Mindspeak 


| 


und LR 


Stereotype: No one expects restraint from a Galliard, but 
they'reusually good fora rousingstory ora powerful song. They 
make fine warriors and inspiring leaders. 

Quote: Come on! Up! Up! Don't look so depressed! Don't you 
remember the story of Blenfor Winterfang, surrounded by 
Wyrmspaun at the Icy Spring Caem? You don't? There he was, 
Blenfor Winterfang, leader of the North Wind, snow up to his 
knees, and as the full moon rose, he saw their blazing eyes. Forty of 
them, and him all alone. . 


Ahroun: Full Moon; Warrior 


The Ahroun is the vessel of Luna's Rage, the talons of 
Gaia's fury. He is the.slayét, themad man-wolf, Rage incar- 
nate. Blood ishiswine, warishis pleasure. In time, wisdom may 
guide the Ahroun's hand, but in his youth the Ahroun stands 
atop a pile of corpses and howls for more. 

Ahroun will never be known for their social graces, but 
their inspiring presence and physical prowess make them 
natural war leaders. Their affinity for the inner Beast often 
leads Ahroun to an early, if glorious, death, but pain can be a 
fine teacher. An elder Ahroun is one of the most dangerous 
creaturesalive. These are the heroes ofthe Garou, the warriors 
of legend. 

Even among the most level-headed tribes, Ahroun are 
known for their bad tempers. They do not fear death, but 
embrace it as a warrior's due. These born fighters see them- 
selves as the fists of the pack and the leaders by natural right. 
Not all Ahroun are so callous; some-keep a handle on their — 
Rage and save it for the enemy. For most children of the Full 
Moon, however, life isa battle — nasty, brutish, and short. 

Initial Rage: 5 


Beginning Gifts: Razor Claws, Inspiration, The Falling 
Touch 

Stereotype: Ahroun are all that is mighty, proud, and 
foolish in the Garou. Their spirit is powerful, but their manners 
leave something to be desired. Still, it's better to have one at 
your back than at your throat. 

Ahroun born under the waxing moon are said to be 
fanatically attuned to Gaia's will, while those born under the 
waning moon often use their might to dominate other Garou. 

Quote: Only a coward fears death! My spirit will only be rebom 
as it has been a thousand times before. If I fall tonight, let it be in 
glorious battle for the Mother. Let my blood water her fields for a 
hundred miles! Task only to scatter a few dozen of these Wyrmspawn 
before I go down fighting. 

Now who stands with me? 


Tribes 


If the pack is the cornerstone of Garou society, the tribe is 
the foundation itself. Garou are social beings at heart; tribes 
provide them with an identity, a culture, and an extended 
family. Without the stability of the tribe, most Garou would 
become lone marauders. Tribes are like nations for the Garou, 
and tribal loyalties cut across most lines. Though different 


———— AG ern 


tribes often mix in modern packs, tribal divisions make pack 
alliances.. interesting. 

In the beginning, it is said, all tribes were one. Strife among 
Gaia's chosen split them into tribes, and each tribe soon 
departed from its first homeground, settling in different parts 
of the world. Over the centuries, Garou tribes have crossed 
pathsand boundaries, extended their territories, and battled or 
befriended each other. Although usually capable of unity in 
the face of a common foe, the tribes tend to be fractious and 
insular in their dealings with each other. The concept of 
cooperation is still new to them, and the more conservative 
elementsamong the tribes are still as likely to battle each other 
as they are to battle the Wyrm. Tribal divisions have ham- 
pered the Garou for millennia and continue to do so. If the 
Garou were ever to set aside their tribal differences and unite, 
they could be unstoppable. 

Two tribes, the Croatan and the Bunyip, have fallen before 
the Wyrm. The Croatan tribe sacrificed itself centuries ago, 
while the werewolves of the Bunyip tribe died under the claws 
of their fellow Garou. A third tribe, the White Howlers, was 
corrupted into the fearsome Black Spiral Dancers, who are 
regarded by all Garou as traitors to their race and the Mother. 
The remaining tribes are described below. 

Each tribe has an ancestral totem affiliated with it. This 
totem guides the tribe as a whole, teaching its members Gifts 
and granting them wisdom. Tribal totems are not purchased 
like pack totems, but reflect overall tribal guidance. Each tribe 
also has traditional territories and protectorates, which its 
members take very seriously. 

Backgrounds: Some tribes have Background restrictions; 
these are listed with each tribe. A character with such restric- 
tions may not begin play with these Backgrounds, nor may she 
buy them with “freebie” points. However, she may try to gain 
them through roleplaying, at the Storyteller’s discretion. 


Black Furies 


These ferocious defenders of the Wyld call Greece their 
homeland, though they have established a strong presence in 
North America over the last two centuries. This tribe, com- 
posed almost entirely of female Garou, is renowned for its 
members’ honor, ferocity and attunement to the sacred. The 
Furies claim that Luna, in her aspect as Artemis the Huntress, 
created their tribe from she-wolves and appointed them to be 
protectors of the Wyld, defenders of women, and punishers of 
men. They uphold these duties with grim determination. 

Other tribes look askance at the Furies, who give away or 
kill their male children. Many outside the tribe see the Furies 
as man-haters, but the truth is much more complex. Although 
thetribe tolerates male metis, the Furies have a definite gender 
bias; they believe that women share a deeper bond with Gaia 
than any man can know, and see themselves as aspects of the 
Goddess incarnate. In her name, they Rage against any insult 
to women, nature or the Goddess. 

Black Furies maintain strong ties to ancient mysticism. 
Theirritesare complex and quite beautiful, and their Giftsand 


92 Werewolf: The Apocalypse 


OT R. ——————À 


spirit allies reflect a primal connection to the Wyld. Black 
Furiesplaceahigh value on their honor; even theirhated rivals 
concede that the tribe can be trusted. 

Although strong in character, they are few in number, and 
their radical stance alienates many Garou. The Furies loathe 
the Get of Fenris, and the two tribes have a long and bloody 
history. The Childrensof Gaia have counseled the Furies to 
smooth their rough edges, but crossing a Black Fury remains a 
dangerous thing to do. 

Furies organize themselves into groups called kuldos, or circles, 
thatact in a fairly autonomous fashion. Above all other kuklos are 
the Inner and Outer Calyxes, the high councils of the tribe. 

Tribal Totem: Pegasus 

Initial Willpower: 3 

Backgrounds; No restrictions. 

Beginning Gifts: Heightened Senses, Sense Wyrm 

Physical: Furies" Crinos, Hispo and Lupus forms are pre- 
dominantly black, with highlights or stripes of white, silver or 
gray. Although the Furies originated in Greece, they have 
spread throughout the Western Hemisphere and come from 
all walks of life. As a rule, Black Furies tend to be broad- 
shouldered and graceful. 

Territory: Furies are reclusive werewolves; most prefer to 
live in the deep wilderness, although some few stalk human 
cities or chair political-action groups. Mystic barriers once 
protected many Black Fury lands from discovery, but the 
Wyrm's influence has largely shattered these defenses. 

Protectorate: Black Furies guard many unspoiled Wyld 
places from human intrusion, and seek to purify other places 
that might still be salvaged. Many see themselves as the 
protectors of women and take crimes against their gender into 
their own hands (or, more likely, claws). 

Quote: No one saw you enter. No one has to see you leave. 


Bone Gnawers 


Most Garou see the Bone Gnawers as the dregs of the 
Garou, pathetic scavengers living in the humans filth. But the 
Bone Gnawers know that survival takes precedence over 
manners. Living off the scraps of society, this tribe endures the 
contempt of most Garou. But where the others have faltered, 
the Gnawers have prospered. Of all the tribes, the Bone 
Gnawers may be the most numerous. 

These hardy mongrels trace their pedigrees to India and 
Africa. Possibly descended from jackal stock, the Gnawers 
have spread throughout human civilization and have an 
uncanny knack for knowing just who is doing what to whom. 
Few secrets stay hidden for long if a Bone Gnawer is in the 
neighborhood. 

Bone Gnawers care little for ceremonial niceties or lofty 
ideals. Hard-core survival, whatever the cost, is their driving 
force, and freedom is their passion — freedom without the ties 
of rank or property. They live on whatever they can grab. This 
survival ethic has bred a tough tribe ideally suited for guerrilla 
warfare. Like junkyard dogs, Bone Gnawers should never be 
underestimated. 


These Garou tend to be dirty and mangy, wearing castoffs 
and eating leftovers. They are generally cynical and world- 
weary, but possess a wicked wit and plenty of street-smarts. 
Gnawers have a keen empathy for folks on the skids and often 
take other unfortunates under their care. Bone Gnawer elders 
— often called "fathers" or *mothers" — hoard goods for their 
"families." Gnawers' status is often measured by the quality of 
these goods and their generosity with them. 

Thecities of humans are the Bone Gnawers' turf, and their 
knowledge of these areas exceeds even that of the Glass 
Walkers, although Gnawers keep to the rattier sections. 
Gnawers often congregate for mutual protection, and some- 
times “adopt” human and Kinfolk vagrants, runaways and 
drifters. Many Gnawers succumb to human temptations like 
booze, junk and junk food, but these seem to toughen rather 
than weaken them. A Bone Gnawer elder is a tribute to 
Darwin's law. Let the Wyrm beware. 

Tribal Totem; Rat 

Initial Willpower: 4 

Backgrounds: Bone Gnawers may not buy Past Life, 
Pure Breed or Resources. 

Beginning Gifts: Cooking, Scent of Sweet Honey 

Physical: Mangy, jackal-like werewolves, often resembling 
large dogs. Their coats area mishmash of clashing colors, and they 
usually smell bad. They are small for Garou, but are surprisingly 
tough for theirsize. Bone Gnawers come fromall lands and may be 
of any race or cultural background; no matter their origins, 
however, all Gnawers end up on the low end of life. 

Territory: Bone Gnawers often keep to the burnt-out and 
abandoned sections of town. They shun buildings for the most 
part, preferring to live under the sky. 

Protectorate: Bone Gnawers watch over Gaia’s lost children, 
thehas-beensand never-hads, helping others help themselvesand 
putting to rest those who can't. They have a special hatred for rich 
and callous humans whose greed tramples Gaia's bounty into the 
dust. They breed among the city’s lost souls, thereby, they feel, 
passing on a momentary honor of a sort. 

Quote: Pretty neat jacket there, rich boy. Oh, don’t whine. The 
stains'll come out some day... 


Children of Gaia 


When the Wyrmclaimed the hearts of the Garou, when the 
blood of the tribes was shed by the claws of their kin, the 
Children of Gaia arose to lead the Garou back to the Mother's 
bounty. They lifted the Impergium, pressed for peace among 
the tribes and spread the words of Gaia’s love among the lands 
of humans. To the Children of Gaia, life isa gift to be savored, 
nota battle to be won. They are the unifiers of the Garou, the 
heralds of peace. 

The Children of Gaia insist that embracing violence grants 
the Wyrm victory by default. Death is ever a part of life, they 
concede, but hatred is the gateway to the inner Wyrm, and 
must be avoided. Even the Children of Gaia disagree, how- 
ever, about when the time for talking ends and the time for 
fighting begins. When they do choose to fight, the Children 


Chapter Six: Traits 


OL TS ARN UR ————À 


of Gaia are powerful warriors, strengthened by their commit- 
ment to the Mother. Until then, these Garou search for a way 
to resolve conflicts without bloodshed. 

The tribe shares a vision of Gaia as a loving, bountiful 
Mother, and sees the Wyrm as the denial of Her love. The 
Children rightly predicted that the Impergium would forever 
drivea wedge between humans and Garou, but the tribe seems 
ata loss before the coming Apocalypse. Its leaders still wish to 
negotiate with the humans and enlighten them before it is too 
late, but even the most optimistic Children wonder if the time 
for peace is past. 

The Children band together in loose packs, often joining 
members of other tribes and acting as a mediating influence. 
Each sept has tribal elders who take the roles of the Voice of 
the Goddess (female) and the Arm ofthe Goddess (male), one 
for each sept. 

Other Garou grant the Children of Gaia a grudging respect. 
Children are known as honorable peacekeepers, if a little soft 
in the head. They have proved right in the past, much to their 
rivals' annoyance, and radiate a deep faith in the Mother's 
love. Their Gifts heal, protect and nurture rather than harm, 
and they tend to have high Social Attributes. They are deeply 
attuned to Gaia and all of Her splendor, and prefer to spend 
time contemplating harmony over havoc. When angered, 
however, they are terrible in their Rage. 

Tribal Totem: Unicorn 

Initial Willpower: 4 

Backgrounds: No restrictions. 

Beginning Gifts: Mother's Touch, Resist Pain. 

Physical: In their Hispo and Lupusfotms, Childrenof Gaia 
resemble the magnificent wolves of mystic art. Clean-limbed 
and powerful, they radiate a tangible senseofcalm and balance 
rather than the feral coldness of most Garou. Their fur tends 
toward shades of brown and gray, often spotted or striped with 
white. In Homid form, Children of Gaia represent all human 
races and cultures. 

Territory: Nearly anywhere. Although many operate out 
of North America, Children of Gaia often travel, teaching by 
example. Many join human environmental groups. 

Protectorate: Like the Black Furies, the Children of Gaia 
watch over their human kin. Over the last century, the two 
tribes have aided the progress of human rights and environ- 
mental awareness. Unlike the Furies, however, the Children 
of Gaia would rather bring change by example than by threat. 

Quote: Shouldn't you savor the life that Gaia gave you rather 
than end it? Is it any better to drown in blood than in filth? I think 
not. 


Fianna 


Much of the Garou's language and lore was created and 
recorded by the Celtic tribe known as the Fianna. Originally 
hailing from Ireland and the British Isles, this tribe is most 
renowned for its loremasters, singers and bards. Nonetheless, 
tribes such as the Get of Fenris have learned to their chagrin 
that Fianna warriors are by no means ineffective. 


93 


Fianna come from all backgrounds and as a result have the 
fewest intratribal rivalries between lupusand homid members. 
The Fianna's Celtic Kinfolk saw shapeshifting as perfectly 
natural. Metis, however, are very poorly treated by the tribe; 
the Fianna believe that impurity of body isa curse for evil, and 
metis may never hold positions of power in the tribe. 

Fianna bards are noteworthy for their eideticmemoriesand 
are the historians of the Garou asa whole. Theycan remember 
clan lineages stretching back millennia. Fianna bards are also 
well versed at dealing with faeries, and the tribe has formed 
alliances with a group of human mages knownas the Verbena. 

Fianna werewolves are generally outgoing sorts and greatly 
enjoy parties, contests of wits, and stories. They are also the 
Garou most noted for falling in love, both with humans and 
with other Garou. Such relationships all too often end in 
tragedy, and Fianna bards seem to take a perverse pleasure in 
composing one heartbreaking ballad after another. 

Nonetheless, when called upon to be warriors and judges, 
the tribe can do so ruthlessly and without hesitation. Fianna 
are renowned even among Garou for their ferocity, and 
though they love their Kinfolk; they enforced the Impergium 
as harshly as any tribe. The legend of the Wild Hunt is still 
remembered with dread. 


Of late there has been a schism within the clan, as Irish 
loyalists lend their skills to the IRA while British Fianna fight 
for the Provincial Army. The elders have tried to mediate a 
dispute, but to no avail. Fianna battles in metropolitan areas 
such as Belfast have enhanced these places’ reputations as 
terrorist sites. 


un Ae A 


Tribal Totem: Stag 

Initial Willpower: 3 

Backgrounds: No restrictions. 

Beginning Gifts: Persuasion, Resist Toxin 

Physical: Fianna tend to breed among humans of Celtic 


descent, though there has recently been limited mingling 
outside that ethnic group. Their wolf forms resemble dire 
wolves or wolfhounds; they are huge (particularly in Hispo 
form) and either red or black, with glowing green eyes. 

"Territory: Fianna traditionally dwelt in peat bogs, downs 
and other rural areas, but have migrated around the world. 

Protectorate: European Fianna protect the Celtic people, 
while immigrants tend to protect dwellers in rural areas. 
Fianna also protect entertainers and artists. 

Quote: Ah, c’mon laddie! "Tis only one draught I’m askin’! It's 
me own homebrew — you wouldn't want to insult me now by 
refusin' me hospitality, would ya? That's a lad! What? Oh, don't 
worry, it's made o' the best: pure distilled spirits, with a dash o' faerie 
spit. Whoah! Don't go spewin' that! It's prime stuff! 


Get of Fenris 


Many Garou consider the savage Get of Fenris to be the 
tacnukes of Gaia. Violent and remorseless, the Get embrace 
the warrior ideals of the ancient Norse and yearn for a place in 
Valhalla. The stereotypical Get is a blood-drenched, raging 
monster; the tribe's ferocity is legendary, even among the 
Garou. Rare is the Get who backs down from a fight; rarer still 


is the Get who shows mercy. To the Get of Fenris, strength is 
the greatest virtue and self-sacrifice the greatest gift. 

The Get see themselves as heroes in the classic sense, and 
only the toughest heroes are fit to wage war with the Great 
Serpentof Darkness. Noble as their motives may be, however, 
the Get are often blind to the darkness within themselves. 
Their Rites of Passage are bloody, often deadly, affairs. Even 
after their acceptance into the tribe, Get of Fenris are con- 
stantly tested and challenged. Savagegameshone their fighting. 
prowess. Refusing any challenge is considered weakness, and 
weakness cannot be tolerated. Weare the greatestoftribes, claim. 
the Ger, because we continually test ourselves. If you want us to 
find you worthy of respect, we will test you as well. 

The Get are a fatalistic lot, determined to crushithe Wyrm 
in their jaws as they die. Honor among the tribe is often. 
measured in battle scars. They see themselvesas the vanguatd 
in an endless war, and would have ivno other way. Geteend 
to hold other tribes in contempt, knowing in their hearts that 
the Get are the only ones worthy of Gaia’s trust. This attitude 
does not endear them to other Garou; the Wendigo and Black 
Furies harbor deep grudges against the tribe. The Get of Fenris 
do have a powerful code of honor, but that honor is a personal 
code of heroism, not an abstract social ethic. Victory isall that 
matters to a Get, and only the strongest deserve to win. 

The Get alw 
ingly, Ahroun dominate tribal leadership. Leaders must fight 
for their positions, and any sign of weakness dooms them. 
Tribal moots are very militaristic, usually marked by contests 
of strength and skill. Visitors must often run a deadly gauntlet 
merely to attend a moot. Ritual bloodletting, live rune- 


meet beneath the full moon. Not surpris- 


carving, and the torture of captured enemies are all fairly 
common moot activities. 

Some modern Get have embraced the racist Aryan-su- 
premacy ideal, in the process staining the honor of the tribe. 
The Get do consider themselves superior, but they feel that 
this supremacy stems from a harsh lifestyle and high ideals. 
They are consummate chauvinists, however, and sneer at 
“civil rights” and “empowerment.” To the Get, the only power 
worth having is power taken by force. 

Like the Norse whose culture they admire, the Get of Fenris 
see life asa long, hard struggle. Beneath their iron facade, many 
Get yearn for a peace that they know they can never attain. 
They favor their lupine heritage and seem more attuned to 
their inner Beasts than do many of the other tribes. Like the 
cold wind of their northern homes, the Get lash against all 
comers, howling with Rage as they blow the walls down. 

Tribal Totem: Fenris Wolf 

Initial Willpower: 3 

Backgrounds: Get of Fenris may not purchase Contacts 
or Mentor. 

Beginning Gifts: Razor Claws, Resist Pain 

Physical: The lupine forms of most Get resemble huge 
Northern gray wolves, broad-shouldered and muscular with 
huge jaws. Black and brown patches are common, although 
some supremacist Get consider anything less that 


a pure gray 


Chapter Six: Traits 


f ERR, RP ie SS P À 


coat to be a sign of mongrel blood. The Get of Fenris are 
derived almost entirely from Nordic stock, although some 
septs willaccept members of other ethnic groups if they think 
the "foreigners" can handle it. Most Get have some form of 
hattlesscar, and many brand themselves or carve permanent 
tunes in their flesh during impassioned rites. 

‘Territory: The Get hail from Northern Europe but have 
spread throughout the world. They tend to settle in rural areas 
near the homies of their Kinfolk. Many Get stake out ancestral 
pack territories and defend them for generations. 

Protectorate: The Getsee themselves as the claws of Gaia; 
they often cull “worthless” humans in the Goddess’ name, but 
are exceedingly proud and.protective of their Kinfolk. Any 
manifestation of the Wyrm is fair game, and any place that 
"isn't guarded strongly enough" is subject to Get "protection." 
The tribe is infamousforattacking other tribal caerns to secure 
them against corruption. 


Quote: You are a worthy foe! I will sing a dirge in your honor 
and wear your skin with pride! 


Glass Walkers 


Asarule, Garou prefer the depths of the forests to the depths 
of the cities. Werewolves, even homid werewolves, see the 
concrete expanses as sores on the body of Gaia, and as 
shun them. 

The Glass Walkers ate the exceptions to the rule. 

The Glass Walkers originated in Mesopotamia (though 
they were not called Glass Walkers then) and swiftly gained 
reputations as curious and odd Garou. They were among the 
first Garou to dwell inhhuman settlements, where they grew to 
respect human ingenuity and adaptability. They vehemently 
opposed the Impergium and were instrumental in ending it 
(the Red Talons still have not forgiven them). 

Now the Glass Walkers live among the cities of humar 
not (like the Bone Gnawers) because they have nowhere else 
to go, but because they choose to doso. Indeed, they embrace 
creature comforts and technology, always seeking to stay on 
the cutting edge of human science, art and. fashion. This 
proclivity makes-the Glass Walkers the sources of much 
puzzlement and occasional outrage among the other Garou; 
certainly the Glass Walkers are distrusted by their peers. 

The cries of their critics, howeyer, fall on deaf ears (prob- 
ably from overexposure to SSTs and Sony Walkmans). The 
Glass Walkers argue that, far from being aberrations against 
Gaia, they are the werewolves most attuned to the Mother. 
Afterall, they are but carrying the theory of evolution one step 
further. If the Earth is being paved over and the Sun is being 
blocked by smog, then Earth and Sun are obviously not fit to 
exist. If the other Garou-wish to cling to, an idyllic fantasy 
world, fine; smart creatures learn to live in the here and now. 
New and different aren’t always bad, and the skyscrapers are 
just the trees ofanew forest. Perhaps, encased in asp! 
and surrounded by a monoxide shield, Gaia can better with- 
stand the Wyrm’s assault. 


a rule 


rmor 


Indeed, the Glass Walkers maintain and hold several 
powerful urban caerns. They take great pride in reclaiming lost 
urban caerns “for Gaia,” and insist that only they can stem the 
worst outrages of urban corruption. Only they, positioned as 
they are, can hunt down and destroy the vilest members of the 
human species. The Walkers' ability to discover and disrupt 
plans for particularly destructive developments, such as waste 
dumps, is the primary reason they have not been declared 
traitors. 

Ofcourse, the Walkers’ power assuredly plays a role in their 
continued good standing. They do not have the Kindred’s 
influence in human society, but they have much more clout 
than do any other werewolves. The Glass Walker tribe is the 
wealthiest tribe, and its members are the most technically 
adept. Furthermore, Glass Walker Theurges have made pacts 
with many urban elementals and spirits, and often bind them 
into deadly fetishes. 

Tribal Totem: Cockroach (this might seem an odd choice 
until one considers that the insect has existed for 325 million 
years, is incredibly adaptable and resilient, and is virtually 
impossible to wipe out) 

Initial Willpower: 3 

Backgrounds: Glass Walkers may not buy Pure Breed, 
Mentor or Past Life. 

Beginning Gifts: Control Simple Machine, Persuasion 

Physical: Glass Walkers have bred with humans the world 
over. They are noted for their devotion to human fashion, 
though this varies by subculture; an individual Glass Walker 
may look like a GQ model or a tattooed street hood. In wolf 
form they are generally of small to medium size. Their fur is 


often multicolored and mottled (and occasionally dyed). 
Many of the tribe’s younger members dye and clip the manes 
oftheirCrinosforms intoa variety of colorful and bizarre styles. 
Ofall the tribes, the Walkers have the fewest lupus, and their 
blood is thinning as a result. 

Territory: Glass Walkers dwell in urban areas, many of 
which they control. They gravitate toward ritzier areas than 
their Bone Gnawer cousins do, although younger Walkers 
seem as fond of warehouses and seedy clubs as their elders are 
of four-star hotels. 

Protectorate: Glass Walkers protect the movers and shak- 
ers of the city: corporate figures, the underworld, street gangs, 
research scientists and the like. They generally breed with 
such people. They are less concerned with more mundane 
humans, but take a dim view of harm coming to any citizens 
of “their” city. 

Quote: The urban landscape unnatural? Hardly. The preda- 
tors wear different guises and use different methods to entrap their 
prey — bad credit ratings and IRS audits replace talons and fangs. 
Still, the age-old snarl of triumph is daily heard in many a corporate 
boardroom, and the look in the eyes of a frightened deer flashes 
among the members of countless stress-reduction support groups. 


Red Talons 


It is often said that nature is self-correcting — that when 
one species oversteps its bounds and upsets the balance, a 
retaliatory force will arise to counter it. If, as many claim, 
humans have thrown nature out of balance, the Garou called 
the Red Talons are nature's way of righting things. 


The Red Talon tribe is composed entirely of lupus Garou. 
Though oncea mighty tribe, the spread of humanity through- 
out the world has greatly weakened its numbers and power. 
Thus have the Talons implemented their foremost tribal 
policy, one that has become virtually synonymous with the 
tribe asa whole: total genocide of the humantace. Humans — 
all humans — must be destroyed, as quickly and finally as 
possible. Only thus may Gaia be saved. 

Regrettably, the Talons’ hatred of humanity has led to the 
alienation and degeneration ofthe tribe asá whole. Many 
Talons, outraged by the razing of their caerns undensthe 
humans’ bulldozers, have become single-minded fanatics. 
Even homid Garou are disdained, and the Theurgés of other 
tribes often wonder whether the Red Talonsfare not slowly 
being corrupted by the Wyrm: Certainly, the inventive ways 
in which some Red Talonsdispose of thé human “cancer” rival 
the rites of the Black-Spiral Dancers for sheer cruelty. 

Red Talons dwell in the deep wilderness, far from human 
settlements —they cannot bear the stench of the “scabs,” as 
they refer tocities. Of all werewolves, the Talons are the most 
attuned to the wildemess; they walk unafraid through wastes 
wWhere'even other Garou fear to travel, and their Theurges are 
rumored to remember many secrets lost in the deepest wilds. 

A few of the younger, “upstart” Talons have questioned 
whether/all the human race need be exterminated. These 
younger Talons have gone so far as to take the hated Homid 
shape and walk amid human settlements, seeking virtue 
among the humans. Only traditional Garou respect for the 
right of the young to walk their own path has kept the elder 
Talons from slaying these upstarts outright. 

Tribal Totem: Griffin 

Initial Willpower: 3 

Backgrounds: Red Talons may not buy Allies, Con- 
tacts, or Resources. Their only Kinfolk are wolves. 

Beginning Gifts: Beast Speech, Scent of Running Water 

Physical: Red Talons are not used to Homid form and assume 
itonly rarely. When they do, they are often rough, hairy, crudeand 
slouching. Some Talons even resemble Neanderthals. In wolf 
form, they are of medium to large frame, with ruddy or brown fur 
and noticeably large jaws. There isalwaysashock offlaming red fur 
somewhere on their bodies; the Children of Gaia say this is Gaia’s 
mark of shame, but the Talons claim it is a badge of valor. 

Territory: Red Talons dwell in the deepest wilds, far from the 
taint of humans. 

Protectorate: The Red Talons watch over the dwindling wolf 
packs. They love the wolves like brethren and mourn when one 
falls to disease, starvation or hunters. 

Quote: You humans need to refine and alter and corral and 
codify and measure things, yes? Very well. I shall use your 
“wristwatch” to count out 10 of your "seconds"; I suggest you use 
that time to nun, for at the end of it I shall come for you, and I shall catch 
you, and we shall measure the duration of your death — in screams. 


Shadow Lords 


Wolves, and werewolves, are creatures of dominance and 
submission, mastery and servitude. Surely no Garou tribe exempli- 
fies this dictum so much as the Shadow Lords. This tribe of great 
dark werewolves is renowned for its members valor and cunning, 
and equally notorious for their arrogance and ambition. 

The Shadow Lords arose to prominence in the Balkans, where 
they were powerful warlords. The tribe has since moved on, 
however, establishing strongholds throughout the world in a 
ceaseless quest for power. The Shadow Lords have certainly been 
aided in this by the tribal emphasis on dominance at all costs. 
Shadow Lords live and die by a certain credo, one of which they 
do not often speak among other Garou. This credo is simple: 
werewolves are supreme among Earth’s lifeforms, Shadow Lords 
are supreme among werewolves, and thus it is the Lords’ responsi- 
bility to rule the rest of Gaia’s creatures — for their own good, of 
course. 

ToaShadow Lord, hierarchy is everything; the only measure of 
worth is leadership, and it is to be gained at all costs and by any 
means. For this reason, the Lords strive ceaselessly to dominate 
human, wolfand werewolfalike. Shadow Lords despise the Silver 
Fangs, whom they consider weak and decrepit; they would like 
nothing more than to usurp the Fangs’ position. 

The Shadow Lordscompose perhaps the strongest tribe overall. 
The combination of strong tribal unity and individual members 
forged in the fires of unceasing competition has produced a truly 
formidable machine. Of late, the Lords’ long-standing rivalry with 
the Silver Fangs has been more overt. These are dark times, the 
Lords argue. While the so-called wisdom of the Silver Fangs may 
be appropriate in soft days of peace, desperate days demand new 
policies and new leaders. 

Shadow Lords are generally proud, regal, dignified and aloof. 
Their cunning is renownedjas is theirutter lack of mercy. They are 
skilled and honorable fighters (at least, some Garou whisper, until 
observers’ backs are turned), and accede grudging respect to those 
beings Who»prove themselves fit to,live, However, they have 
neither sympathy nor tolerance för the weak. Shadow Lords are 
perhaps the Garou 2 o 


Tribal Totem: Grandfat Thunder 

Initial Willpower: 3 

Backgrounds: Shadow Lords may not buy Allies or 
Mentor. 

Beginning Gifts: Aura of Confidence, Fatal Flaw 

Physical: Shadow Lords can be of any human stock, for 
they have bred with the best and brightest of all peoples. They 
are generally muscular, with a commanding bearing. In wolf 
form they are large, stocky and dark, rather resembling enor- 
mous pit bulls. 

Territory: Shadow Lords prefer areas of stark, gloomy 
beauty: craggy mountains, dark forests and the like. However, 
in their quest for power, many Lords have migrated to the 
cities. 


Chapter Six: Traits 97 


POL PST TR —————— À 


Protectorate: Shadow Lords protect few people as such; 
they feel that anyone who needs such protection is a weakling 
and should be destroyed for the good of the species. Occasion- 
ally, a particularly brilliant and ruthless businessperson, 
organized crime head or military figure will catch a Shadow 
Lord's eye; such a person might be aided on occasion. 

Quote: | respectfully disagree with thee, my Red Talon sister! 
Come hither — away from the others, yes? I say the humans should 
not be killed outright — nay, merely culled until they learn their 
place — in the pose of submission, our claws at their throats! By the 
Great Mother, animals were made to serve humans, humans were 
made to serve Garou, and Garou were made to serve the Sh—err, 
Gaia. Yes, of course — Gaia. But let us speak later, when there are 


fewer ears about. 


Silent Striders 


Hailing from the wastes of the Sahara, the tribe known as 
the Silent Striders has since ranged far and wide across the 
material and spirit Realms. Striders have traversed, explored 
and scouted all the lands knowii'to Garou (and probably a: 
great many unknown ones.as well). Silent Suiders have long 
made it their duty to pave the Wayinto the void; bringing the 
previously unknown to light. - 

It is ironic, then, that so little is known about the tribe. 
Striders exist on the periphery of Garou society, coming and 
goingas they please. They interact with spirits, elementals and 


mages nearly as oftenas they do with other Garou, for they seek 
many perspectives from which to view the Wyrm’s activities. 

Striders love stories, and only the Fianna rival them in the 
storytelling art. They prefer to listen rather than speak, but on 
the rare occasions when they do tell a tale, they leave their 
audiences awestruck. They are masters of gleaning the impor- 
tant data from a conversation; other werewolves who speak 
with a Silent Strider often leave the conversation feeling as 
though they have revealed everything and learned nothing. 

This penchant and the Striders’ refusal to discuss their 
beliefs or rites have caused the Silent Striders to be viewed 
with suspicion by other Garou. Striders often appear out of the 
wilds bearing news of an impending Wyrm assault; other 
Garou have often misconstrued this, reviling Striders as har- 
bingers of ill omen. 

Indeed, many Silent Striders carry a weighty burden. They 
stride and stride and stride because they have nowhere to rest. 
They are silent because they have no countrymen with whom 
to converse. The Silent Striders were long ago driven from 
dlieir homeland and have never found a place to settle. They 
hold fewer caems than,any other tribe, and this lack of 
connection to Gaia often causes otherGarou to distrust them. 
Striders rarely join packs.of other Garou, but-when they do, 
they defend their adopted brethren with the fiercest loyalty. 

Striders value wisdom and knowledge above all else. Their 
travels often take them into the heart of Wyrm-infested 
territory, and they more than all other werewolves understand 


the Wyrm's nature. The Strider who does turn to the Wyrm is 
a truly terrible foe. 

Tribal Totem: Owl 

Initial Willpower: 3 

Backgrounds: Silent Striders may not buy Past Life or 
Resources. 

Beginning Gifts: Sense Wyrm, Speed of Thought 

Physical: Striders have a variety of human somatypes, 
though most are lean from constant travel. Striders originated 
in North Africa and thus are most often African or Semitic, 
butthey have interbred with humansofall stocks. In wolfform 
they are long and lean, resembling the jackals of Egyptian art, 
with inscrutable expressions and regal countenances. Silent 
Striders in Crinosform may well be responsible for the legends 
of such deities as Anubis and Set. 

Territory: None to speak of; Silent Striders wander where 
they will, rarely staying in one place for longer than a week or 
so. 

Protectorate: Silent Striders are the advance scouts of their 
race; theysometimes protect humans whom they meet in their 
travels, but leave the protection of the race asa whole to other 
tribes. 

Quote: Minions of the Wyrm approach from the northeast. 
Prepare thyselves. 


Silver Fangs 


In the beginning, it is said, all Garou were Silver Fangs, 
descendants of the Progenitor Wolf. Asthebloodlinexkinned 


and the tribes divided, the Silver Fangs kepe their breed pure 


and held the fragmenting tribes together. Though: noble 
Garou still command respect from the other tribes; heii 
grows weak with age and inbreeding, ~ 

For centuries, the Silver Fangs mingled their blood wih 
human aristocrats, influencing their culture and being influ: 
enced in return. Of all Garou, the Silver Fan 
rigid protocols. They once ruled lands througheut Europe, but, 
like their human counterparts, have lost much of their former 
prestige. In Russia, their homeland, the Silver Fangs have only 
recently lost the power that had been theirs for centuries. 


These noble Garou are known for their physical beauty, 
courage and honor; they tend to have high Social Attributes 
and a variety of Knowledge Abilities. Sadly, many younger 
members of the tribe suffer from odd quirks — absent- 
mindedness, mild hallucinations, somnambulism — nothing 
overtly psychotic, but noticeable nevertheless. The powerful 
history of the tribe lays a heavy burden on the shoulders of its 
members, and many are too proud to ask for help. 

TheSilver Fangs representall that is best in Garou; they are 
magnificent, generous, loyal, mannered and regal. When they 
fight, they are predators supreme. When they govern, they are 
eloquent and strong. Though they espouse the superiority of 
the Garou, the Silver Fangs consider mediation, not slaughter, 
to be the werewolves' sacred duty. When their ire is raised, 
however, the Silver Fangs shed blood as eagerly as any Get of 
Fenris. More radical tribes, like the Red Talons and the Get, 


Chapter Six: Traits 


TE Te A 


see the Silver Fangs as doddering kings, blind drunk on old 
glory. Though legends tell of great Silver Fang heroes, these 
tribes grumble that it will take more than tales to save Gaia 
now. Some even accuse the Garou nobles of complacency, of 
consorting with humans while the Wyrm grows stronger. The 
Shadow Lords chuckle at the discontent and bide their time. 

The plight of the Silver Fangs epitomizes the tragedy of the 
Garou in general. Although proud and outwardly strong, the 
Fangs suffer from diseases of the spirit and mind. Inbreeding 
and Harano have weakened the foundation of the tribe, and 
although they strive to set things right, it may already be too 
late. 

Many tribal customsdescend from the human courts through 
which the tribe has stalked for so long. Many packs have 
elaborate titles and rituals. The elder Silver Fangs dominate all 
social functions, which frustrates the younger tribe members 
to no end. Special moots are held at every new moon, and 
many packs have two moots or more a month. 

Silver Fang territories are divided into protectorates ruled 
by a “king” and his court. By tradition, only Ahroun may 
become kings. Many Glass Walkers mock these anachronistic 
holdovers, but never to the Silver Fangs’ faces. 

Tribal Totem: Falcon 

Initial Willpower: 3 

Backgrounds: Silver Fang characters must spend at least 
three of their Background points on Pure Breed. 

Beginning Gifts: Lambent Flame, Sense Wyrm 

Physical: While spreading throughout Europe and North 
America, thé Silver Fangs ififiltrated the nobility and wealthy 
classes of the nations in which they dwelt. They have refined 
features, often with familial peculiarities (distinctive noses, 
chins, etc.). Their lupine forms are always pure white or silver, 
with long jaws and graceful builds. Their eyes are often blue or 
green, and they usually wear some form of jewelry even in 


5 Lupus form: 


Teércitorjé Sil cc Fang septs select vast, beautiful wilder- 
ness areas to reflect their splendor: mountains, deep forests, 
and majestic coastal cliffsides. They guard these lands jeal- 
ously, suffering trespass from neither human nor Garou. 

Protectorate: The revered Silver Fangs are the court of last 
resort. If some mission defies the efforts of all other tribes, che 
Garou nobles go in and clean house. All Silver Fangs are 
expected to live up to their tribe's legendary heroism, to 
sacrifice all and serve the Mother in good grace. 

Quote: By the blood of my forebears, no one will harm this land. 
This I swear to you by the eternal promise of the Thousand-Oak 
sept. We will prevail! 


Stargazers 


Klaital Starcatcher came forth from the ends of the world 
with a vision of harmony, words of wisdom and answers to 
many questions. In the days of the Impergium, he (or she; the 
legends differ) fell into despair. The Wyrm had taken hold of 
the noble Garou; hatred festered in their hearts and blood 
rained upon the lands. Klaital found the seeds of wisdom in a 


99 


star within himself, but many Garou refused to listen. Those 
few who agreed forsook their kin and followed Klaital's path, 
a path to the balance within oneself. These Garou, known as 
Stargazers, still prefer solitude, but remember their purpose 
and their oath before Gaia. Thus, they wander the world, 
carrying their truth but knowing that no one will listen. 

Stargazers are philosophers, questors after enigmas, and 
solvers of riddles. Their totem, Chimera, is called “The Lady 
of Many Faces” and “The Shaded Mirror.” Nootherwerewolves, 
not even the Children of Gaia, have such control over their 
Rage and inner Beasts. By putting aside passing concerns like 
vengeance, tradition and material possessions, Stargazers have 
cultivated a serenity unknown to other Garou. Within their 
bliss, they and creation become one. Ironically;by centering 
themselves so well, they have moved away from what the 
Garou were meant to be. The tribe is painfully small; fewer. 
than 500 are thought to exist, and many of theseare converts 
fromothertribes. Though they have entered a higher state, the 
Stargazers have lost a vital tie to their forebears. By forsaking 
the pack, they have forsaken the wolf within. 

Nonetheless, the tribe has perfected many new paths to 
harmony and awareness. Their Gifts attune the body and the 
spirit to adversity. Their martial art, Kailindo, harnesses the 
five forms and Rage into a graceful yet effective fighting style. 
Stargazers ever ponder the balance between the mind and the 
Beast, between the quest for peace and the need for war. They 
shun the traps of civilization and dislike the children of the 


city, the Glass Walkers and Bone Gnawers, for their slavery to 
the flesh. They have, however, made lasting impact on other 
Garou through their reason and example. What the Children 
of Gaiaachieve by outward activism, Stargazers accomplish by 
introspection. 

Thisinner road to harmony has not weakened the Stargaz- 
ers’ fighting prowess; they are idealistic seekers, not pacifistic 
dreamers. When combat is needed, they fight bravely and 
well: But Stargazers do not seek warfare for its own sake, as do 
the Getof Fenris. They simply accept it as a reality of life. If an 
'enemy seems salvageable, Stargazers will try to subdue him 
without permanent harm. If they face a minion of the Wyrm 
or some other evil foe, they will wipe the blight from Gaia's 
face. 

Thereis little formal order among the tribe; all are generally 
accorded respect, though the words of elders still carry great 
weight. Some Stargazers gather into collective enclaves or 
monasteries in the name ofsome common philosophy, though 
such arrangements are usually temporary. 

Stargazets tend to work on their own, joining packs to 
impart wisdom, then leaving when their task is done. Al- 
though his packmates may not listen, the average Stargazer 
will forever urge them to seek the deeper truths within 
themselves and the ineffable splendor of the Mother. 

Tribal Totem: Chimera 

Initial Willpower: 5 


Backgrounds: Stargazers may not buy Allies, Fetish or 
Resources. 

Beginning Gifts: Balance, Sense Wyrm 

Physical: Many Stargazers come from Far Eastern stock. 
Some, however, are European or African in ancestry. The 
graceful Stargazers range from striped gray to solid black in 
color, though many have fur of a lighter hue. Most are lean, 
and nearly all radiate a tangible aura of serenity. 

Territory: Stargazers prefer the outskirts of the known world, 
wandering from place toplace seeking greater truthsand spreading 
wisdom. Many hail from the Far East, but travel anywhere. 

Protectorate: Those who strive for enlightenment and aware- 
nessare the favored charges of this tribe. Stargazers often mate with 
outcasts and vagabonds who make their way in the deep wilder- 
ness. Though they are carefulaboutwhom they teach, these Garou 
often share their insights with worthy humans. 

Quote: Toface the Wyrm without, one mustface the Wyrm within. 


Uktena 


While the Stargazers seek inner serenity, the Uktena walk 
adarker path. In their hearts and their blood, the Uktena bear. 
the legacy of the dispossessed, of people drivenfromtheirlands 
or dragged away in chains. Their eclectic heritage and history 
of oppression have nurtured dark hungers in the Uktena; it is 
said that the Wyrm tempts the tribe with forbidden knowl- 
edge. Even their Wendigo brothers watchithe Uktena with 
suspicion. 

When the Pure Ones led the migration across the Bering 
Strait, the Uktena settled to the south, roving into the deserts, 
mesas, and jungles of Central America and the southern U.S. 
In deep nights beneath an open sky, the Uktena communed 
with spirits unknown to other Garou. They learned odd lore 
from the Nuwisha, the Corax, and the Pumonca and Qualmi 
Bastet, andate of the desert vision-fruits. Here and there, they 
found powerful Banes sleeping beneath the earth and bound 
them lest they escape. The Uktena grew wise in ways thatno 
other Garou could understand, and they kept their secrets 
hidden from their jealous cousins. 

When the white settlers, called “Wyrmbringers” by the 
Pure Tribes, ravaged the New World, they brought other races 
— Africans and Asians — as slaves. The Uktena looked with 
pity upon these dispossessed and took them in. When the 
Uktena's own folk were decimated by the Wyrmbringers, the 
tribe becamea haven for refugees of vision, incorporating their 
mystic secrets into Uktena tribal lore. Now the Uktena lurk at 
the fringes of the spirit world. Many Garou feel that they may 
have lurked there for too long. 


The tribe avoids corruption, however, by maintaining a 
loose confederation of septs rather than a strong central 
hierarchy. Messengers travel between septs to keep lines of 
communication open, and councils of elders meet every 
solstice and equinox. Intersept feuding is rare, but becomes 
intense when some object or secret of power is at stake. 

The tribe is renowned for its curiosity. Its members’ knowl- 
edge of spirits is legendary, and their sullen silence only makes 


Chapter Six: Traits 


p/m am, mrt m TRA. = 


other Garou more suspicious of them. The Uktena have 
adopted a siege mentality after centuries of oppression. While 
they will cooperate with members of other tribes, Uktena keep 
their own counsel. Uktena Theurges are perhaps the darkest 
and most powerful of all Crescent Moons. They have looked 
upon the face of the Wyrm, not only in the Banes and the 
Umbra, but within their own hearts and those of their Kin. 
Most Uktena are at peace with the darkness inside them; the 
enemy one knows, they feel, is easier to defeat than the shadow 
one denies. 

Tribal Totem: Uktena (a Native American water spirit 
combining the features of serpent, deer and cougar) 

Initial Willpower: 3 

Backgrounds: No restrictions. 


Beginning Gifts: Sense Magic, Shroud 

Physical: The wiry Uktena tend toward reddish-black hues 
in wolf form, with large brown or black eyes. Many descend 
from Native Americans, but septs incorporating other ethnic 
groups exist. Over the years, the tribe has integrated many 
downtrodden ethnic groups into the fold. 

Uktena have the disconcerting habit of staring intently at 
everyone around them. They exude an air of mystery and 
menace; although small for Garou, the Uktena have a cold 
ferocity disproportionate for their size. 

Territory: Uktena prefer caerns in the deep wilderness 
beneath the open sky, or in secret places that have withstood 
Wyrmcomer assaults. Intruders, particularly white ones, are 
dealt with harshly. 

Protectorate: Uktena see themselves as the guardians of 
the dispossessed, of the people who have lost their lands and 
spirits to foreign conquest. They ally and breed with members 
of a great many oppressed ethnic groups, and defend them 
when need be. The tribe also claims rightful ownership of 
powerful fetishes and talismans. No one else, Uktena say, 
could care for them properly. 

Quote: While you peer into the sunlight, the Lost Ones gather 
at your back. They remember the things you have done, all the 
secrets you would rather forget. Best not to look, my friend. What 
you see may destroy your illusions. 

How much would you give to make them go away? 


Wendigo 


The Croatan have fallen. The Uktena have polluted their 
blood with Wyrmcomer taint. Only the Wendigo remain to 
continue the Pure Ones’ ways, and theyare few. One night, the 
Theurges promise, the spirits of the dead will rise to aid their 
faithful descendants, and the blood of the Wyrmcomers, even 
the Garou, will water the trees of newborn forests while the 
cities rust away. Such, at least, is the dream of the Wendigo. 

The Wendigo carry the bitterness of conquest in their 
hearts. Since the coming of the European settlers, this Native 
American tribe has watched its human cousins dwindle or fall 
before the white man’s poisons. For the last three centuries, 
Wendigo have waged a guerrilla war with the Wyrmcomers, 
keeping true to their ancestral culture and breeding. Though 


101 


| 


¡ROTAR NEN ANI UE 


they may ally with European Garou for a short time, these 
proud werewolves remember losing their lands to the Others, 
and their bitterness runs deep. Although the tribe maintains 
decent relations with the Silent Striders, Black Furies and Red 
Talons, it loathes the Get of Fenris and Shadow Lords and 
mistrusts the others. Only the Uktena tribe is pure enough to 
be considered true kin by most Wendigo. 

Wendigoare masters of woodland survival, stealth and hit- 
and-run tactics. Some infiltrate human townsand Wyrmcomer 
tribes, gathering information for later use. They do not breed 
save with Native American communities or wolf packs, and 
take pains to transmit the old ways to their Kinfolk. Their 
eventual goal is the "liberation" of northern Canada and the 
weakening of the white man's stranglehold on the continent. 
Tothisend, some Wendigo search the spirit world for their lost 
brothers, the Croatan, while others wage covert war against 
the European invaders. 

This tribe remains very true to its roots, enshrining the 
traditions of its ancestors. Wendigo rites are among the purest 
preservations of bygone rituals in existence; Wendigo are very 
careful to avoid external corruption and frown on spectators. 
Few European werewolves have ev ever been allowed anywhere 
near a Wendigo moot, and no 
The Wendigo are 


sources. 
Beginning Gifts: Call the Breeze, Camouflage 
Physical: All Wendigoare Native American. Their wolfforms 
resemble giant Northern timber wolves — gray, brown, or a 
mixture of both, with broad shoulders and short, strong jaws. 
Territory: The Wendigo make their stand in the remaining 
virgin woodlands of North America. Many homid Wendigodwell 
on reservations, fomenting revolt, though some few wander the 
Wyrmcomers' cities, taking the fight to the invaders’ back door. 
Protectorate: Clear-cutters, miners and hunters often disap- 
pear in the woods near Wendigo caerns; these areas acquire dark 
reputations among humans and even other Garou. The Wendigo 
will not tolerate another inch of their land falling to bulldozers, 
saws, or guns, and will spill their last drops of blood to protect what 
lands they have left. They likewise defend their human cousins 
when need be, though they encourage them to stand up on their 
own. While many Native Americans are as blind to the Garou as 
is the average European, some realize the true nature of their allies 
and aid them when they can. 
Quote: You came. You saw. Now you die 


102 


— nf SL ANTI arms CU 


Werewolf: The Apocalypse 


Tr n rm ———— 2 


Attributes 
Specialties 


For each Attribute and Ability Trait rated 4 or higher, a 
player can select a specialty. A specialty is a particular 
subcategory that a character is capable of performing with 
additional proficiency — a character may be able to drive very 
well, but may be particularly adept at off-road maneuvers. 

A specialty allows the player to reroll 10s scored on actions 
directly involving the specialty. The player gets to keep the 
success indicated by the 10, and may subsequently try again for 
another success, rolling another die for each 10 obtained. 


Physical 

These Traits describe how strong, dexterous and sturdy 
a character is, and are the primary Traits of an action- 
oriented character. Physical Traits concern only the 
strengths and weaknesses of the body. 


Strength 


This Trait measures your mean physical strength — your 

ability to lift, carry and cause physical harm. A person with a 
high Strength rating is usually larger than someone with a 
lower rating. Of course, there are always exceptions. 
Stre: usedwlie ő attempt to lift, carry, push, heave 
thing. In melee combat, your Strength Trait is 
ded to your damage Dice Pool. Strength is also used when 
you attempt to make any sort of jump or leap. 

Specialties: Strong Grip, Massive, Husky, Able-Bodied, Broad 
Shoulders, Hearty, Powerful, Bulging Biceps, Wiry, Large 

. Poor: You can bench press 40 lbs. 

.. Average: You can bench press 100 Ibs. 

Good: You can bench press 250 lbs. 
* Exceptional: You can bench press 400 Ibs. 
++... Outstanding: You can bench press 650 lbs. 


(Dexterity 


This Trait measures your general physical prowess — 
speed, quickness and agility. It indicates the capacity for 
moving precisely and manipulating objects with accuracy 
and grace. Dexterity includes hand-eye coordination, fine 
motor manipulation, reaction speed, reflexes and bodily 
grace. 

Specialties: Smooth-Motioned, Lithe, Steady, Deft, 
Graceful, Nimble, Athletic, Catlike Reflexes, Swift, Sure- 
Footed, Fleet-Footed, Light Touch 

. Poor: Youare butterfingered, so don'tuse a chainsaw. 

ee Average: Youcan chew gumand walk at thesame time. 

Good: You have excellent raw athletic potential. 

Exceptional: You can juggle five knives. 

* Outstanding: You can juggle five knives while 
blindfolded. 


| 


Stamina 


Stamina measures general health and resistance to pain; 
it indicates how long you can continue to exert yourself and 
how much physical punishment you can sustain. Stamina 
is your staying power, both physically and mentally, and 
one of its most important elements is the will to live. 

Specialties: Tireless, Enduring, Tough, Determined, Ag- 
gressive, Tenacious, Stalwart, Durable, Forceful, Dedicated 

. Poor: You are frail in constitution and may be sickly. 

.. Average: You are moderately healthy. 

eee Good: You are in good shape, the result of 
regular exercise. 

Exceptional: You could run a marathon. 
Outstanding: You are tough enough to survive 
almost anything. 


Social 


Your Social Traits describe your appearance, charm and 
familiarity with the human mind. Your Social Traits are 
vital in determining first impressions, leadership ability 
and the nature of your interactions with others. 


Charisma 


Charisma measures your aptitude for enticing and fasci- 
nating others. You use Charisma to win others over to you 
emotionally and to get them to trust you. This Trait reflects 
a charismatic personality more than it does an overt ma- 
nipulation of others. It is a sum of your bearing, charm and 
power of influence. Charisma reflects your power to con- 
vince others to put their faith in you. 

Specialties: Smooth, Eloquent, Outgoing, Captivating, 
Charming, Regal, Genial, Well-Mannered, Urbane, So- 
phisticated, Rustic, Gracious 

. Poor: Others avoid being around you. 

. Average: You are likable. 

Good: People trust and confide in you. 
Exceptional: Something draws people to you. 


Outstanding: You could lead a nation. 


Manipulation 


This Trait measures your aptitude for active self-expression, 
such as when you want to get someone else to do something. 
It is important when you attempt to influence or manipulate 
another person directly. You use Manipulation to trick, fool, 
bluff, outmaneuver and out-talk another. While you may be 
effective at manipulating people whom you have just met, 
those who already know you are rarely fooled. 

Manipulation is used in all rolls where you are attempting 
to influence or convince another person overtly. Whether 
they like you or not is of no consequence (though it can affect 
the difficulty of what you are trying). 

If you fail a Manipulation action, and the target realizes what 
you were trying to do (you botch, for instance), she may well be 


Chapter Six: Traits 


JP Ps IARE EEE ER. ——— HÀ 


angered. People are manipulatedall the time and usually ignore it. 
However, ifitisbroughttotheirattention, itcanbe verydisturbing. 
Manipulationcannetgreat results, but it isrisky to perform openly. 
Characters with high Manipulation ratings are not overly trusted 
by those who know them best. 

Specialties: Glib, Expressive, Cunning, Persuasive, 
Smooth, Silver-Tongued, Bravado, Ingratiating, Eloquent, 
Blarney, Double-Talker, Sophist, Witty 

. Poor: You express yourselfin as few words as possible. 

.. Average: Others might believe you. 

Good: You'd make a good lawyer. 
Exceptional: You should run for office. 


++ Outstanding: You could sell ice to an Eskimo. 


Appearance 


This Trait describes your attractiveness and force of pres- 
ence. You do not necessarily need beauty to have a high 
Appearance, you only need looks that somehow attract others 
to you. Appearance is not just your actual physical looks; it's 
the appeal of the way you move and talk, your animation and 
expressiveness. It is a measure of how interesting and attrac- 
tive you seem to others. 

Appearance is vital in any social situation where words are 
not exchanged. It is more important than you might think 
offhand; your impressions of another are heavily affected by 
that person's looks, no matter how open-minded you are. You 
may not like to admit it, but it's true. 

Appearance is often used by the Storyteller to judge roughly 
how others react to you upon a first meeting. Thus it can affect 
all other Social rolls you make involving that person (in some 
cases, your rating determines the maximum number of suc- 
cesses from a Social action that can actually be applied, 
making it impossible for an ugly person to achieve anything 
beyond minimal success). 

Specialties: Bold Demeanor, Alluring, Captivating, Sexy, 
Luminous, Honest Face, Imposing, Dignified, Pleasing, Hand- 
some, Beautiful, Gorgeous, Look of the Eagles 

. Poor: You tend to attract the hostility ofothers. 

.. Average: You are easily ignored, for you fit in so 

well with the crowd. 

eee Good: You have a pleasing appearance, and 
people treat you well. 

Exceptional: You are good-looking enough to 
be a model and are given respect and attention 
because of it. 


.... 


Outstanding: Others’ first reaction to you is either 
awe, intense jealousy or complete solicitude. 


Mental 


The Mental Traits represent your character's total mental 
capacity, including such things as memory, perception and the 
ability to learn and think. 


Perception 


This Trait indicates your awareness of the environment 
around you. While this is sometimes a conscious action, such 
as when you search for something, it more often works 
intuitively — you simply notice something. At base, Percep- 
tion isa sensitivity to the world, an open-eyed quality common 
among children (for whom the world is a boundless and 
mysterious place) and seldom present among the most jaded. 

Perception is used to see if you have the insight to under- 
stand or be aware of a certain fact or concept. It can help 
indicate your degree of alertness to ambushes, the subtext of a 
politician’s speech, or the subtleties of color in a painting. 

Specialties: Insightful, Attentive, Patient, Probing, 
Keen-Eyed, Intuitive, Visionary, Astute, Apprehensive 

. Poor: You are blind to anything but the obvious. 

oe Average: You are unaware of the subtle interac- 

tions that occur around you. 

eee Good: You are aware of moods and textures. 

eeee Exceptional: You are constantly alert to the 
nuances of life. 
eee Outstanding: You can see a needle in a haystack. 


Intelligence 


Intelligence represents both your memory and your ability 
to learn and think. It is important when using Abilities that 
require complex thought processes. Some people describe 


Intelligence as a person's quickness of mind or judgment, but 
it is more than that — it is the facility for understanding and 
the capacity for reasoning and evaluation. Intelligence is a 
rating of an individual's depth and flexibility of thought. 

Common sense, street savvy and wisdom are not compo- 
nents of the Intelligence Attribute; these facets of a character 
are portrayed by the player. However, low Intelligence can 
indicate a character who lacks the capacity to understand 
complicated thoughts, and who is a very slow learner — he 
might simply see things in terms of black and white, and can't 
understand that things are really in shades of gray. 

Characters with high Intelligence, on the other hand, are 
sophisticated thinkers capable of decoding many different 
levels of an argument or problem. They have discerning 
judgment and are well able to separate truth from lies, at least 
when they have time to think things over. Intelligence caters 
to carefully reasoned judgments rather than snap decisions 
(which employ the Attribute of Wits). 

Specialties: Discerning, Creative, Knowledgeable, Prag- 
matic, Astute, Brilliant, Bookworm, Clear Thinker 

. Poor: IQ 80 

ee —— Average: IQ 100 
Good: IQ 120 
Exceptional: IQ 140 
ee Outstanding: IQ 160+ 
Wits 

The Wits Attribute describes your ability to react quickly and 
correctlytonewsituations, as wellas youroverallsharpnessofmind 
and cleverness. In the simplest of terms, it measures how quickly 
you think. A more complex view understands Wits as a shrewd- 
ness, sagacity and capacity for understanding problems in the most 
basic terms. 


Those with low Wits are occasionally unable to take appropri- 
ate actions because of surprise (like a deer caught in headlights). A 
low Wits can indicate that you are more easily tricked and fooled 
thanmostpeople,foryouareagullibleandunsophisticatedstudent 
of human nature. If you have high Wits, you are able to react 
quicklytonewsituationsandareseldomcaughtoff guard bysudden 
changes in events. Whatever else happens, you are able to keep 
your Wits about you. 

Specialties: Clever, Shrewd, Sharp, Practical, Wily, Level- 
Headed, Creative 

. Poor: You send money to televangelists. 

.. Average: You know when to bet or fold in poker. 

eee Good: You are capable of handling L.A. rush 
hours (without shooting anyone). 
Exceptional: You could be a stand-up comic. 


++ Outstanding: You have a supercomputer for a 
brain — it's fast. 


Abilities 
He sat his horse well, and knew how to ride, 
And how to make a song and use his lance, 


And he could write and draw well, too, and dance. 


— Geoffrey Chaucer, The Canterbury Tales 


Talents 


Talents are the untrained and intuitive Abilities. Talents can 
almost never be studied or learned via training (though a few, like 
Brawl, are exceptions), but can be learned through direct experi- 
ence — usually during a story. If your character takes an action 
using a Talent he does not possess, there is no effect on your roll. 
A number of dice equal to the base Attribute is rolled. Talents are 
such natural and intuitive abilities that it is assumed everyone has 
some small capacity for each one. 


Alertness 


Over the years, you have become practiced in noticing all that 
happens around you, even if you are not actively concentrating 
upon the surroundings. You are a capable bodyguard, for you have 
learned how to stay alert over a long period of time. Alertness 
simply indicates your awareness of the world around you. It 
describes how much attention you pay to things other than the 
rumblings in your belly or the doubts in your mind. 


. Novice: You tend to be alert to changes, moreso 
than most. 
.. Practiced: You are watchful and very attentive 


to your surroundings. 
eee Competent: You are highly vigilant. 
e... Expert: You are a truly cautious individual and 
rarely let down your guard. 
***** Master: You notice everything that goes on 
around you. 
Possessed by: Watchmen, Hunters, Bodyguards, Re- 
porters, Burglars 
Specialties: Bodyguarding, Traps, Ambushes, Forests, 
Crowds, Noises, Paranoia 


Athletics 


This Ability describes your general athletic prowess and as- 
sumesafamiliarity with mostsports. Itisused tosee ifyoucan jump 
across a chasm, swim through a storm, throw a football, vault a 
fence or climb a tree. 

Athletics concerns complex motor actions; physical actions 
requiring only one type of motor action, such as lifting, do not use 
the Athletics rating, nor do athletic actions already subsumed by 
another Ability. 

. Novice: Little Leaguer 

oe Practiced: High school jock 

eee  Competent: College Varsity player 

. 


Expert: Professional athlete 


++...» Master: Olympic gold medalist 


Chapter Six: Traits 


Ya um mr mr a: —————4 


Possessed by: Professional Athletes, Enthusiasts, Danc- 
ers, Jocks, Kids 

Specialties: Swimming, Mountain Climbing, Acrobat- 
ics, Dancing, a specific sport 


Brawl 


You know how to fight bare-handed. This Ability includes 
such maneuvers as punching, kicking, grappling, throttling, 
throwing, gouging, clawing and biting. Brawling can get quite 
ruthless, but generally isa nonlethal form of combat— though 
werewolves’ claws and fangs can easily kill. 

. Novice: You know what to do, but you haven't 

had much experience. 

ee Practiced: You know where to hit people and 

make it hurt. 

eee Competent: You can choose your barstool. 
Expert: You are a black belt martial artist. 
Master: You could be a Golden Gloves boxing 
champion. 

Possessed by: Ahroun, Martial Artists, Soldiers, Thugs, 
Police Officers, Bouncers 

Specialties: Armlocks, Boxing, Wrestling, Karate, Judo, Tai 
Chi, Grappling, Throws, Showing Off, On Home Territory 


(Dodge 


The most effective way to win a fight is not to be struck. 
Becoming proficient in the Dodge Talent is a very wise choice. 
Your rating in this area describes your ability to avoid both melee 
and missile attacks; this includes diving for cover and ducking 
punches. 


. Novice: You hit the ground if someone screams, 
“Duck!” 

ee Practiced: You have no problem finding cover 
in a firefight. 


eee Competent: You're always the last one out in 
dodgeball. 
+... Expert: A lucky shot may land once in a blue moon. 
++... Master: You can nearly sidestep gunshots. 
Possessed by: Criminals, Street Fighters, Military Per- 
sonnel, Bouncers, Boxers 
Specialties: Leap, Sidestep, Duck, Cover, Dive 


Empathy 


You understand and can sympathize with the emotions of 
others, and are thus able to respond to them appropriately. 
Oftentimes you can discern the motives behind a person's actions 
simply by listening to him. You can also detect when youare being 
told lies. Empathy has a down side, however — because you are so 
open to the feelings of others, you often feel the same emotions as 
those around you. 


105 


——€(^A«^^^A^A-«——«-—-—-—-—-—-—-—-—-———-—-—-—— NS 


. Novice: People tell you their problems at parties. 

.. Practiced: Occasionally you get sympathetic 
pains from others. 

eee Competent: You have an amazing insight into 

others' motivations. 

Expert: No lies ever get past your scrutiny. 


Master: You often finish other people's sentences. 
Possessed by: Actors, Mediums, Above-Average Sales- 
men, Pick-Up Artists 
Specialties: Emotions, Truths, Spirits, Personalities, 
Backgrounds 


Expression 

Expression covers yourability to get your point across, whether 
by writing a book or debating social issues. Characters with high 
Expression are unforgettable, but only in their ability to convey 
their feelings intelligent or meaningful expression is the purview 
of other Traits. Expression at its highest form can be art. 

. Novice: Tabloid reporter 

.. Practiced: College debate team captain 


eee Compete uccessful comedian 


Expert: Best-selling novelist 


Master: William Shakespeare 

Possessed by: Orators, Politicians, Novelists, Actors, 
Demagogues, Protesters 

Specialties: Poetry, Impromptu, Radical, Innuendo, Meetings 


Intimidation 


Theart of intimidation takes many forms, ranging from a subtle 
suggestion to outright physical damage. Each method of intimida- 
tion has its time and place. You understand the science of being 
overbearing and know how to use it to get what you want. People 
with high Intimidation ratings seem to radiate auras of authority. 

. Novice: Six-year-olds give you the right of way. 

ee Practice 

eee Competent: Your gaze is very unsettling. 

e... Expert: You would be an above-average drill 

sergeant. 


: You win an occasional staredown. 


ee... Master: You can make vicious animals turn tail 
and run. 
Possessed by: Businesspeople, Bouncers, Military Per- 
sonnel, Mobsters 
Specialties: Veiled Threats, Political, Military, Social, 
Overt Violence 


Primal-Urge 


This describes your native instincts and connection to your 
ancestral past. Primal-Urge measures your ability to function not 
only as a wolf, but as a half-wolf. Those Garou skilled in Primal- 
Urge are very attuned to the bestial part of their inner nature. 
Primal-Urge describes your raw instincts, not rational thought. 
With practice, the Primal-Urge Talent can be used to control the 
subtle changes in werewolf forms. Primal-Urge is often added to 
Perception rolls when in wolf or Crinos form; it is also used for 


Werewolf: The Apocalypse 


tracking, overland navigation, and detecting hidden dangers 
about which only age-old instincts would be able to warn (such as 
the distinctive odor of a predator or the subtle shift of thin ice). 

* Novice: Wolf cub 

.. Practiced: With concentration, you can feel 

which way is north. 

eee Competent: An average feral Garou 

Expert: Subtle instinctual warnings are routine. 
* Master: Pack leaders 

Possessed by: Predators, Garou Warriors, Lupus, Banes, 
Various Wild Animals 

Specialties: Forms, Directions, Hunting, Tracking, Combat 


Streetwise 


Thestreetsarea majorsourceof informationand money, as well 
as big-time trouble. The Streetwise Talent has a variety of uses. 
First and foremost, Streetwise allows you to blend in with the local 
scene without drawing attention to yourself. Gossip, felony theft 
and street slang are also imparted by using this Talent. 

. Novice: You know who sells drugs. 

.. Practiced: You are considered cool by the populace. 
Competent: Member of a prominent gang 


+ Expert: Youhavespentmostofyourlife on the streets. 
ee... Master: [f you don't know it, it hasn't been said. 
Possessed by: Gang Members, Winos, Reporters, Home- 

less People, Detectives 
Specialties: Picking Pockets, Drugs, Fencing, Slang Terms 


Subter[uge 


You know how toconceal your own motives; moreover, you 
know how to decipher the motives of others and how to use 
those motivesagainst them. The secretsand intrigues of others 
interest you, and you work at understanding their weaknesses. 
A commandofthisskill makes you the ultimate conversation- 
alist, or the ultimate spy. 

. Novice: A few white lies never hurt anyone. 
Practiced: You can pick up in a nightclub. 
Competent: You could be a criminal lawyer. 
Expert: Amway salesmen have nothing on you. 
++... Master: Perry Mason wishes he had it so good. 
Possessed by: Lawyers, Con Men, Casanovas, Politicians 
Specialties: Finding Weaknesses, Seduction, Little White Lies 


Other Talents 


Search, Guile, Intrigue, Instruction 


Skills 


Skillsare the Abilitiesthatare learned through apprenticeships 
orrigorous training. Ifyou try to perform a feat involvinga Skill but 
have no rating in it, the difficulty increases by one. You are simply 
untrained in the techniques of that Skill and thus have a harder 
time accomplishing the task than someone who has at least some 
idea of what he is doing. 


—— É € AT Frome ere 


Animal Ken 


Animals do not behave as humans do, even when con- 
fronted with identical circumstances. The ability to 
understand the actions of animals can thus prove quite 
handy. Characters skilled in Animal Ken can not only 
predict the actions of animals, but can calm or enrage them. 
Animal Ken is also the Skill required to train animals. 

. Novice: Befriend a domesticated animal 

.. Practiced: Housebreak a puppy 

Competent: Train a seeing-eye dog 
* Expert: Train an animal to perform 


** Master: Domesticate a wild animal 

Possessed by: Animal Trainers, Zookeepers, Nature 
Lovers, Masters 

Specialties: Dogs, Cats, Horses, Parrots, Farm Animals 


(Drive 


You can drive a car and perhaps other vehicles as well. 
Simply because you have a Drive rating does not mean that 
you are familiar with all land vehicles. Your difficulty may 
be raised or lowered depending on your general experience 
with a particular automobile. 

. Novice: You can drive an automatic automobile. 

eo Practiced: Youcan operate a manual/shift transmission. 

Competent: Commercial trucker 
* Expert: Formula One car driver 
eeeee Master: Evel Kneivil 
Possessed by: Truckers, Race Car Drivers, most Americans 
Specialties: Curves, Sudden Stops, Stick Shifts 


Etiquette 


You understand the small nuances of social life, and are able to 
conductyourselfinamannerthatisboth unobtrusive and gracious. 
You understand how to make your way through human society. 
Your specialty is the culture with which you are most familiar. You 
use Etiquette during actions such as dancing, seduction and 
haggling. Etiquette is also used when engaging in diplomacy. 

. Novice: You know when to shut up. 

oe Practiced: You know not to wear paisley at a 

black-tie dinner. 


eee Competent: You know which spoon is used to 
eat soup. 

Expert: Youcan getalong with just about anybody. 
* Master: You could prevent World War III. 
Possessed by: Diplomats, Idle Rich, Executives 
Specialties: Business, High Society, Street Culture 


Firearms 


Skill in Firearms means that you have a broad knowledge ofall 
guns, from a simple 22 to an Ingram Mac-10 machine gun. 
Firearms Skill does not include the ability to operate heavy 
machinery such as tank guns and other artillery weapons. How- 
ever, skill in Firearms does include the ability to repair them. 


Chapter Six: Traits 


a ae 


y mmn. am, 


. Novice: You've had one or two lessons at the 
gun store. 
.. Practiced: You do all right at a firing range. 


Competent: You can pull off a few gun tricks. 
Expert: You're cool and steady, even under 
pressure. 

++... Master: "Do you feel lucky? Well, do ya punk?" 

Possessed by: Gang Members, Police, Criminals, Sol- 
diers, Hunters 

Specialties: Rifles, Handguns, Pistols, Machine Guns, Sprays 


Leadership 


You can get people to follow your lead and obey your 
orders by exerting authority and by example. Leadership 
isn't so much knowing the techniques of getting people to 
follow youas it is being the type of person people will follow. 
Leadership is often used in conjunction with Charisma. 


. Novice: You could coach a Little League team. 
oe Practiced: Your voice is a dominant one; you 
can demand silence. 
eee Competent: Youare an effective leader in times 
of strife. 
++... Expert: Youattract followers without really trying. 
++... Master: You are a Napoleon, a Churchill — or 
a Hitler 
Possessed by: Politicians, Military Officers, Gang Lead- 
ers, Executives, Police Officers 
Specialties: Commands, Oration, Compelling, Friendly, 
Noble, Military 


Melee 


The ability to fight with a weapon is a valuable skill in the 
Gothic-Punk environment. Proficiency in this Skill allows 
you to use hand-held weapons. Knives, sai, saps, tonfa and 
swords are examples of the types of weapons covered by the 
Melee Skill. This Skill is almost archaic nowadays because of 
society’s dependence on firearms, but keep in mind that a 
wooden stake or silver spear is a melee weapon... 

. Novice: You've taken a six-week course in fencing. 


.. Practiced: You have military training. 

eee Competent: Youdraw byes in kendo tournaments. 
. Expert: Any weapon is deadly in your grasp. 
++... Master: Bruce Lee with a pair of nunchuka 


Possessed by: Police, Fencers, Kendo Enthusiasts, Thugs, 
Gang Members 
Specialties: Swords, Axes, Rapiers, Knives, Clubs, Disarms 


Performance 


You are able to perform artistic actions such as singing, 
guitar playing, and acting. You know the minutiae of what to 
do and how to do it. Your specialty is the type of performance 
on which you concentrate, more than likely the first type of 
artistic expression you ever pursued. 


107 


. Novice: You can play bass in a garage band or act 
in a college play. 

.. Practiced: You can eke out a living on the club 
circuit, 


Competent: You can get a movie or record deal. 
. 


+ Expert: You regularly make the pages of People. 
++... Master: Your work will be remembered through 
the ages. 
Possessed by: Actors, Musicians, Karaoke Regulars, Mimes 
Specialties: Hardcore, Villains, Guitar Solos, While Drunk 


Repair 

You are able to repair simple or complex devices of all sorts. 
Suchdevices include doors, cars, and even computers. Mastery 
of this Skill means that you are a jack-of-all-trades. This Skill 
covers everything from simple carpentry to mechanics. Of 
course, proper tools are always needed. 

. Novice: You can assemble ready-made kits. 

. Practiced: You could wire a house. 


Competent: You save quite a few dollars in 
mechanics' fees. 


Expert: You are able to repair personal comput- 
ers within minutes. 


* Master: If it's broke, you can fix it. 


Possessed by: Handymen, Carpenters, Electricians, 
Mechanics, Husbands 


Specialties: Wood, Computers, Electronics, Engines, 
Automobiles, Electricity 


Stealth 


Stealth is the ability to sneak about or hide without 
being seen or heard; it is often rolled against another 
character's Perception. 


. Novice: You can hide in the dark. 
ee Practiced: You can hide in the shadows. 
Competent: You are an accomplished hunter. 


Expert: You can walk silently over two inches of 
dry leaves. 

* Master: Ninja clan leader 

Possessed by: Criminals, Spies, Reporters 

Specialties: Prowl, Hide, Lurk, Shadows, Crowds, Crawling 


Survival 


The wilderness is a dangerous place, at least for those 
who do not understand it. The Skill of Survival includes 
seeking shelter, finding a direct route through and relative 
safety in the wilderness, and tracking. When you use 
Stealth in the wilderness, you cannot roll more dice for your 
Stealth Dice Pool than you have in Survival. 


108 


Werewolf: The Apocalypse 


mI UR, GEN SERA E A m ——— //. 


. Novice: You can survive a five-mile hike. 
oe Practiced: You are familiar with the wilderness. 


Competent: You know how to brew natural 
medicines. 
Expert: You are at home in the wild. 
* Master: You could find an oasis in Death Valley. 
Possessed by: Tribesmen, Hunters, Park Rangers, Hik- 
ers, Native Americans 
Specialties: Tracking, Arctic, Jungle, Hunting 


Other Skills 


Piloting, Cooking, Boating, Archery, Disguise, Meditation 


Knowledges 


Knowledges include all the Abilities that require rigor- 
ous application of the mind, not the body, so Mental Traits 
can be used to modify Knowledge rolls. Though the ratings 
discuss Knowledges in terms of college degrees, school is 
not the only way to gain Knowledges — it is simply the most 
common. These are scholastic abilities for the most part, 
but self-study or tutoring is also possible. 

If you do not have a Knowledge, you cannot even 
attempt a roll involving it. There are exceptions, however, 
such as when the Storyteller rules that the roll pertains to 
trivial information that anyone has a chance of knowing. 


Computer 


You understand how to operate and program computers. 
You may also be able to design your own system. If you wish 
to break into a computer system, you need this Knowledge. 


. Student: You can boot up a video game. 

. College: Youmadeatleasta Bin Data Processing 101. 
Masters: You are a competent programmer and 
can design your own software. 

+ Doctorate: You make a living scamming Ma Bell. 
** Scholar: You could probably design an Al. 

Possessed by: Programmers, Data Processors, Gamers, 
Students, Hackers 


Specialties: Hacking, Virus Programs, Retrieving Data 


Enigmas 


Puzzlesand problems occupy your imagination — in fact, 
you may even enjoy being perplexed. Solving riddles of all 
sorts isa passion, and this interest has given you a knack for 
piecing together and remembering information vital to 
many kinds of problem-solving. 

The Enigmas Knowledge assists players in solving the 
mysteries created by the Storyteller. It is irreplaceable for 
divining secret pathways to lost Realms, answering the 
riddles of mystical guardians, or even trying to navigate the 
paper trails of modern bureaucracies. 


A 


. Student: You can put together a 100-piece jig- 
saw puzzle. 

.. College: You can guess the outcome ofa mystery 
novel. 


eee Masters: You can do Rubik's Cube in an hour. 
+... Doctorate: You'd have whipped Gollum with 
out hobbit trickery. 

++... Scholar: You understand the deepest mysteries. 

Possessed by: Crossword Puzzle Devotees, Zen Enthusi- 
asts, Game Players, Mystics 

Specialties: Ancient, Riddles, Visual, Verbal 


Jnvestigation 


Youare trained tonotice all sorts of details that others might 
miss. High levels of this Knowledge allow you to function as a 
detective. This Knowledge provides an ability to find clues, 
perform forensic analyses and predict crime patterns. 

. Student: Amateur detective 

oe College: Police officer 


Masters: Private detective 
Doctorate: FBI, CIA, KGB, MIS, Interpol agents 
++... Scholar: Sherlock Holmes 
Possessed by: Detectives, Insurance Investigators, Re- 
porters, FBI Agents, Intelligence Agents 
Specialties: Search, Prowl, Tail, Detective Work 


Chapter Six: Traits 


Law 


The law is not a thing to trifle with, and those with 
knowledge of the law are well able to use it to their advantage. 
If you ever want to get out of jail, this Ability is essential. 

. Student: Practical knowledge, police officer 

oe College: Prelaw, beginning lawyer 
Masters: Lawyer, full partner 


Doctorate: Judge 

eee e Scholar: Supreme Court Justice 

Possessed by: Police, Lawyers, Judges, Detectives, Crimi- 
nals, TV Viewers, Legislators 

Specialties: Courts, Contract, Litigation, Criminal, 
Police Procedure 
Linguistics 

It is assumed that you can speak your natural language, but 
you must purchase any other languages that you wish your 
character to speak. Garou characters know their native (hu- 
man) language, the Garou language, and “wolfspeak” without 
having to purchase levels in Linguistics; however, Linguistics 
allows greater fluency in these languages. Each level of Lin- 
guistics allows your character to speak another language 
fluently. Linguistics also gives a character an understanding of 
the structure of language, which is in turn the basis of thought. 
With this Ability, you can identify accents or read lips. 


Note that a lupus character without at least one dot in 
Linguistics (purchased through freebie points) cannot speak a 
human tongue. Note further that lupusare automatically assumed 
illiterate, while homid and metis Garou are assumed literate. 

. Student: One additional language 

.. College: Two additional languages 
Masters: Three additional languages 


© Doctorate: Four additional languages 


4 ++... Scholar: Five additional languages 
Possessed by: Travelers, Scholars, Diplomats, Interpreters 
Specialties: Curse Words, Technical, Diplomatic, Political 
Medicine 
Medicine is the study of the human body and the 
techniques used to cure its ills. While a werewolf's body is 
different from that of a human's, the knowledge of medi- 
cine can be used to treat its most serious (i.e., aggravated) 
wounds. The Medicine Knowledge includes an under- 
standing of the structure and functions of the body, the use 
of medicine, and the diagnosis and treatment of disease. 
. Student: You know the basics of setting bones 
and preventing shock. 
.. College: You have paramedic-quality training. 
eee Masters: You are a doctor and can diagnose and 
treat diseases. 
.... 
eeeee Scholar: You are a specialist of great renown. 
Possessed by: Doctors, Paramedics, Rescue Rangers 
Specialties: Pharmaceutical, Paramedics, Emergency 
Care, Disease, Neurosurgery 
Occult 
You are knowledgeable in all areas of the occult. This 


Doctorate: You can perform surgery. 


understanding of the more sinister side of the world in- 
cludes knowledge of curses, voodoo, magic and mysticism. 
This Knowledge is of the utmost interest to many Theurges. 
. Student: You've dabbled, butaren’t in the know. 
.. College: You're starting to know what's going on. 
eee Masters: There are more than werewolves out 
there, and you know a lot about these other 
residents of the World of Darkness. 
Doctorate: You can separate truth from fancy. 


++... Scholar: You have been fully initiated in many 
of the great mysteries. 
Possessed by: Weirdoes, New Agers, Occultists, Schol- 
ars, the Curious 
Specialties: Vampires, Witches, Mystical Powers 


Politics 


This Knowledge provides a familiarity with the political struc- 
tures of the day, including who are in charge and how they got 
there. It represents an understanding of both human and Garou 
politics. This can be an essential Ability when attempting to deal 
with mortal authorities in any way. 


. Student: Protester or casual observer 
oe College: Campaign worker or political science major 
eee — Masters: Campaign manager or speech writer 
Doctorate: Politician 
* Scholar: Machiavelli 
Possessed by: Lobbyists, Politicians, Lawyers, Protesters 
Specialties: Neighborhood, City, Congress, Elections, 
Oration, Radical 


Rituals 


Rituals covers a werewolf's knowledge of the traditions, 
history, myths and liturgies of the Garou. This Knowledge 
is essential for understanding what the Garou from the 
other tribe are really doing, what is written on the wall of the 
ancient Garou burial mound, and how to approach an elder 
properly. To learn a rite, one needs a Rituals rating equal to 
or greater than the level of the rite. 


. Student: You are still an unschooled cub. 
.. College: You can attend a moot without making 
a fool of yourself. 
eee Masters: You can attend another tribe's moot 
without screwing up. 
Doctorate: You can attend the Black Spiral 
Dancers' moot and make a good impression. 
@eeee Scholar: You know just about all there is to know. 
Possessed by: Garou 
Specialties: Accord, Caern, Death, Mystic, Punishment, 
Renown, Seasonal 


Science 


You have at least a basic understanding of physics, 
chemistry, botany, biology, geology, astronomy and other 
sciences. Your Knowledge deals with the useful applica- 
tions of science. Higher levels almost invariably involve 
specialization in a particular field. 


. Student: You can make smoke bombs with a 
chemistry set. 
.. College: You understand the major theories and 


applications. 
Masters: You could teach high-school science. 
Doctorate: You might win a Nobel Prize someday. 
++... Scholar: Albert Einstein 
Possessed by: Engineers, Researchers, Inventors, Tech- 
nicians, Pilots 
Specialties: Biology, Physics, Chemistry, Astronomy, 
Relativity, Nuclear Physics 


Other Knowledges 


Psychology, Bureaucracy, Finance, Art, Philosophy, 
Theater, Journalism, Military Science, Genealogy, Geog- 
raphy, History, Theology, specific area of knowledge/trivia 


110 Werewolf: The Apocalypse 


pamm am, mrt mr SE TRA. -——————— MÀ 


B ackgrounds 


These Traits describe the special advantages of your char- 
acter. You must choose why and how you came to possess these 
particular Traits. How did you gain your fetish? Who was your 
Mentor? You need to make sense out of your Backgrounds and 
integrate them into your character concept. 

A Background can sometimes be used in conjunction with 
an Attribute, such as rolling Wits + Resources to get your 
mother to write you just one last check — as a loan, of course 
— or Manipulation * Mentor to convince your teacher to 
instruct you in a rite. 

Backgrounds cannot be increased with experience points. 
They can be improved only through the actual events of the 
story. The only exception to this rule isthe Totem Background 
(see Totem, below). 


Allies 


Your Allies are people who help and support you — they 
could be family, friends, or even an organization to which you 
are friendly. Allies have their own lives to live, so they are not 
at your beck and call, but they often have influence in the 
community and access to Contacts or Resources. An Ally is 
ultimately a person whom you have befriended, and who 
protects and aids you out of love or common interest. 

Foreach point of Allies that you have, consider yourself to have 
one Ally. This individual isa person of influence in the area where 
she lives. An Ally could be a police sergeant, an advisor to the 
mayor, or even (if your rating is a 4 or 5) the mayor herself. 

Allies are generally very trustworthy and loyal. However, it 
requires time and energy to maintain the alliance, for the 
friends expect reciprocal aid from the character. Though they 
likely do not know you are a werewolf, they may know of some 
of your powers and thus may come to you for favors. This is 
often a means by which a story can begin. 

. One Ally, of moderate influence and power. 

.. Two Allies, both of them of moderate power. 

eee Three Allies, one of them quite influential. 

**** Four Allies, one of them very influential. 

++... Five Allies, one of them extremely influential. 


Contacts 


You know people from many different walks of life; to- 
gether, these disparate persons form a network of information 
and help that may well prove useful. 

Your Contacts are not only the people you can manipulate 
or bribe to get information, but friends whom you can trust 
implicitly (Major Contacts) to provide you with accurate 
information (in their areas of expertise). You should describe 
your Major Contacts as complete characters, either as the 
chronicle progresses or beforehand. You also have a number of 
Minor Contacts spread through the area. When you wish to 
get in touch with a Minor Contact, make a roll using your 
Contacts rating (difficulty 7). Each success means you have 


successfully located one of your Minor Contacts; of course, you 
will need to bribe or charm her into giving you needed 
information. 

. One Major Contact 

oe Two Major Contacts 
+ Three Major Contacts 
* Four Major Contacts 
** Five Major Contacts 


Fetish 


You possess a spirit fetish, a physical object with a spirit 
bound into it. It is a highly valuable object, full of great 
significance to the Garou, and has a number of powers granted 
by the invested spirit. The greater your score in this Back- 
ground, the more valuable the fetish. See the Appendix for a 
list of sample fetishes. 


. You possess one Level 1 fetish. 
.. You possess one Level 2 fetish or two Level 1 
fetishes. 


eee You possess one or more fetishes with a total of 
three levels. 

You possess one or more fetishes with a total of 
four levels. 


***** You possess one or more fetishes with a total of 
five levels. 


Kinfolk 


You are in contact with certain humans or wolves who, while 
descended from the Garou, did not receive the “gene” and so for 
all practical purposesare normal membersoftheirspecies. They are 
immune to Delirium, however, and know of your origin; they are 
willing to help you however they can, though most are not in 
positions of power (those people are instead considered Allies). 
NetworksofKinfolk can be invaluable for Garou who wish to deal 
with the human world but cannot risk frenzy. 

. 2 Kinfolk 

ee 5 Kinfolk 
10 Kinfolk 
20 Kinfolk 
50 Kinfolk 


Mentor 


This Trait describes one or more elders who look after you. 
Each rating point of Mentor you possess quantifies how 
powerful your Mentor is within the tribe, and what Rank he or 
she has obtained. Your Mentor can advise you, protect you, 
speak for you to other elders, teach you, warn you of a potential 
faux pas, and inform you of opportunities for power and 
advancement. A powerful Mentor might not be a single 
person, buta group. Thus, a pack could be a collective Mentor, 
as could the ruling council of a sept. 

Mentors may expect to receive something in retum for the aid 
they provide. Though they may simply enjoy the company of the 


Chapter Six: Traits 111 


/ ME EN EEE BE ER ————À 


| 


character, in times of need they may call upon their “apprentice.” 
Thisisagood waytobeginanumberofexcellentstories. [n general, 
however, you do receive more than you give. 

. Mentor is Rank 2. 

ee Mentor is Rank 3. 
Mentor is Rank 4. 
Mentor is Rank 5. 
** Mentor is Rank 6 (or even higher!). 


Past Life 


Garou have a much better grasp of their ancestral memory 
than humans do; many werewolves can actually remember 
scenes from the lives of their distant forebears. Some Garou 
can even allow the spirits of their ancestors to take over their 
bodies. Such a surrogate consciousness may well be capable of 
performing feats of skill that the “host” herself could not. 

A Garou with this Background may, once per game session, 
roll his Past Life Background (difficulty 8, or 10 if trying to 
contact the spirit of a specific ancestor). Each success allows 
the character to add one die to the Dice Pool of any Ability, 
or to create a Dice Pool (of one die per success) for an Ability 
that the character does not even possess. Thus, a Garou with 
a Past Life of 4 is in a desperate battle; he is no great shakes as 
a warrior (Dex 2, Brawl 1), but he rolls his Past Life rating 
(difficulty 8) and scores three successes. He has just contacted 
his ancestor, the mighty chieftain Fleshripper, who guides his 
claws in battle, effectively adding three to his Brawl score. 
Even if the character had no Brawling Talent whatsoever, he 
would now have an effective score of 3. 

As heretofore noted, it is more difficult to contact specific 
ancestors, but successful contact may provide precognitive 
visions or advice at the discretion of the Storyteller. All effects 
of the Past Life bonus last for one scene only. 

Abotchon the Past Life roll may indicate that the character 
becomes overwhelmed by the memories of thousands of lives 
(effectively rendering the character catatonic for the remain- 
der of the scene) or, worse yet, may mean that the character is 
possessed by the spirit of an ancestor who subsequently refuses 
to relinquish the body. The ancestor will stay for a length of 
time dependent on the Storyteller’s whim. 

. You get hazy flashes of scenes from the distant past. 

oe A few faces and places stand out in your mind. 

Youknow some of your distant ancestors by name. 
* You regularly have conversations with your 
ancestors as if they were in the room. 
***** You have gained repute among the ancestor 
spirits; they often come to you. 


Pure Breed 


This Background determines your “pedigree” — your lin- 
eage and ancestry, your markings and carriage, and other 
features of birth. Garou with high scores in Pure Breed are 
revered by other Garou as the heroes of old come to life — and 


112 


they are expected to act like it. The higher your Pure Breed 
score, the more likely it is that you will be able to traverse the 
territory of other Garou unmolested or gain hospitality from a 
foreign tribe. It is the closest thing to status that Garou possess 
— each point of Pure Breed adds an extra die to Social or 
challenge rolls involving other Garou (even Black Spiral 
Dancers!). Pure Breed is a semi-mystical trait — eons of 
instinct tell other Garou whois Pure Bred and who isn't. In the 
present age, there are very few Pure Bred Garou left in the 
world. 

In addition to the normal advantages of being a Pure Breed, 
Garou expect those who are pure of blood to “act as one of their 
lineage.” Tribes expect more from those who are pure of blood, 
and they frown upon those who do not accept their heritage. 

. You carry yourself well. 

ee Your distant cousin in the distant past was the 

sidekick of a great Garou warrior. 

eee Other Garou part to allow you passage. 

The bards of your sept blessed your birth as sign 
from the spirits. 
ee... Youare the spitting image of the great heroes of yore. 


Resources 


This Trait describes your financial resources or access to such 
resources. Your Resources are not completely liquid assets, but you 
can often sell them to gain money. It may take weeks or even 
months to do so, depending on how much needs to be sold. 

This Trait assumes that the character gains a basic allowance 
each month appropriate to the level of Resources. The source of 
this income must be detailed, however, as it could easily “dry up” 
depending on the circumstances of the chronicle. 

. Small savings: You have an apartment and per- 
haps a motorcycle, If liquidated, you would have 
$1000 in cash. Allowance of $500 a month. 

.. Middle class: You have an apartment or condo- 
minium. Ifliquidated, you would have $8,000 in 
cash. Allowance of $1200 a month. 


eee  Largesavings: You own a house (or at least have 
some equity). If liquidated, you would have 
$50,000 in cash. Allowance of $3000 a month. 
m 


Well off: You own a large house, or perhaps a 
dilapidated country manor. If liquidated, you would 
have $500,000 in cash. Allowance of $9000amonth. 
eee Fantastically rich: You are easily a millionaire many 
times over. If liquidated, you would have at least 
$500,000,000in cash. Allowanceof$30,000amonth. 


Rites 


This Trait describes how many rites the character knows at 
the beginning of the game. This rating may represent one big 
one or a number of lesser ones whose total levels equal the 
Rites rating; remember, however, that a character needs a 
Rituals Knowledge rating at least equal to the level of a given 
rite in order to learn it at all. A list of rites is given later in this 


Werewolf: The Apocalypse 


pamm am, mrt mr RED. ——— //, 


nt oa 
chapter. Note: Two Minor Rites can be purchased in place of 
one Level One rite; see Minor Rites, pp. 152-153. 
. Character knows one level of rites 
ee Character knows two levels of rites 
Character knows three levels of rites 
Character knows four levels of rites 


Character knows five levels of rites 


Cotem 


This Trait does not apply directly to the character, but to the 
totem of the pack. In fact, the Background points invested in this 
Trait by all the characters in the pack are added together to 
determine the power of the totem. Pack totems are avatars of the 
totem they represent. They cannot be destroyed or bound into 
fetishes unless a pack is disbanded, although if they are reduced to 
zero Power, they will Reform elsewhere; during this convales- 
cence, they may not be contacted by pack members. 

Each totem has a Background Cost rating; the pack must spend 
that amount to ally with that totem. Some totems are willing to 
lend great powers to their devotees; these totems cost more than 
others. See Pack Totems, pp. 259-263, for a list of possible totems. 
The base totem spirit has seven points to divide among Rage, 
Willpowerand Gnosis, anda base Power of 20. The totemalsohas 
the Charms of Airt Sense and Reform. Unless a special relation- 
shipispurchased (see below), the totemissomewhatalooffrom the 
pack and is of minor influence within the community of spirits. 
Some pack totems, however, have become the totems of whole 


Chapter Six: Traits 


p mmm m rmn Te ———— 2 


septsoreven tribes; stories of such occurrences are common fare of 
the Galliards. 

Totems lend special powers to the pack members, such as Gifts 
or Abilities. However, these powers may only be used by one pack 
member at a time (per tum). Each turn, the pack member 
"borrowing" thepowersmustdeclareupon whomheendowsthem 
next turn (or if he still keeps them). The exception is Renown, 
which is awarded to all pack members when they ally with the 
totem. 

Anyextra pointsspent (after the totem's Background Cost has 
been spent) can be added to the totem's powers as listed below: 

Cost 

1 Per three points to spend on Willpower, Rage 
and/or Gnosis 
1 Per 10 points of Power 


Power 


1 Totem can speak to the pack (the pack does 
not require the Spirit Speech Gift) 
1 Totem can always find the pack members 
2  Totemis nearly always with the pack members 
2 Totem is respected by other spirits 
2 Per Charm possessed 
3 Per extra pack member who can use the 
totem's powers in the same turn 
4 Totem is mystically connected to all pack mem- 
bers, allowing communication among them even 
at great distances (Storyteller's discretion) 
5 Totem is feared by agents of the Wyrm 
The Totem Trait is the only Background that can be increased 
through experience (see Spending Experience, pp. 188-189); the 
cost is per the chart above. However, the Storyteller should only 
allow this in special situations, and only if the pack in some way 
gainsanew insight or connection to their totem during play. Such 
aspecialsituationcouldbe whenapack membergainsanew Rank, 
oranew member joins the pack. 


Gilts 


The Garou have long been in contact with the spirit world 
and know many of its secrets. Over the millennia, Garou have 
learned many powers, tricks and skills from the spirits. These 
magical abilities, called Gifts, are the special powers and 
secrets of the Garou, the ways in which they focus their Gnosis 
toaffect the world. Gifts are divided by breed, auspice and tribe 
— each group of Garou has its own particular secrets, though 
the auspices (the Garou "professions") have more Gifts than 
do any other group. 

Gifts are divided into levels, with Level One being the 
weakest Gifts—those taught to the raw cubs—and Level Five 
Gifts being the greatest secrets, only taught to those heroes 
who have proved themselves time and again. A beginning 
character may choose one Level One Gift from each of her 
breed, auspice and tribe Gift lists — three Gifts in all. 

Although Giftsare purchased with experience, Garou must 
beofa Rank equivalent to the level of the Gift desired or they 
cannot buy the Gift. Garou may learn the Gifts of other breeds, 


113 


auspices and tribes during play, provided they can find a spirit 
toteach them, but these have a higher cost (see the Experience 
Point Chart, pg. 188). 


Learning Gifts 

“My special Gift? Ah, the hiding-in-plain-sight?” 

"Yes. Tell me of it." 

“It is the simplest thing,” the chameleon said, and showed 
Night Flyer how to hide in plain sight. 

— Sam Chupp, "Night Flyer" 

Gifts are normally taught by spirits. A Garou must either 
petition a particular spirit to teach him its powers or ask an 
elder to summon that spirit and petition for him. Only spirits 
allied to Garou will teach Gifts, and they will not teach them 
to Garou who have not attained the proper Rank. 

Garou may learn other Gifts besides those on theirown lists, 
but these cost extra experience points (it is very difficult for a 
homid Garou to learn the ways of the lupus), and finding a 
spirit or an elder willing to teach these secrets to an “outsider” 
isa real challenge. 

In order to find a suitable spirit, a Garou must either travel 
toacaern equal in power to the Gift's level (a Level Four caern 
for Level Four Gifts) to seek the spirit personally, or ask a 
Theurge to summon the particular spirit sought (such as a 
Falcon Jaggling for the Silver Fang Gift: Awe). If either option 
is unavailable, the Garou must quest through the Umbra in 
search of the desired spirit and then convince it to teach him. 
Spirits will often be wary of requests not put to them through 
the proper channels (at a caern or by an elder). 

Each Gift lists the type of spirit that first taught the Gift to 
the Garou. Some of these spirits are detailed in the Appendix. 
The spirits listed with each Gift are not necessarily the only 
ones capable of teaching the Gift; the Storyteller may decide 
whether or not to allow another spirit to teach the Gift. The 
Storyteller is free to create any spirits not detailed. Spirits 
encountered while learning a Gift are meant to be roleplaying 
opportunities, allowing a character to interact with another 
beingand learn its ways. Almost anyone can figure out how to 
roleplay an Eagle-spirit without the need of Traits. Books on 
animals can be helpful, especially those that list the legendary 
qualities associated with certain animals. 

Sometimes a Garou may teach another Garou a Gift he 
knows. Unlike spirit teaching, which only takes a short time 
(aboutan hourforthe spirit to impart its wisdom), thiscan take 
quite a while of training, during which the Garou tries to show 
the other how to perform the trick. The training takes a 
month, at the end of which time the student can spend 
experience points and acquire the Gift. However, acquisition 
in this manner costs one more experience point than normal. 

There are other drawbacks to Garou-taught Gifts; for 
example, the Gift has to be practiced by the student before he 
can master it (this is not the case when spirits teach). Thus, it 
can be quite painful to learn a Gift such as Silver Claws. 
Certain Gifts, such as Call of the Wyrm, are forbidden to be 
taught except by spirits — no sept can afford to have wayward 
Wyrm creatures coming around just so a student can practice. 


114 


Systems 


Gifts are highly variable in effect, depending largely on the 
whims of the spirits who grant them. If no set difficulty exists 
for a given use of the Gift, the Storyteller has complete 
freedom to determine the difficulty. The Storyteller is also 
encouraged to make botches interesting (and embarrassing). 

TherearerumorsofGifts beyond Level Five, but such Gifts, 
if they indeed exist, are known only to the wisest elders. 


Breed Gifts 


These Gifts are taught by a variety of spirits, usually 
those who owe the breed a favor in accordance with an 
ancient pact or deed. For instance, an ancient tale tells of 
a metis who helped a mole hide from predators. In return, 
the mole taught the metis how to burrow through the earth, 
and since that time, Mole-spirits will teach metis this Gift. 


Homid 


Homid Gifts involve humankind's skills and abilities as 
toolmakers and cultural beings, but also as conquerors of 
nature. Humanity's adversarial stand against nature has given 
humans great controlovertheirenvironment, but also a vague 
disquiet within their souls — the repercussions of severing the 
primordial relationship with nature. Humans are strangers to 
the world of spirit. Thus, many of the homid breed's Gifts are 
taught by their ancestors rather than by Nature-spirits. 

* Persuasion (Level One) — This Gift allows a homid to 
become more persuasive when dealing with others; his state- 
ments and arguments are imbued with meaning or credibility. 
This Gift is taught by an Ancestor-spirit. 

System: TheGarourolls Charisma * Subterfuge (difficulty 
6). Ifsuccessful, the difficulties of all Social rolls are reduced by 
one for the remainder of the scene. 

* Smell of Man (Level One) — Creatures of the wild have 
learned well that man is often a bringer of death. With this 
Gift, the Garou greatly enhances the human scent around 
him, causing animals to feel uneasy and nervous. This Gift is 
taught by an Ancestor-spirit. 

System: All normal animals (not including supernatural 
creatures in animal form) lose one die from their Dice Pools 
when within 20 feet of the Garou, and are likely to flee. The 
Garou may use this Gift at will; she simply states when she is 
activating it or turning it off. 

* Jam Technology (Level Two) — The Garou can cause 
technological devicesto cease functioning, albeit temporarily. 
This Gift is taught by a Gremlin, a type of Wyld spirit that 
enjoys breaking things. 

System: The Garou spends one Gnosis point and rolls 
Manipulation * Repair. Technological devices within 50 feet 
cease functioning for one turn per success, though the devices 
are unharmed. The difficulty of the roll is based on the 
following chart: 


Werewolf: The Apocalypse 


pamm am mrt mr a RA ————— 


Device Difficulty 
Computer 4 
Phone 6 
Automobile 8 
Knife 10 


* Staredown (Level Two) — By staring into the eyes of a 
human or animal, the Garou can cause the target to flee in 
terror. This Gift can be used against Garou, but the Garou will 
freeze in place rather than flee. This Gift is taught by a Ram- 
spirit or a Snake-spirit. 

System: The Garou rolls Charisma + Intimidation (diffi- 
culty 6). The victim flees for one turn per success. Should the 
Garou score five or more successes, the victim flees for the 
duration of the scene. Garou targets will not flee, but they 
cannot attack while this Gift is in effect, although they can 
defend themselves. 

* Disquiet (Level Three) — The Garou causes the subject 
of this Gift to feel inexplicably depressed and withdrawn. The 
subject will find it hard to use his anger (Rage) or concentrate 
effectively on tasks. This Gift is taught by an Ancestor-spirit. 

System: The Garou rolls Manipulation + Empathy against 
adifficulty equal to the Willpower of the opponent. If success- 
ful, that opponent will not be able to recover Rage for the 
duration of the scene; furthermore, all difficulties for extended 
actions (not combat) are increased by one. 

* Reshape Object (Level Three) — The Garou can 
instantly shape once-living material (but not undead!) into a 
variety of objects — thus trees may become shelter, buck 
antlers become spears, animal hides become armor, and flow- 
ers become perfumes. The item will in some way resemble the 
object from which it was created (the spear is made of antler, 
not wood). This Gift is taught by a Weaver-spirit. 

System: The Garou rolls Manipulation + Repair against a 
variable difficulty (5 to turn a broken tree limb into a spear, 8 
to turn a plank into a floatable raft, etc.). The created object 
is not necessarily permanent; it will last a length of time 
according to the chart below. Expendinga Gnosis point allows 
acreated weapon to inflict aggravated damage (this effect is 
not permanent unless a permanent Gnosis point is spent). 


Successes Duration 
One 5 minutes 
Two 10 minutes 
Three One Scene 
Four One Story 
Five Permanent 


* Cocoon (Level Four) — The Garou causes a thick, 
opaque epidermis to surround him. The Garou is immune to 
fire, starvation, gas, et al. This Gift is taught by an Insect- or 
Weaver-spirit. 

System: The Garou spends one Gnosis point. While in the 
cocoon, attacks must do an amount of damage equal to the 
Garou’s Stamina + Rituals toaffect himatall. The cocoon lasts 
for one scene. Extra time may be gained by spending more 
Gnosis points, sometimes allowing Garou to stay protected for 


Chapter Six: Traits 


premat am, mrt m TRA -————— P ÁÀ 


days. How longa Garou can ultimately spend in the cocoon is 
up to the Storyteller. 

* Spirit Ward (Level Four) — This Gift allows a Garou to 
protect himself from spirits by performinga quick warding rite. 
The Garou, by drawing an invisible pictogram into the air, 
scares and unnerves any nearby spirits (except the pack 
totem). This sign travels with the Garou wherever he goes for 
the duration of the Gift. This Gift is taught by an Ancestor- 
spirit. 

System: The Garou spends one Gnosis point and rolls 
Manipulation + Rituals (difficulty 7); spirits within 100 feet of 
the Garou (again, except the pack totem) must subtract one 
from their Dice Pools for each success. This Gift lasts for one 
scene. 

* Assimilation (Level Five) — The Garou is able to blend 
smoothly into any culture, no matter how strange or alien the 
culture is. The Garou can slip in among Bedouin nomads as if 
he were one of them, or shop in a Chinese market without 
anyone noticing he does not belong. This Gift will not hide 
racial differences, but the behaviors and mannerisms of a 
native can be mimicked. This also allows the Garou to speak 
and understand the culture's language, although it will be 
forgotten when the Gift wears off. This Gift is taught by an 
Ancestor-spirit. 

System: The Garou rolls Manipulation + Empathy. If 
successful, he is able to interact with members of another 
culture as if he were from that culture. The difficulty depends 
on how alien the culture is; the difficulty would be 5 for 
another Garou sept, but it could be as high as 9 when trying to 
assimilate into a Black Spiral Hive. The Garou will not suffer 
Social roll penalties when interacting with members of the 
culture, although she will not receive any special benefits. The 
Gift lasts for one scene plus one day per Willpower point spent 
when activating it. 

* Part the Veil (Level Five) — The Garou may immunize 
any human from the Delirium for a scene. In this way, the 
human can interact with Garou without deleterious effects. 
However, the human will forget much of what he knows if the 
Delirium is induced in him at a later date (he sees a Crinos, 
etc.). This Gift is taught by an Ancestor-spirit. 

System: The Garou spends a Gnosis point and rolls Cha- 
risma * Empathy (difficulty 6). 


Metis 


Metis are the outcasts of Garou society. Unlike homid and 
lupus Garou, however, they are born into werewolf society and 
raised within it. This gives them an inner anger and pain at 
their abuse, but also a deeper connection with many of the 
Garou's allies. 

* Create Element (Level One) — The Garou can create 
a small amount of one of the four basic elements — fire, air, 
earth or water. In this way, a Garou can replenish the air supply 
in an airtight room, make a rock to throw at someone, create 
a fire without matches or wood, or fill a bathtub without any 
faucet or pipes. Precious metals (especially silver) cannot be 


115 


created, nor can lethal gases or acid. This Gift is taught by an 
elemental. 

System: The Garou spends one Gnosis point and rolls 
Gnosis (difficulty 6). One cubic foot of the desired element is 
created per success, to a maximum weight of 100 lbs. The 
element is now permanent until used up (breathed in the case 
ofair or burned up in the case of fire without any fuel to keep 
it going). 

* Sense Wyrm (Level One) — The Garou can sense 
manifestations of the Wyrm in the nearby area. This Gift 
involves a mystical sense, not a visual or olfactory image, 
although Garou using this Gift are likely to say, "This place 
stinks of the Wyrm." This power requires active concentra- 
tion. This Gift is taught by any spirit servant of Gaia. 

System: The Garou rolls Perception + Occult. The diffi- 
culty for this Gift is based on the concentration and strength 
of the Wyrm's influence (sensing a single fomor in a room 
would have a difficulty of 6). Vampires can be sensed using this 
Gift, but only those with Humanity scores lower than 7. 

* Burrow (Level Two) — The Garou can burrowa tunnel 
into the earth. The tunnel is relatively permanent, and others 
can follow the Garou through it, although it is tight and only 
one person ata time can go through. However, no being larger 
than the Garou can travel the tunnel. The Garou must be in 
Crinos, Hispo or Lupusform to use this Gift, but the tunnel will 
only be as large as the form he assumed while burrowing it 
(only Lupus- or smaller-sized beings can travel a tunnel 
burrowed by a Garou in Lupus form). The tunnel is not 


116 


NS 


structurally sound and will collapse over time. This Gift is 
taught by a Mole-spirit. 

System: The Garou rolls Strength * Athletics against a 
difficulty depending on the substance to be excavated (4 for 
loose mud, 9 for solid rock). One yard per turn can be burrowed 
for each success. 

* Curse of Hatred (Level Two) — The Garou may 
verbalize the hatred in her heart, disheartening opponents 
with the intensity of her emotion. This Gift is taught by a spirit 
of Hate. 

System: The Garou spends one Gnosis point and rolls 
Manipulation + Expression (difficulty of the opponent's Will- 
power). If the Garou succeeds, her opponent loses two 
Willpower points and two Rage points. This may only be used 
on an opponent once per scene. 

Eyes of the Cat (Level Three) — The Garou may see 
clearly in pitch darkness. The Garou’s eyes will glowa lambent 
green while this power is in effect. This Gift is taught by a Cat- 
spirit. 

System: The Garou must state when this Gift is in effect, 
but there is no roll or cost expenditure. The Garou suffers no 
difficulty or Dice Pool penalties from darkness. 

* Mental Speech (Level Three) — The Garou may 
mentally communicate with another being over great dis- 
tances. This does not allow mind-reading, but does allow the 
Garou to use Social Abilities, such as Intimidation, from a 
distance. The Garou must know the person with whom he is 
attempting to communicate (although he does not have to be 


Werewolf: The Apocalypse 


friends with that person). If he does not know the person, he 
must have something that belongs to that person, such as a 
lock of his hair. This Gift is taught by a Bird-spirit or any spirit 
affiliated with intellect. 

System: The Garou rolls Charisma + Empathy (difficulty 
8). The Garou may transmit a maximum distance of 10 miles 
per success. 

* Gift of the Porcupine (Level Four) — This Gift allows 
a Garou's fur to become bristly and sharp like the quills of a 
porcupine. The Garou must be in Crinos, Hispoor Lupus form. 
This Gift is, of course, taught by a Porcupine-spirit. 

System: The Garou spends a Gnosis point to sharpen his 
fur. Anyone whom the Garou body slams, grapples or immo- 
bilizes takes aggravated damage from the Garou's sharp fur 
(Strength + 1). Furthermore, anyone who hits the Garou with 
bare flesh and scores fewer than five successes takes damage 
based on theattacker'sStrength, although the Garou still takes 
normal damage. This Gift lasts for one scene or until the Garou 
deactivates it. 

* Wither Limb (Level Four) — The Garou can cause a 
target’s limb to wither, making it useless. Which limb is 
withered is the Garou’s choice, but it must be an arm or leg. If 
the victim isa creature with regenerative properties, such as a 
Garou or vampire, the limb will regenerate whole after one 
scene. This Gift is taught by a venomous animal spirit oraspirit 
of Disease. 

System: The Garou spends a Gnosis point and rolls 
Willpower (difficulty of the victim’s Stamina + 4). 

* Madness (Level Five) — The Garou can induce madness 
in others. The madness will take a form decided by the 
Storyteller, but should be severe. This Gift is taught either by 
a Lune or by a spirit of Madness or Trickery. 

System: The Garou spends a Gnosis point and rolls Ma- 
nipulation + Intimidation (difficulty ofthe victim’s Willpower). 
The number of successes determines the number of days that 
the insanity lasts. 

Totem Gift (Level Five) — The Garou is in touch with the 
totem of her tribe and can actually plead with the totem, 
gaining some of its power. The effects of this power are up to 
the Storyteller, but should be in keeping with the totem; thus, 
Chimera (totem of the Stargazers) might grant the Garou 
increased insight or the ability to shapeshift into anything 
desired, while Rat (totem of the Bone Gnawers) might send 
swarms of rats to attack the Garou’s enemies, and Grandfather 
Thunder (totem of the Shadow Lords) might smite the 
Garou’s enemies with a blast of thunder and lightning. This 
Gift is taught by the Garou’s tribal totem. 

System: The Garou spends one Gnosis point and rolls 
Charisma + Rituals (difficulty 9). 


Lupus 

Ofall werewolves, lupus are closest to their innate instincts, 
and their Gifts reflect this. While their powers provide them 
no aptitude with modern technology, they are deeply con- 
nected to the wilderness and the beings that live there. 


Chapter Six: Traits 


PL PST TR ——————— HÀ 


* Heightened Senses (Level One) — The Garou may 
vastly increase her sensory input for a short time. When in 
Homid or Glabro form, her senses become as sharp as those of 
a wolf, while in her wolf forms, her senses become preternatu- 
rally potent. This Gift is taught by Wolf-spirits. 

System: The Garou spends a Gnosis point. The effects last 
for one scene. Homid and Glabro forms: Perception difficul- 
tiesare reduced by two; roll Perception + Primal-Urge (difficulty 
6) to perform sensory feats impossible to humans. Crinos, 
Hispo and Lupus forms: Perception difficulties are reduced by 
three; *1 to Primal-Urge Dice Pools. 

* Leap of the Kangaroo (Level One) — This Gift was 
originally developed by the lost Bunyip tribe. By invoking this 
Gift, Garou may leap incredible distances. Despite its name, 
this Gift is taught by Hare- or Cat-spirits (marsupial-spirits 
seem loath to aid the Garou these days...). 

System: The Garou rolls Stamina + Athletics (difficulty 
7). If successful, she may double her normal jumping distance. 
See the Jumping Chart, pg. 212. 

* Scent of Sight (Level Two) — The Garou can use his 
sense of smell to compensate completely for his eyes; thus, he 
could attack invisible creatures normally, or roughly navigate 
in absolute darkness. This Gift is taught by a Wolf-spirit. 

System: The Garou rolls Perception * Primal-Urge against. 
aStoryteller-determined difficulty (depends on how powerful 
local smells are). The Storyteller should not require rolls every 
turn, but only when something could cause the Garou to lose 
his opponent's scent (he ran through water, they are fighting 
in a smelly alley, etc.) 

* Sense the Unnatural (Level Two) — The Garou can 
sense any unnatural presence and determine its approximate 
strength and type. Supernatural presences can include: magic, 
spirits, the Wyrm, wraiths, etc. This will detect vampires, but 
only those with Humanity scores below 7. This Gift is taught 
by any spirit servant of Caia. 

System: The Garou rolls Perception + Enigmas (difficulty 
6). The more successes rolled, the more information is gained. 
However, understanding the information might require an 
Intelligence + Occult roll (Storyteller's option). 

* Catfeet (Level Three) — This Gift gives the Garou the 
agility ofa cat, making him immune to falls under 100 feet (he 
lands on his feet just right). He also has perfect balance even 
on the most slippery surfaces, and the difficulties of all combat 
actions involving body slams and grappling are reduced by 
two. This Gift is taught by a Cat-spirit. 

System: The Garou does not need to expend points or roll 
for this ability; it becomes innate to those who learn the Gift. 

* Name the Spirit (Level Three) — The Garou is able to 
detect the type and approximate Trait levels (Rage, Power, 
etc.) of a spirit. This Gift is taught by a spirit servant of the 
Uktena totem. 

System: The Garou spends one Willpower point and rolls 
Perception * Occult (difficulty 8). 

* Beast Life (Level Four) — The Garou may not only 
communicate with animals, but can attract and command 


117 


them. If there are no animals of the sort desired in the vicinity, 
none can be called. This Gift is taught by any Animal-spirit. 

System: The Garou spends one Gnosis point and rolls 
Charisma * Animal Ken (difficulty 7). One success causes 
animals within a 10-mile radius to be affected. Each additional 
success add 10 miles (two successes indicate a 20-mile radius). 
The effect lasts for one scene, but the time may be extended by 
spending one Gnosis point per extra scene. 

* Gnaw (Level Four) — The Garou may strengthen her 
jaws to the point that, given time, she can chew through just 
about anything. In addition, her jaws do more damage in 
combat. This Gift is taught by a Wolf-spirit. 

System: The Garou spends one Willpower point and rolls 
Stamina + 4 againsta variable difficulty (3 for wood, 6 for steel 
cables, 9 for a titanium door). The length of time it takes to 
gnaw through something is up to the Storyteller. When 
employing this power in combat, the Garou's bite does an 
extra die of damage. 

* Elemental Gift (Level Five) — The Garou maycallupon 
the primal force of Caia Herself, thereby commanding the 
spirits of the elements. The Garou can cause the elements to 
rise up, undulate forward, and even engulf foes. This Gift 
summonsan elemental spirit, not merely the raw matter of the 
elements. This Gift is taught by an elemental. 

System: The Garou spends one Gnosis point and rolls 
Charisma * Occult (difficulty 8). If successful, he may control 
a large volume of air, earth, water or fire — approximately 20' 
by 20' per success. The effect lasts for one scene. 

+ Song of the Great Beast (Level Five) — The Garou must 
be in the deep wilderness to employ this Gift. If so, he can, by 
howling at the sky, call one of the Great Beasts — the ancient 
creatures that used to walk the Earth in ages past — to his aid. 
Examples of Beasts are the Sasquatch (Bigfoot), the Willawau 
(giant owl), the Yeti, the great megalodon sharks that swam 
the seas eons ago, and other legendary creatures. Who knows 
—there are rumors of surviving dinosaurs in the deep Congo... 
This Gift is taught by a Nature-spirit. 

System: The Garou spends one Gnosis point and rolls 
Charisma + Primal-Urge (difficulty 9). More successes im- 
prove the Beast’s disposition. 


Auspice Gifts 


These Gifts represent the secrets given to Gaia’s children by 
Luna. She bade her many servants teach the Garou their various 
tricks, giving them magical skills to use in protecting Gaia. 


Ragabash 


Ragabash are the tricksters of the Garou. Their Gifts 
involve stealth and thievery, for it is during the dark of a 
moonless night that such activities work best. Luna grants 
New Moons the ability to break the rules. 

* Blur of the Milky Eye (Level One) — The Garou’s form 
becomes a shimmering blur, allowing him to pass unnoticed 
among others. Once the Garou has been seen, however, this 


118 


Werewolf: The Apocalypse 


pamm an, ST ———— 


Gift is negated until the viewer has again been distracted. This 
Gift is taught by a Chameleon-spirit. 

System: The Garou rolls Manipulation + Stealth (diffi- 
culty 8). Each success increases by one the difficulties of all 
Perception rolls made to detect him. 

* Open Seal (Level One) — With this Gift the Garou can 
open nearly any sort of closed or locked device. This Gift is 
taught by a Raccoon-spirit. 

System: The Garou rolls Gnosis (difficulty of the local 
Gauntlet rating). 

* Scent of Running Water (Level One) — The Garou can 
completely mask her scent, making herself virtually impos- 
sible to track. This Gift is taught by a Fox-spirit. 

System: The difficulties of all rolls to track the Garou are 
increased by two. This Gift becomesan innate ability to the Garou 
who leams it. She need not expend any points or make any rolls. 

* Blissful Ignorance (Level Two) — The Garou can become 
completely invisible to all senses, spirits or monitoring devices by 
remaining still. This Gift is taught by a Chameleon-spirit. 

System: The Garourolls Dexterity + Stealth (difficulty7);each 
success subtracts one success from the Perception + Alertness rolls 
of those actively looking for the character. If no one is so doing, 
then one success indicates complete concealment. 

* Sense of the Prey (Level Two) — Thecharacter, ifhe knows 
anything about his prey, can track it down as rapidly as he can 
travel. This unerring sense of direction operates anywhere, and is 
used to track spirits through the Umbra as well as to find beings on 
Earth. This Gift is taught by a Wolf- or Dog-spirit. 

System: No roll is required unless the target is actively 
hiding, in which case a Perception + Enigmas roll is made 
against a difficulty of the target's Wits + Stealth. If the target 
is a spirit, the difficulty is the spirit's Gnosis. 

* Taking the Forgotten (Level Two) — Not only is the 
Ragabash an accomplished thief, but those from whom she 
steals often never realize they have been robbed. If the 
character succeeds in stealing something, her victim will 
forget he ever possessed the stolen item. This Gift is taught by 
a Mouse-spirit. 

System: The Garou must score three successes on a Wits 
+ Stealth roll (difficulty of the victim's Intelligence + 
Streetwise). 

* Gremlins (Level Three) — The Garou can cause a 
technological device to malfunction merely by touching it. 
Use of this Gift actually intimidates the spirit that inhabits the 
device and causes it to function. If the Garou can sufficiently 
frighten the spirit, it will flee the device, causing it to malfunc- 
tion permanently. This Gift is taught by a Gremlin, a type of 
Wyld spirit that enjoys breaking things. 

System: The Garou rolls Manipulation + Intimidation; the 
difficulty is determined by the complexity of the item (see 
below). The more successes the Garou obtains, the more the 
device is damaged. Five successes permanently disable the 
device (the spirit has fled). Good roleplaying might certainly 
warrant one to three additional dice at the discretion of the 
Storyteller. 


Device Difficulty 
Computer 4 
Phone 6 
Automobile 8 
Knife 10 


* Open Moon Bridge (Level Three) — The Garou has the 
ability toopen a Moon Bridge, with or without the permission 
of the totem of that caern. This Gift is taught by a Lune. 

System: The Garou spends one Gnosis point. See the Rite 
of the Opened Bridge (pg. 141) for more information on 
opening Moon Bridges. The maximum distance that can 
thereby be covered is 1,000 miles. 

* Luna's Blessing (Level Four) — When the moon is 
visible in the night sky, silver refuses to cause the Garou 
aggravated wounds. Indeed, if the moon waxes full, silver 
weapons may well turn on those who would wield them against 
the character. This Gift is taught by a Lune. 

System: For each strike against the Garou, the wielder of the 
weapon must roll three extra dice on the attack; these dice are read 
only to check for botches. The Garou can soak and regenerate 
silver as if it were normal damage, but only when the moon is 
visible. Thus, the Garou is still vulnerable during a new moon. 

+ Whelp Body (Level Four) — With this Gift a Garou may 
deliver a devastating curse upon a foe's body, causing it to 
weaken or palsy. Many consider the use of this power on a foe 
to be a declaration of unending war. This Gift is taught by a 
Pain-spirit or a spirit of Disease. 

System: The Garou spends one Gnosis point and rolls 
Gnosis; this roll is resisted by the target’s Gnosis roll. The 
Garou's difficulty is the opponent’s Willpower, while her 
victim's difficulty is the Ragabash's Gnosis. Each success 
scored by the Ragabash allows him to remove one point from 
any of the victim's Physical Attributes. The effect is perma- 
nent, although the victim may restore these Attributes via 
experience. This Gift may be used only once per scene against 
a given opponent. 

* Thieving Talons of the Magpie (Level Five) — The 
Garou can steal the powers of others and use them herself. 
These powers can be Garou Gifts, spirit Charms, vampiric 
Disciplines, mage Spheres, etc. This Gift is taught by, of 
course, a Magpie-spirit. 

System: The Garou must gain three successes on a Wits * 
Stealth roll (difficulty of the target’s Willpower). If successful, 
the Garou can use the specified power for each successive turn 
she is willing to spend a Gnosis point. 

* Violation (Level Five) — Those few Garou privy to the 
secret of Violation well know the hate and revulsion of others. 
This power requires the Garou to make physical contact with 
the target, but once that has happened, the victim is quickly 
overwhelmed by feelings of defilement. To learn this Gift, the 
Garou must confront a malevolent spirit (not necessarily a 
Bane) inspirit combat; ifhe wins, he may wrest the knowledge 
of this Gift from it. 

System: The Garou rolls Manipulation + Primal-Urge 
(difficulty of the target's Willpower). For the next turn, and for 


Chapter Six: Traits 


[EE p PD GE SEE ————À 


a number of turns equal to the number of successes, the victim 
cannot spend Rage or Willpower. Additionally, the difficul- 
ties of all Willpower rolls are increased by two, while the 
difficulties of Rage rolls are decreased by two (the victim may 
not be able to direct his anger, but he definitely feels it). 


Theurge 


Astheseerofthe Garou, the Theurge has great insight into 
the Umbraand its inhabitants. These Gifts allow the Theurge 
to control spirits or even devastate the intelligence of others. 
The Crescent Moon has great power, be it used for good or ill. 

* Mother's Touch (Level One) — The Garou is able to 
heal the wounds of others, aggravated or otherwise, simply by 
laying hands over the afflicted area. The Garou may not heal 
herself with this Gift. This Gift is taught by a Unicorn-spirit. 

System: The Garou spends one Gnosis point and rolls 
Intelligence + Medicine (difficulty ofthe wounded individual's 
Rage, or 6 for non-Garou). Each success heals one Health 
Level. Even battle scars may be cured in this manner, but this 
must be done in the same scene the scar was obtained and 
requires the expenditure of a Gnosis point. There is no limit to 
how many times this may be used on a person, but each use 
requires a Gnosis point. 

* Sense Wyrm (Level One) — As the Level One Metis 
Gift. 

* Spirit Speech (Level One) — This Gift allows the Garou 
to communicate with encountered spirits. The Garou is thus 
able to address them whether they wish to be addressed or not. 
Of course, nothing (usually) prevents the spirit from leaving. 
This Gift can be taught by any spirit. 

System: Once learned, this Gift allows the Garou to 
understand the communication of spirits intuitively. Some 
spirits, such as Banes, may not always be understood. 

* Command Spirit (Level Two) — The character can 
manipulate encountered spirits, giving simple commands and 
expecting their compliance. While she cannotsummon spirits 
by name with this Gift, she can interact with those she meets. 
This Gift is taught by any Incarna avatar. 

System: The Garou must spend a Willpower point and roll 
Charisma + Leadership (difficulty of the spirit’s Gnosis). Each 
successive command requires the expenditure of another 
Willpower point. Note that the Garou cannot command 
spirits to leave areas to which they have been bound; that 
requires the Exorcism Gift (see below). 

* Name the Spirit (Level Two) — As the Level Three 
Lupus Gift. 

+ Sight from Beyond (Level Two) — When danger stalks 
the Garou, or momentous events are in the offing, visions 
begin striking the Garou without warning. Her dreams are 
haunted by images of the Cainite elder stalking her; she begins 
seeing symbols of the Wyrm wherever she looks; the sky itself 
opens to show her images of the glorious battle to come. This 
Gift is taught by a Crow-spirit. 

System: Interpreting these signs is best handled through 
roleplaying, but the Storyteller can require the Garou to roll 
Wits * Occult (difficulty 7) if appropriate. 

119 


+ Exorcism (Level Three) — This is the Gift of ejecting spirits 
from places or objects, whether they are there voluntarily or are 
bound there. This Gift is taught by any Incama avatar. 

System: Ifa spirit does not wish to leave, the character must 
make a Manipulation + Intimidation roll (difficulty of the 
spirit's Willpower). If the spirit has been bound to its lodging 
place (or into a fetish), then the Exorcist must make a Wits + 
Subterfuge roll (difficulty 8) and gain more successes than the 
binder did when tying the spirit to its location. 

* Pulse of the Invisible (Level Three) — Spirits fill the 
world around the Garou, and none knows this better than the 
Theurge. Those Garou with Pulse of the Invisible remain 
constantly aware of all that spirits do around them and can 
interact with them at will. While most of what occurs is barely 
worth watching, the Garou will be aware of any dramatic 
changes. This Gift is taught by any spirit. 

System: If the Garou’s Gnosis Dice Pool equals or exceeds 
the Gauntlet, he can automatically see into the Umbra. 
Otherwise, he must roll to pierce the Gauntlet, using Percep- 
tion + Occult (difficulty of the Gauntlet). Only one success is 
required. The effect lasts for an entire scene or until the 
character enters an area with a higher Gauntlet. 

* Grasp the Beyond (Level Four) — The Garou may take 
things to and from the Umbra without having to Dedicate 
them to herself (see Rite of Talisman Dedication, pg. 144). This 
includes humans and animals, both willing and unwilling. 
Garou often use this power to take loyal Kinfolk with them on 
Umbral quests or to heal injured Kinfolk — both body and soul 
— in mystic Glens. 

System: The Garou must grasp the object or person he 
wishes to take to the spirit world. He must then spend a 
number of Willpower points: one for small items, two for larger 
items (swords, etc.) and three for huge items (including 
people). He makes the usual Gnosis roll to pierce the Gauntlet 
and step sideways; if successful, both he and the desired object 
or person pass into the Umbra. An unwilling target may resist 
with a Willpower roll; each success subtracts one from the 
Garou's successes. A Garou attempting to abductan unwilling 
victim must achieve at least three successes on his Gnosis roll. 

Any person taken to the Umbra, unless she has the ability 
to step sideways, must rely on the Garou to escape, or else find 
an area with a very thin Gauntlet, such as a caern. The 
Gauntlet rating must be 3 or lower for a victim to exit of his 
ownaccord. Ifhe does exit, he may not reenter the Umbra, no 
matter what the Gauntlet rating. 

* Spirit Drain (Level Four) — The Garou may drain 
power from a spirit to feed his own resolve. This Gift is taught 
by a spirit servant of the Uktena totem. 

System: If the Garou succeeds in a resisted Gnosis vs. 
Gnosis roll while combating a spirit, the spirit loses one Power 
point per success for the rest of the scene. For every two points 
drained, the Garou gains a temporary Willpower point, but 
loses any points exceeding her maximum at the end of the 
scene. 

* Ultimate Argument of Logic (Level Four) — Those 
who speak with the Garou leave convinced of some fact they 


120 


might otherwise have disbelieved. If successful, the Garou can 
cause the target to believe implicitly in one aspect of existence 
(true or false) — from the "fact" that the sun revolves around 
the Earth to the “truism” that the wolf's inherent nature is that 
of the pawn. This Gift is taught by a Coyote-spirit. 

System: The Garou needs three successes on a Manipulation 
+ Performance roll (difficulty of the target’s Wits + Enigmas). 

+ Feral Lobotomy (Level Five) — With buta thought, the 
Garou can devolve an opponent's mind to that ofan animal, 
effectively destroying his intelligence. This Gift is taught by a 
spirit servant of the Griffin totem. 

System: The Garou spends Gnosis (see below) and rolls 
Wits + Empathy (difficulty of the target’s Willpower + 3 
(maximum 10)). If successful, the Garou can permanently 
destroy a target's Intelligence Attribute. Two Gnosis points 
must be spent for each point of Intelligence destroyed, and the 
Garou cannot destroy more points than he rolls successes. 
Additionally, the target begins acting more animalistic with. 
each point removed. 

* The Malleable Spirit (Level Five) — The Garou can 
change a spirit's form or purpose. This Gift is taught by a 
Chimerling. 

System: The Garou must best the spirit in a resisted Gnosis 
vs. Gnosis roll. The difficulty is based on what the Garou tries 
to accomplish (see below), while the spirit's difficulty is the 
Garou's Gnosis. 


Change Difficulty 

Characteristics (Willpower, 6 
Rage, Gnosis; one point 
changed per success) 

Disposition (Friendly, 8 
Neutral, Hostile) 

Type (Naturae, Elemental, 10 
Bane, etc.) 


Philodox 


The Philodox are the judges of Garou society, the chieftains 
whose decisions determine the course of a sept's future. Their 
Gifts allow them to tell truth from fiction, to command others 
and to call upon racial wisdom. The Half Moons must ever 
walk a balance between the extremes of Rage and rulership. 

* Resist Pain (Level One) — Through force of will, the 
Garou is able to ignore the pain of his wounds and continue 
acting normally. This Gift is taught by a Bear-spirit. 

System: The Garou, by spending one Willpower point, 
may ignore all wound penalties for the duration of the scene. 

* Scent of the True Form (Level One) — This Gift allows 
the Garou to determine what a subject really is. This informa- 
tion is conveyed as an olfactory sensation — it is actually a 
scent of the target’s true nature. This Gift is taught by any spirit 
servant of Gaia. 

System: The Garou can automatically tell when someone isa 
werewolf, and can detect vampires and faeries on a Perception + 
Primal-Urge roll (difficulty 8). Even mages can be detected 
(difficulty 9). 


Werewolf: The Apocalypse 


POL E A TR ————— PÓ 


— M SL 


* Truth of Gaia (Level One) — Philodox, as judges of the 
Litany, have the ability to sense whether others have spoken 
truth or falsehood. This Gift is taught by a Falcon-Gaffling. 

System: The Garou rolls Intelligence + Empathy (diffi- 
culty of the subject's Manipulation + Subterfuge). This Gift 
reveals only whether the target speaks the truth or lies. 

* Call to Duty (Level Two) — The Garou can summon 
spirits if she knows their names, and may give them one 
command. Only one command may be given; after it is carried 
out, the spirits will depart. Spirit names can be discovered 
either through personal acquaintance or the Gift: Name the 
Spirit (Lupus and Theurge). This Gift is taught by an Incarna 
avatar. 

System: The Garou rolls Charisma + Leadership (difficulty 
of the spirit’s Willpower). If the Garou spends a Gnosis point, 
she can summon all spirits within one mile to protect or assist 
her, even if she does not know their names. 

* King of the Beasts (Level Two) — Specific animals, 
generally ones with which the Garou regularly associates, 
follow his commands willingly and unconditionally. They 
understand him and want tohelp. This Gift is taught by a Lion- 
or Falcon-spirit. 

System: The target must be within 100 feet, and the Garou 
rolls Charisma * Animal Ken against a difficulty based on his 
relationship with the animal (see below). This power only 
works on one animal at a time, and it does not attract animals 
to the Garou's vicinity (see the Level Four Lupus Gift: Beast 
Life). 


Relationship Difficulty 
A sibling 3 
Feed and care for 6 
Stranger 8 
Hostile 10 


* Strength of Purpose (Level Two) — Some Garou feel 
so strongly about their place in the pack, the tribe and the 
world that they can draw on this resolve in times of need. The 
Garou can pull new resolve from his deepest reserves. This Gift 
is taught by a Wolf-spirit. 

System: Once perscene, when the character feels she needs 
Willpower, she can roll Stamina + Rituals (difficulty 7). For 
every two successes, she recovers one point of Willpower up to 
her maximum. 

* Weak Arm (Level Three) — Philodox are more attuned 
toothers than are most Garou. Accordingly, they can use this 
perceptiveness against their foes. Merely watching an 
opponent'sfightingstyle lets the Garou determine itsstrengths 
and weaknesses. This Gift is taught by a Snake- or Wind-spirit. 

System: The Garou rolls Perception + Brawl (difficulty 8). 
A number of bonus dice equal to her successes may be divided 
between (oramong) herattack and damage rolls. This Gift can 
only be used against a given foe once per scene, and the 
benefits are lost at the end of the scene. The Garou must 
concentrate for a full turn to use this Gift. 


* Wisdom of the Ancient Ways (Level Three) — All 
Garou have an innate connection to their ancestors, a form of 


racial unconscious accessible through intense meditation. 
The Garou, by tapping into these deep memories, can remem- 
ber ancient facts and lore. This Gift is taught by a Garou 
Ancestor-spirit. 


System: The Garou must meditate forashort time, concen- 
trating on the past. The Garou then rolls Gnosis (difficulty 9, 
-1 for each point of Past Life the Garou possesses). 

* Roll Over (Level Four) — The Garou has such a 
commanding presence that those encountered readily submit 
to her. Should she succeed in a test of wills, she dominates her 
foe, causing humans to fall to their knees, wolves to roll on 
their backs, etc. This Gift is taught by a Lion- or Wolf-spirit. 

System: The Garou must score at least three successes more 
than the opponent on a resisted Willpower contest. 

* Scent of Beyond (Level Four) — The Garou can bring 
all his senses to bear on one spot (even an Umbral site) with 
which he is familiar, no matter how far away that spot is. The 
Garou senses the site from a point of view as ifhe were standing 
in the middle of the area being scanned. This Gift is taught by 
a Bird-spirit. 

System: The Garou rolls Perception + Enigmas (difficulty 
8). Ifthe spot isin the Umbra, the difficulty is 8 or the Gauntlet 
rating (whichever is higher). 

* Geas (Level Five) — A Geas causes others to do a 
Garou's bidding, though the Geas-layer cannot make the 
targets act contrary to their basic instincts. Thus, she could 
send a group ona quest, but could not make its members attack 


Chapter Six: Traits 121 


and try to kill each other — unless they were psychotics or 
werewolves. This Gift is taught by an Incarna avatar. 

System: The Garou spends one Gnosis point and rolls 
Manipulation + Leadership (difficulty of the target’s Will- 
power). In the case of a group, the difficulty is the highest 
Willpower among its members. 

* WallofGranite (Level Five) — Philodox haveastronger 
relationship with the elementals of the earth than do other 
Garou, for justas the earth upholds those upon it, the Philodox 
uphold their people's ways. While in contact with earth or 
rock, the Philodox can invoke a wall to protect himself. This 
wall will move with the Garou, defending him from all angles. 
This Gift is taught by earth elementals. 

System: The Garou spends one Gnosis point. The wall's 
dimensionsare three yards high, two yards longandone yard thick; 
it can soak damage as though it had 10 dice, and 10 Health Levels 
must be inflicted to penetrate it at any point. The wall lasts for one 
scene or until released into the earth by the Garou. 


Galliard 


Galliards are the songsmiths and bards of the Garou. Their 
Gifts allow them to weave the dreams of others or work a foe 
intoarage. While others may trick the eye or best the body, the 
Galliard plays others' emotions like a harp. 

* Beast Speech (Level One) — The Garou may speak to 
animals, from pigeons in the park to beaversat their dam or fish 
in the sea. This does not change their basic reactions — a 
hungry tiger is still hungry and may well attack. This Gift is 
taught by a Nature-spirit. 

System: The Garou rolls Charisma + Animal Ken (diffi- 
culty 6). This roll must be made for each type of animal and for 
each encounter. 

* Call of the Wyld (Level One) — The Garou can 
summon others by howling; Garou far beyond the range of 
hearing will sense the Call and may come toaid. This Gift can 
enhance the effect of any of the normal Garou howls (see 
Howls, pg. 37). This howl can also be sounded to summon 
specific Garou for a moot. Finally, Call of the Wyld is often 
used at the beginning of revels and other events, to invigorate 
the Garou. This Gift is taught by a Wolf-spirit. 

System: TheGarourollsStamina * Empathy (difficulty 6). 
Thenumberofsuccesses determines how far away the Call can 
be heard and how stirring it is to those who hear it. The actual 
effects are determined by the Storyteller, but they should be 
linked to the type of howl made and the intent of the Garou. 
Some examples are: every two successes gives those at a revel 
extradicetotheir Pools; Wyrm agentsare distracted by the call 
and their difficulties are temporarily raised; all Garou in the 
area do not hesitate to respond to the Garou's Call to Succor. 

* Mindspeak (Level One) — Through the creation of 
waking dreams, the Garou can place any chosen characters 
into silent communion. This Gift is taught by a Chimerling. 

System: The Garou spends one Willpower point per sen- 


. tient being chosen, and, if the being is unwilling, makes a 


Manipulation + Expression roll (difficulty of the victim's 


122 


Werewolf: The Apocalypse 


y ERR TS GER -—————— 4 


Willpower). All those included in the dream may interact 
normally through the Mindspeak, though they can inflict no 
damage through it. Their real bodies can still act, though all 
Dice Pools are reduced by two. The Mindspeak ends when all 
the participants want it to, oron the turn the Galliard fails the 
roll against an unwilling member. The beings affected must be 
within line of sight. 

* Call of the Wyrm (Level Two) — This dangerous Gift 
actually attracts creatures of the Wyrm. This Gift is usually 
used to create an ambush or to flush prey from hiding. This Gift 
is taught by any spirit servant of Gaia. 

System: The Garou makes a resisted roll of Manipulation 
+ Performance vs. the Wyrm creature's Willpower (both rolls 
are difficulty 7). Ifthe Wyrm creature loses the contest, it must 
come to the caller. 

* Distractions (Level Two) — The Garou can make 
annoying yips, yelps and howls to divert the attention of his 
target. This Gift is taught by a Coyote-spirit. 

System: The Garou rolls Wits * Performance (difficulty of 
the victim's Willpower). Each success subtracts one from the 
target’s Dice Pool next turn. 

* Dreamspeak (Level Two) — The Garouentersanother’s 
dream and can thereby affect the course of that dream. The 
Garou does not have to be anywhere near the target, but must 
know or have seen the dreamer. This Gift is taught by a 
Chimerling. 

System: The Garou rolls Wits + Empathy (difficulty 8). If the 
dreamer awakens while the Garou is still within the dream, the 
Garou is thrown out of the dream world and loses a Gnosis point. 

* Eye of the Cobra (Level Three) — With but a look, the 
Garou can attract anyone to his side. This Gift is taught by a 
Snake-spirit. 

System: TheGarourolls Appearance * Enigmas (difficulty 
ofthe target's Willpower). The Garou needs three successes to 
bring the target to his side; fewer at least start the victim 
moving in the right direction. 

* Song of Rage (Level Three) — This Gift unleashes the 
Beast in others, forcing Garou to transform into Crinos form, 
sending vampires into frenzy and turning humans into ber- 
serkers. This Gift is taught by a Wolverine- or Wolf-spirit. 

System: The Garou rolls Manipulation * Leadership (dif- 
ficulty of the targets Willpower). Each success drives the 
victim into a violent rage for one turn. 

* Bridge Walker (Level Four) — The Galliard has the 
ability to create minor Moon Bridges through which she alone 
can travel. The Garou travels between the ends of this Moon 
Bridge in one percent of the time it would take to travel that 
distance normally, allowing her to disappear ftom in front of 
a foe and reappear instantly behind it. Note that these Moon 
Bridgesare not protected by Lunes and occasionally attract the 
interest of spirit creatures; these beings have been known to 
follow the Garou into the physical world. This Gift is taught 
by a Lune. 

System: The Garou spends one Gnosis point to create the 
Bridge. The Moon Bridge lasts for only one passage unless the 


Garouspendsa permanent Gnosis point during its creation, in 
which case it lasts until the next full moon. The maximum 
distance that can be traversed by the Bridge is the Garou's 
Gnosis in miles. 

* Shadows by the Fire Light (Level Four) — The Garou 
creates interactive stories in which others take part, willingly 
or not. Usually this power is used at a moot when telling old 
stories, allowing those who take part in the story to enact the 
tales. However, this Gift can also be used on the unwilling, 
forcing them to participate in a story of the Garou's choosing. 
This Gift is taught by an Ancestor-spirit. 

System: When using this Gift on the unwilling, the Garou 
must spend a Gnosis point and score three successes on a 
Manipulation * Performance roll (difficulty of the target's 
Willpower). If successful, the player may tell a story and force 
the victim to perform exactly as the story’scharacter does. This 
effect lasts one turn per Gnosis point spent. 

Fabric of the Mind (Level Five) — Garou with this Gift 
can bring their imaginations to life, creating a Dream Being 
from the fabric of their thoughts. This Gift is taught by a 
Chimerling. 

System: The Garou makes an extended roll of Intelligence 
+ Performance (difficulty 8). She can create any form of life 
she can imagine, assigning it one point of Traits for each 
success gained on the roll. The Garou can take as long as she 
wants to form the creature, accumulating successes from turn 
to turn, but once she stops, the Dream Being takes form and 
requires the Garou to spend Gnosis to keep it manifested. The 
cost is one point per scene if the Dream Being remains 
relatively inactive (such as cleaning the Garou's home or 
sitting as a gargoyle on the roof), or one point per turn if the 
Being engages in combat. Botched rolls manifest an uncon- 
trolled (and often hostile) Dream Being; these cost no Gnosis 
but will stay as long as they desire. 

* Head Games (Level Five) — Other werewolves always 
accuse Galliards of being manipulative and playing with their 
emotions, but those Garou with the Gift of Head Games do it like 
nobody else. The Galliard can change and control the emotions 
of those to whom she speaks. She could cause someone to fall in 
love with her (this won't last, and the victim's love may tum into 
justified resentment) or cause another to befriend her (again, this 
won't last, but a genuine friendship could still develop). This Gift 
is taught by a Coyote-spirit. 

System: The Garou rolls Manipulation + Empathy (diffi- 
culty of the target’s Willpower). Success allows the Garou to 
steer the emotions of any one individual. The more successes, 
the more quickly the emotions manifest and the more strongly 
they are felt. The Storyteller should give the Galliard extra 
dice for roleplaying this Gift especially well. 


Ahroun 


The Ahroun is Gaia’s warrior, Her war beast against the 
Wyrm. Ahroun Gifts provide them the combat power neces- 
sary to tackle the most corrupt creatures in the Tellurian. 

* Inspiration (Level One) — Other werewolves look to 
the Ahroun for leadership in combat. The Gift of Inspiration 


isone reason. The Garou with this Gift lends new resolve and 
righteous anger to his brethren. This Gift is taught by a Lion- 
or Wolf-spirit. 

System: The Garou spends one Gnosis point. Comrades 
automatically receive one success on any Willpower rolls 
made during the scene. Note that this Gift does not affect its 
possessor. 

+ Razor Claws (Level One) — The Garou may honehisclaws 
to razor sharpness. This Gift is taught by a Cat- or Wolf-spirit. 

System: The Garouspends one Rage point and takesa turn. 
to scratch his talons over a hard surface, such as a stone. Claw 
attacks then do an additional die of damage for the remainder 
of the scene. 

* The Falling Touch (Level One) — This Gift allows the 
Garou to send her foe sprawling with but a touch. This Gift is 
taught by any aerial spirit. 

System: The Garou rolls Dexterity + Medicine (difficulty 
of the opponent's Stamina + Athletics). Even one success 
sends the victim to the ground. 

* SenseSilver (Level Two) — Ahrounare the Garou least 
concerned by humans, but even the greatest can be brought 
low by silver weapons. Thus, the Ahroun have learned tosense 
when they need to be worried. This Gift is taught by a Lune. 

System: The Garou rolls Perception + Primal-Urge (diffi- 
culty 7). If successful, she can detect the presence of silver. 
Three successes allow her to pinpoint the silver's location. 

* Spirit of the Fray (Level Two) — The Garou may opt 
to attack first in any given turn, no matter what his initiative 
roll may be. This Gift is taught by a Cat-spirit. 

System: There is no mandatory point cost or roll for this 
Gift, but Gnosis may be spent to ensure extra speed. If more 
than one Garou combatant has this Gift, the one who spends 
the most Gnosis goes first. If both (all?) spend the same 
amount, they take their first actions simultaneously. 

* True Fear (Level Two) — The Ahroun can display the 
true extent of her power, scaring one chosen foe into quies- 
cence for a number of turns. This Gift is taught by a spirit 
associated with fear. 

System: The Garou rolls Strength + Intimidation (diffi- 
culty of the target’s Willpower). Each success she achieves 
cows the enemy for one turn; the victim cannot attack. He 
may defend himself and otherwise act normally (though he 
will be scared). 

* Heart of Fury (Level Three) — The Garou can steel 
himself against anger, suppressing his rage and creating a 
mental dam against the explosive frenzies of his race. This 
anger will eventually catch up with him, so he must vent it 
before it breaks free in frenzy. This Gift is taught by a Lion- or 
Wolf-spirit 

System: The Garou rolls Willpower (difficulty of his own 
Rage (permanent, not temporary)). Every two successes add 
one to the Garou's frenzy difficulties for the scene, making it 
harder to frenzy. After that scene, however, past slights and 
injuries are remembered, refilling the Garou's heart and soul; 


Chapter Six: Traits 123 


pamm am, mrt mr TRA -—————— A 


he must spend one Willpower point or immediately make a 
frenzy check at regular difficulty. 

* Silver Claws (Level Three) — The Garou can turn her 
claws into silver, making her a terror against other Garou on 
the battlefield. This Gift is taught by a Lune. 

System: The Garou rolls Gnosis (difficulty 7). All claw 
wounds inflict aggravated damage, which cannot be soaked by 
Garou. While the Garou manifests the claws, she suffers 
searing agonies. Each turn, she gains an automatic Rage point; 
furthermore, all noncombat difficulties are increased by one 
because of the distraction. When her Rage points exceed her 
Willpower, she must check for frenzy. 

* Clenched Jaw (Level Four) — The Garou's jaw can 
become a grip of steel, clamping down on a foe and not 
releasing it until the Garou chooses. This Gift is taught by a 
Wolf-spirit. 

System: After making a successful bite attack, the Garou, 
by spending a point of Rage, makes her grip unbreakable. For 
each successive turn she opts to maintain her grip, she makes 
a bite attack roll (difficulty 3). While foes can make a typical 
resisted Strength roll to break the grip, the Garou may add half 
her Willpower to her Dice Pool. 

* Stoking Fury's Furnace (Level Four) — The Garou is 
especially connected to his inner anger. He does not have 
more control than others, but is simply more familiar with 
using his Rage. This Gift is taught by a Wolverine-spirit. 

System: The Garou regains one Rage point if he takes a 
Health Level of damage that turn, and does not have to check 
forfrenzy. In addition, the Garou can spend one Rage point per 
turn without losing that point. However, if more than one 
point is spent that turn, the point is lost normally. 

* Kiss of Helios (Level Five) — The Garou becomes 
immune to the damaging effects of fire, though artificial forms 
like napalm and gas fires can still harm him. Additionally, the 
Garou is able to ignite small parts of his body and keep them 
burning for extended periods. Most commonly the Garou will 
light his mane during rituals, but he can also light claws, fangs, 
arms or whatever. These flames are approximately as intense 
as those of a torch. This Gift is taught by a fire elemental or 
Sun-spirit. 

System: The Garouspends one Gnosis point. Artificial fire 
(napalm, gas fires, etc.) does half damage. The effects last for 
one scene. 

* Strength of Will (Level Five) — Garou would follow an 
Ahroun with Strength of Will to the gates of Hell itself if that 
were what it took. Werewolves with this Gift inspire their 
comrades with their own force of will. This Gift is taught by a 
Wolf-spirit or an Incarna avatar. 

System: The Garou spends a point of Willpower and rolls 
Charisma * Leadership (difficulty 8). Each success imbues a 
point of Willpower upon all the Garou's allies within 100 feet; 
this extra Willpower lasts for the rest of the scene. These points 
are used like any other. They can raise the ally's Willpower 
above its maximum or even above 10. This Gift may be used 
once only per scene. 


124 


Tribe Gifts 


Tribe Gifts are handed down from ancient times. Most 
tribal Gifts are taught by that tribe's totem spirit, although 
sometimes a spirit allied to the tribe teaches the Gift. 

Each tribe has its specialties and secret powers, jealously 
guarded by the elders of that tribe. Learning another tribe's 
Gifts requires the Garou to be on good terms with the tribe (at 
least with a fellow pack member of that tribe) and convince 
the appropriate spirit that he will use the Gift for the good of 
the Garou, not for intertribal bickering. 


Black Furies 


The Black Furies’ Gifts reflect their guardianship of the Wyld 
places of the world, and deliver a woman's pain onto her foes. 

* Heightened Senses (Level One) — As the Level One 
Lupus Gift. 

* Sense Wyrm (Level One) — As the Level One Metis Gift. 

* Curse of Aeolus (Level Two) — The Garou summons 
an eerie, chilling fog to shroud the landscape, unnerving her 
enemies. The Garou can see through the fog, but others will 
have trouble navigating the mists. This Gift is taught by a spirit 
servant of Aeolus, a totem spirit. 

System: The Garou rolls Gnosis against a variable difficulty 
(4 near the sea, 6 normally, 9 in a desert). The Garou's vision 
isunhindered by the mist, butall others halve their Perception 
rolls. Additionally, the mist is creepy and unnerving to en- 
emies; -1 to Willpower rolls. 

* Sense of the Prey (Level Two) — As the Level Two 
Ragabash Gift. 

* Coup DeGrace (Level Three) — The Garoustudies her 
foe, seeking the best place to land a blow, then sets herself up 
to deliver a devastating attack the following turn. This Gift is 
taught by an Owl-spirit. 

System: The Garou spends one Willpower point and rolls 
Perception + Medicine (difficulty of the target's Stamina + 
Dodge). If successful, the Garou doubles the damage dice on 
her next blow, assuming it hits. 

+ Visceral Agony (Level Three) — TheGaroutumsherclaws 
intobarbed talonsdripping with black venom. The pain caused by 
these claws is excruciating. This Gift is taught by a Pain-spirit. 

System: The Garou spends one Rage point with each 
attack. The claws inflict no extra damage, but any penalty to 
actions caused by the claws’ wounds is doubled for the duration 
of the scene (i.e., a foe at Wounded would have a -4 penalty 
to actions). Even if the foe is in a frenzy or otherwise resistant 
to pain, he suffers normal wound penalties. 

* Body Wrack (Level Four) — The Garou can cause a target 
to suffer immense pain. This Gift is taught by a Pain-spirit. 

System: TheGarouspendsa Gnosis point and rolls Dexter- 
ity * Medicine (difficulty of the opponent's Stamina * 4). 
Each success causes the victim to lose one die from all Dice 
Pools as agonizing pain sweeps over his body. 

* Wasp Talons (Level Four) — The Garou may actually hurl 
her claws through the air at a foe. The Garou is incapable of using 


Werewolf: The Apocalypse 


POL PST TR ——————— À 


| 


this Gift or making a claw attack next turn, for her claws must 
actually regenerate. This Gift is taught by a Wasp-spirit. 

System: The Garou rolls Dexterity + Brawl. Damage is 
normal for the Garou's Strength, while the difficulty is deter- 
mined by range as though the Garou were usinga firearm. The 
medium range is 20 yards; the Garou receives no modifier at 
thisrange. Twice this range (40 yards) is the farthest the claws 
can be hurled. The difficulty at long range is increased by one. 
Ontheother hand, attacks made at targets withina yard ofthe 
Garou are considered "point-blank" (difficulty 4). 

* The Thousand Forms (Level Five) — The Garou may 
take the form of any animal between the sizes of a sparrow and 
a bison, gaining all special abilities thereof (flight, gills, etc.). 
This Gift is taught by an Animal Father Incarna avatar. No 
monsters, et al., may be mimicked. 

System: The Garouspends a Gnosis pointand rolls Dexter- 
ity + Animal Ken. The difficulty depends on the form chosen. 

* Wyld Warp (Level Five) — The Garou calls out to the 
Wyld, the primal force of chaos itself. Success summons one of 
the great Wyld spirits, ora number of lesser ones, to the Earth. 
They (or it) will probably help the Garou, but nothing is 
certain about th 
at best. This Gift is 

System: The Garou spends one Gnosis point and one Rage 
point. She then rolls Wits + Enigmas ta difficulty equal 
to the area’s Gauntlet. Success summons a variable number of 
Wyld spirits (see the Appendix). 


'eatures of chaos; this is a desperate tactic 
aught by a Wyldling. 


Bone Gnawers 


Bone Gnawers know a thing or two about survival that 
other Garou would do well to learn, if they would only listen. 
Bone Gnawer Gifts allow them to find sustenance among 
refuse or to summon allies from among the cracks and crevices 
of the city. 

* Cooking (Level One) — The Bone Gnawer must have 
a small pot and ladle for this Gift. The Garou may take any 
small, easily destroyed item he can find — bark, beer cans, 
plastic wrap, whatever—andstir it into the pot, turning it into 
a foul-tasting but edible mush. This Gift is taught by a 
Raccoon- or Rat-spirit. 

System: The Garou rolls Wits * Survival. The difficulty 
depends on the objects used — 6 for inedible but otherwise 
harmless materials, up to 10 for cyanide and the like. 

* Scent of Sweet Honey (Level One) — The Garou 
attracts minor Air-spirits to a chosen target, causing the target 
toexudea wonderfully sweet aroma and become slightly sticky 
tothetouch. Naturally, all mannerof vermin will shortly make 
their appearance, and the target will swiftly become coated 
with and surrounded by swarms of gnats, flies, bees, etc. The 
swarm will cause impaired vision for the target, annoying 
stings and bites, maddening buzzing noises, total inability to 
function socially, and other inconveniences. The exact game 
effect of the swarm is up to the Storyteller. This Gift is taught 
by certain Plant-spirits, but Insect-spirits can also teach it. 


^ 


| 


System: This Garou spends one Gnosis pointand rolls Wits 
+ Subterfuge (difficulty 6). The effects last for one hour per 
success, and the smell will not wash off during this time. 

* Blissful Ignorance (Level Two) — As the Level Two 
Ragabash Gift. 

* Odious Aroma (Level Two) — The use of musk has 
long been a defense in the wild. With this Gift, the Garou 
can greatly amplify her own natural body odor, creating a 
debilitatingstench. This Gift is taught by a Stinkbug-spirit. 

System: The Garou spends one Gnosis point. For the duration 
ofthe scene, all beings within 20 feet of the Garou (provided they 
possess olfactory organs) subtract two from all Dice Pools as they 
choke and retch. However, the Garou subtracts two from all his 
Social Dice Poolsand may be ostracized for the duration (nota big 
worry for most Bone Gnawers). 

* Reshape Object (Level Three) — As the Level Three 
Homid Gift. 

+ Gift of the Skunk (Level Three) — With this Gift, the 
Garou can swell his musk glands, allowing him to spray musk 
like a skunk. This Gift is, of course, taught by a Skunk-spirit. 

System: On any turn, the Garou may spray his musk at 
any target. Dexterity + Primal-Urge (difficulty 7; modified 
by range) is required to hit. A target hit by the musk doubles 
over retching and must spend a Willpower point to do 
anything at all for the remainder of the scene. Even then, 
however, he subtracts one from his Dice Pool for each 
success the Garou scored on his roll. The effect lasts for the 
duration of the scene or until the target rigorously bathes. 


* Attunement (Level Four) — By standing in a particu- 
lar area, the character can commune with the spirits of the 
area, thus getting an overview of what exists or has hap- 
pened in the area — rough population, secret tunnels, 


, places of note and so on. This Gift is taught by a Rat-spirit. 


System: The Garou spends one Gnosis point and rolls 
Perception * Streetwise (difficulty 6). The amount of 
information gained depends on the number of successes; on 
a botch, the spirits lie. This Gift may only be used in urban 
areas, as the Gnawers have become desensitized to the 
wilderness. 

* Infest (Level Four) — The Gnawer may call up a 
horde of vermin (rats, insects, slugs, birds, snakes, etc.) to 
invade an area (no greater than a large building) of his 
choice. The creatures will act according to their nature and 
will not mindlessly attack humans; indeed, many of them 
may try to flee. This Gift is taught by a Rat-spirit. 

System: The Garou spends one Gnosis point and rolls 
Manipulation * Animal Ken (difficulty 7). The size of the 
horde is determined by the number of successes; 
will cause a notable problem and several calls to the 


exterminator, while five will create a scene from a horror 
film as the building is swamped in creatures. 

* Survivor (Level Five) — This Gift allows the Garou 
temporary immunity to many environmental effects, such 
as pressure or temperature variations. She is also immune to 
disease, poison and even radiation, as well as any corrupting 
effects from the touch of Wyrm entities. She does not need 
to eat, drink or rest, and she gains three extra points of 
Stamina, even if this takes the Attribute over 10. She also 
ignores wound penalties. In addition, whenever she is 
about to die or be defeated, she automatically regains one 
Willpower point. This Gift is taught by a Bear-spirit. 

System: The Garou spends one Gnosis point and rolls 
Stamina + Survival (difficulty 7); the effects last one day 
per success. 

* Riot (Level Five) — The Garou summons a horde of 
malevolent spirits to provoke the hatreds and fears of the 
down-and-out — the homeless, the gangs, the urban ani- 
mals such as alley cats and stray dogs, etc. This Gift is taught 
by a Rat-spirit. 

System: The Garou spends one Gnosis point and one 
Rage point. He then rolls Wits * Subterfuge (difficulty 8). 
If successful, these spirits direct their material hosts against 
a target of the Garou's choosing, though the disparate 
elements of the riot will by no means work together (they 
may not even be aware that others are trying to accomplish 
the same thing). The number of successes determines the 
extent of the riot. 


Successes Extent 

One Building 

Two Block 

Three Neighborhood 

Four District (the South Side, etc.) 
Five Entire City 


Werewolf: The Apocalypse 


— ———— —— 4 


Children of Gaia 


The Children are among the most peaceful of the Garou. 
Their Gifts allow them to calm others or rally nature to 
their aid. 

* Mother's Touch (Level One) — As the Level One 
Theurge Gift. 

* Resist Pain (Level One) — Asthe Level One Philodox 
Gift. 

* Calm (Level Two) — The Garou can quell the anger 
in others. This Gift is taught by a Unicorn-spirit. 

System: The Garou spends one Gnosis point and rolls 
Charisma + Empathy (difficulty of the target’s Willpower). 
Each success removes one of the target’s Rage points, 
though lost Rage can be regained normally. 

* Luna's Armor (Level Two) — The Garou calls upon 
the blessing of Luna to deter any damaging attacks aimed at 
her. This Gift is taught by a Lune. 

System: The Garou concentrates for one turn, spends 
one Gnosis point, and rolls Stamina * Survival (difficulty 
6). Each success allows the Garou to add one to her Stamina 
for the purpose of soaking damage (including silver). The 
effect lasts for one scene. 

* Dazzle (Level Three) — The Garou can overwhelm 
a target with the glory and beauty of Gaia. This Gift is 
taught by a Unicorn-spirit. 

System: The Garou rolls Charisma * Empathy (diffi- 
culty of the target's Willpower). So long as the target is not 
attacked, it will stand mutely in awe for the remainder of 
the scene. This Gift may only be attempted once per target 
per scene. 

* Spirit Friend (Level Three) — The Children walk 
among spirits and interact with them more easily than 
most, for their aura exudes friendship. This Gift is taught by 
Unicorn-spirits. 

System: The Garou rolls Charisma + Expression (diffi- 
culty 7). Each success adds one die to all the Garou’s Dice 
Pools for interacting with any spirits in the vicinity (except 
those of the Wyrm). 

* Beast Life (Level Four) — As the Level Four Lupus 
Gift. 

* Serenity (Level Four) — The Garou can quell others" 
rage, even bringing Garou out of frenzies. This Gift is 
taught by Unicorn-spirits. 

System: The Garou spends one Gnosis point and rolls 
Charisma + Expression (difficulty of the target’s Will- 
power). The target is incapable of using Rage at all for one 
turn per success. He may not spend Rage points, but neither 
may he frenzy. 

* Halo of the Sun (Level Five) — The Garou becomes 
surrounded by a sphere of blazing sunlight. Certain Wyrm 
creatures — denizens of the dark — may flee before the 
brightly shining Garou. This Gift is taught by a spirit allied 
to Helios, the Sun Celestine. 


Chapter Six: Traits 


PLE EN LT n —————— À 


System: The Garou spends one Gnosis point; the effect 
lasts for one scene. The damage of any hand-to-hand attack 
made by the Garou is increased by two dice; alternatively, 
the Garou can cause aggravated damage when in Homid or 
Glabro form. Anyone directly facing the Garou adds three 
to all attack difficulties because of the glare, and any 
vampires within 20 yards suffer damage as if exposed to true 
sunlight. 

The Living Wood (Level Five) — The Garou may call 
the powers of the forest to arise and aid her: nearby trees will 
begin to move and attempt to protect the Garou. The trees 
will restrain, block or even fight foes. This Gift is taught by 
a Glade Child. 

System: The Garou spends one Gnosis point and rolls 
Charisma + Survival (difficulty 8). The Garou animates 
one tree for each success rolled. 


Fianna 


The Gifts of the wild and raucous Fianna allow them to 
play pranks on others or call upon the ancient allies of their 
Celtic heritage. Some of their Gifts are taught by faeries, 
which can sometimes be found near Fianna caerns. 

* Persuasion (Level One) — As the Level One Homid 
Gift. 

* Resist Toxin (Level One) — The Fianna have long 
engaged themselves in the concoction of a variety of 
recreational liquids, many of them distilled from deadly 
substances. They very quickly learned how to adapt — in 
the interests of continued partying, of course. With this 
Gift, the Garou takes no damage from poisons or diseases of 
any sort, and can heal many Wyrm toxins. This Gift is 
taught by a Toad-spirit or Plant-spirit. 

System: The Garou rolls Stamina * Survival (difficulty 
6); only one success is required. 

* Glib Tongue (Level Two) — The Garou is mystically 
able to make whatever she says be what the target wants to 
hear. Whatever the Garou says, even gibberish, will be 
heartily agreed with, although the Garou won't have a clue 
what the target thinks she is saying. This Gift is taught by 
a Trickster-spirit. 

System: The Garou spends one Gnosis point and rolls 
Wits * Expression (difficulty of the victim's Wits * Alert- 
ness). The effects last for one turn per success. 

* Howl of the Banshee (Level Two) — The Garou may 
emit a fearful howl that unnerves all in the vicinity. This 
Gift is taught by a Banshee, a woeful spirit of the dead. 

System: The Garou spends one Gnosis point. All who 
hear the howl, friends or foes, must make Willpower rolls 
(difficulty 8, or 6 for friends of the Garou) or run in terror 
for one turn per success. 

* Faerie Kin (Level Three) — The Garou can call one 
or more faeries to aid her. The faeries are not under the 
Garou's control, though they are favorably disposed to the 
Garou (except on a botch — Gaia help the Garou who 


127 


botches this one!); what they do is entirely up to the 
Storyteller. 

System: The Garou spends one Gnosis point and rolls 
Manipulation + Occult (difficulty 8). Each extra Gnosis 
point spent over the base amount increases the faeries’ raw 
power, while extra successes increase the faeries’ numbers. 

+ Reshape Object (Level Three) — As the Level Three 
Homid Gift. 

* Balor's Gaze (Level Four) — One of the Garou's eyes 
begins to glow a baleful red. Its stare is horrifying, causing 
wracking pain in any being who meets its glare and whose 
resolve falters. This Gift is taught by a Pain-spirit. 

System: The Garou spends one Gnosis and one Rage 
point. He then rolls Perception * Occult (difficulty 8). 
Thereafter, for the remainder of the scene, any foe at whom 
he so much as glances must equal or exceed the Garou's 
successes on a Willpower roll (difficulty 8) or double over 
in agony. Such a foe is treated as "Crippled" (-5 to actions) 
for the scene, even though the foe takes no actual wounds; 
foes whoare already Crippledare effectively Incapacitated. 
If a foe successfully resists, she is immune for the duration. 

* Phantasm (Level Four) — This Gift creates a static 
illusion with full visual, auditory and even tactile and 
olfactory components. This Gift is taught by Trickster- or 
Illusion-spirits, or even by faeries. 

System: The Garou spends one Gnosis point for each 
10-foot area to be covered by the illusion and rolls Intelli- 


4 


y) 


y ) 
(DN, 


gence + Expression (difficulty 6). All in the vicinity must 
match or exceed the number of successes with a Perception 
* Alertness roll (difficulty 6) or believe that the illusion is 
real. 

* Call the Hunt (Level Five) — This Gift may only be 
used once a month, and there must be an overwhelming 
evil in the area. The Garou may call the Wild Hunt of 
Celtic mythology (see The Wild Hunt, pp. 265-266) down 
from the sky to harry and slay the evil. This Gift is taught 
by the Huntsman himself. 

System: The Garou must chant and concentrate for a 
full hour. Afterward, he spends one Gnosis point and rolls 
Charisma * Occult (difficulty 8). The Huntsman himself 
and a single hound are always summoned; another hound 
will come for each extra Gnosis or Rage point expended. If 
the roll to summon is botched, if the threat is not deemed 
appropriate for the summons, or if the Garou fails to join in 
the Hunt, the Wild Hunt turns on the summoner. 

* Gift of the Spriggan (Level Five) — The Garou may 
grow up to three times her normal size or shrink to the size 
of a small puppy. This Gift is taught by a faerie or a 
Chimerling. 

System: The Garou spends one Gnosis point and rolls 
Stamina * Primal-Urge (difficulty 8). The effects last one 
hour per success. When larger, the Garou gains +3 Strength 
(maximum of 10) and one extra Health Level for every 
10096 increase in size; when smaller, the Garou retains her 


normal Strength and abilities, but may sneak around unno- 
ticed or pass as a "cute little doggie" among humans. 


Get of Fenris 


The Getare tough and hardy, dangerous warriors against 
the Wyrm. Their Gifts allow them immense might and skill 
in battle. 

* Razor Claws (Level One) — As the Level One 
Ahroun Gift. 

* Resist Pain (Level One) — Asthe Level One Philodox 
Gift. 

* Halt the Coward's Flight (Level Two) — The Garou 
may slow his fleeing foes, preventing them from escaping 
his wrath. This Gift is taught by a Wolf-spirit. 

System: The Garou spends one turn concentrating and 
rolls Charisma * Intimidation (difficulty of the foe's Will- 
power); if successful, the Garou may halve the speed of that 
individual for a scene. 

* Snarl of the Predator (Level Two) — The Garou lets 
outa primal snarl, sending shivers up opponents’ spines and 
cowing them into submission. This Gift is taught by a Wolf- 
spirit. 

System: The Garou rolls Charisma + Intimidation (dif- 
ficulty of the victim’s Wits + 3). Each success subtracts one 
from the number of dice the opponent can use next turn 
(the victim is cowed and overwhelmed). This Gift takes a 
full turn to invoke. 

* Might of Thor (Level Three) — The Garou can 
immensely increase his strength, wreaking terrible havoc 
on opponents. This Gift is taught by a Wolf-spirit. 

System: The Garou spends one Gnosis point and one 
Rage point. He then rolls Willpower (difficulty 8). The 
Garou may double his Strength for one turn per success, 
after which he will be as weak as a kitten (Physical At- 
tributes 1, half Willpower) until he rests for an hour. 

* Venom Blood (Level Three) — The Garou may 
change her blood toa black, viscous bile capable of harming 
anyone who comes in contact with it. This Gift is taught by 
any poisonous spirit (Snake, Spider, etc.). 

System: The Garou spends one Rage point and rolls 
Stamina * Medicine (difficulty 7). Anything that contacts 
the Garou's blood takes one die of aggravated damage per 
success. This effect lasts for the duration of the scene. 

* Hero's Stand (Level Four) — The Garou plants 
herself on a patch of ground and channels the very force of 
Gaia through her body, essentially becoming one with the 
Earth. She may not retreat or even move from her chosen 
"turf" (and no force on Earth can make her!), but she gains 
many powers thereby. Only when all foes are defeated may 
she retreator leave. This Gift is taught by an earth elemen- 
tal. 

System: The Garou rolls Willpower (difficulty 8). Each 
success grants her one extra die to all her Dice Pools. 
Additionally, she may not be surprised, and all attacks 
against her are considered frontal. 


* Scream of Gaia (Level Four) — The Garou may leap 
into the midst of his foes and issue a terrible howl from the 
depths of his being, a scream of pain from Gaia Herself for 
all the ravages She has suffered. Foes are knocked off their 
feet and injured. This Gift is taught by a Wolf-spirit. 

System: The Garou spends one Gnosis point and rolls 
Rage (difficulty 6). Everyone in a radius of 10 feet per 
success is blasted back, knocked to the ground and suffers 
one die of damage per success as an earsplitting shockwave 
engulfs the area. 

* Horde of Valhalla (Level Five) — The Garou must be 
in good standing with his totem (have displayed exemplary 
courage) and may only use this Gift in the most dire 
circumstances, for he is asking aid from Fenris himself. This 
Gift is taught by an avatar of Fenris. 

System: The Garou rolls Charisma * Animal Ken 
(difficulty 6). If successful, a number of spirit wolves from 
Valhalla emerge from the Umbra to do battle with the 
Garou's foes — one wolf for every point of Gnosis or Rage 
spent by the Garou. These wolves are identical to the 
houndsofthe Wild Hunt (see The Wild Hunt, pp. 265-266). 
The wolves will return at the end of the scene. 

+ Fenris’ Bite (Level Five) — The Garou's teeth 
become terribly sharp, and jaw strength increases to an 
incredible degree, allowing the Garou to mangle limbs with 
one bite or even chomp them clean off. This Gift is taught 
by an avatar of Fenris. 

System: The Garou spends one Rage point and rolls 
Strength * Medicine (difficulty of the opponent's Stamina 
* 3). TheGarou's next bite, if it hits, will crush and mangle 
one of the opponent's limbs, inflicting one automatic 
Health Level of damage in addition to normal bite damage. 
The target's limb is rendered useless for the scene (or much 
longer in the case of humans and other nonregenerative 
creatures). If five or more successes are scored on the 
Strength + Medicine roll, the limb is completely severed. 


Glass Walkers 


Glass Walkers, more than any other tribe, understand 
the ways of modern technology. They have a greater con- 
nection to the Weaver than the other Garou do; they claim 
she is neither mad nor evil, but simply neutral. Their Gifts 
allow them to control technology and Weaver spirits. 

* Control Simple Machine (Level One) — The Garou 
may speak to the primal urban spirits in the simplest 
mechanical devices (no electronics, et al.), causing them to 
operate or shut down as he sees fit. Levers flip, pulleys roll, 
doors unbolt, etc. This Gifts is taught by any technological 
spirit. 

System: The Garou spends a Willpower point and rolls 
Manipulation * Repair (difficulty 7). The Glass Walker's 
control lasts for the duration of the scene. 

* Persuasion (Level One) — As the Level One Homid 
Gift. 


Chapter Six: Traits 129 


p/m am, murs ma RT ———Ó 


Z1ETDDEI "ft 
KADIO AN 
JAI 


(^ 


sJODELETEDDAU N 
VI DELETEDDELS (le 


Pan GPENLEBO PH 


* Cybersenses (Level Two) — The Garou, through 
studying both his own senses and the tools of science, may 
alter his sensory perceptions to those of a machine. Thus, 
he can change his hearing to detect radar, change his eyes 
to detect UV emissions or radiation, etc. This Gift is taught 
by any technological spirit. 

System: The Garou spends one Gnosis point per sense 
affected. Thereafter, he substitutes a Perception + Science 
roll for any Perception rolls involving the new sense(s). 
The effects last for a scene. 

* Power Surge (Level Two) — By speaking with the spirits 
of electricity, the Garou may cause a blackout over a wide- 
spread area. This Gift is taught by an electricity elemental. 

System: The Garou spends one Gnosis point and rolls 
Wits * Science (difficulty 7). The area blacked or browned 
out depends on the number of successes rolled. 


Successes Area Affected 

One Room 

Two House or Single Story 
Three Large Building 

Four City Block 

Five Neighborhood 


* Control Complex Machine (Level Three) — The Garou 
may bargain with the strange spirit life of the electronic world, 
thereby controllingcars, calculators, computers, video games, etal. 
This Gift is taught by a Net-Spider (the knowledge is actually 
stolen from the spirit, much as a hacker copies protected files). 


Werewolf: The Apocalypse 


System: The Garou spends one Willpower point and 
rolls Manipulation + Science (or Computer) against a 
difficulty ascertained by the Storyteller (usually 8). The 
control lasts for the duration of the scene. 

* Elemental Favor (Level Three) — By cajoling a 
nearby urban elemental, the Garou can get the elemental 
to perform one "favor" for her. This can include the ma- 
nipulation or even destruction of the elemental's housing 
— thus a metal vault door might unlock itself, a glass sheet 
might explode at the Garou's enemies, cables might coil 
around the Garou's opponents, etc. This Gift is taught by 
any urban elemental. 

System: The Garou rolls Charisma + Subterfuge (diffi- 
culty of the elemental's Gnosis). 

* Attunement (Level Four) — As the Level Four Bone 
Gnawer Gift, except this is taught to Glass Walkers by a 
Cockroach-spirit. 

* Doppelganger (Level Four) — The Garou may take 
the exact likeness of a particular human or wolf, or even 
another Garou. This is taught by a Chameleon-spirit, or a 
spirit of Illusion. 


System: The Garou spends one Gnosis point and rolls 
Charisma * Performance (difficulty 8). The effect lasts for 
one day per success. 

* Calm the Flock (Level Five) — With this power, the 
Garou may walk among humans without accidentally evok- 
ing the Curse or the Delirium. This allows her to live among 
humans and maintain a family. The effects, however, do 
not last for long. This Gift is taught by a homid Ancestor- 
spirit. 

System: The Garou rolls Manipulation + Subterfuge 
(difficulty 7). The number of successes indicates the num- 
ber of hours that the effect lasts. 

* Summon Net-Spider (Level Five) — The Garou can 
summon a Net-Spider — one of the Weaver-spirits that 
dwell within the Realm of electronic reality. Within rea- 
son, the Net-Spider gives its summoner absolute control 
over computers. The Garou can also send the Spider into 
someone else's system to disrupt it — the effects of this are 
left up to the Storyteller, but should be destructive. This 
Gift is taught by an avatar of Cockroach. 

System: The Garou spends one Gnosis point and rolls 
Charisma * Computer (difficulty 8). If successful, the Net- 
Spider appears and will heed the Garou (see Net-Spider, pg. 
269). The Spider allows the Garou to halve all difficulty 
rolls involving computers. 


Red Talons 


These wolf-brothers and sisters hate humans, and their 
Gifts give them the power to mete revenge for the years of 
human depredation against wolves and the wilderness. 

* Beast Speech (Level One) — As the Level One 
Galliard Gift. 

* Scent of Running Water (Level One) — Asthe Level 
One Ragabash Gift. 


| 


* Beastmind (Level Two) — The Garou can reduce the 
mental faculties of a target to those of an animal for a short 
time. This Gift is taught by an avatar of Griffin. 

System: The Garou rolls Manipulation + Empathy 
(difficulty of the target’s Willpower). The effect lasts for 
one turn per success. 

* Sense of the Prey (Level Two) — As the Level Two 
Ragabash Gift. 

* Elemental Favor (Level Three) — As the Level Three 
Glass Walker Gift, but this version affects only the four 
"classic" elements — air, earth, fire and water. 

* Trackless Waste (Level Three) — The Garou em- 
ploying this Gift must have at least a rough familiarity with 
the terrain in a given area (have spent at least a week in the 
vicinity). The Garou may completely disrupt others' per- 
ceptions of that terrain's landmarks, etc. Humans and the 
like will automatically become lost (compasses won't work 
and maps will be misleading). Even Garou may become 
lost. This Gift is taught by any wilderness-oriented spirit. 

System: The Garou spends one Gnosis point and rolls 
Intelligence + Primal-Urge (difficulty 6). Each success 
enables a two-mile radius to be affected. Other Garou must 
roll Perception * Primal-Urge (difficulty 6) and equal or 
exceed the Gift user's roll. The effect lasts for four hours. 

* Avalanche (Level Four) — The Garou must be in a 
mountainous or otherwise tectonically unstable area. The 
Garou causes an avalanche, mudslide, etc. to engulf his 
foes. This Gift is taught by an earth elemental. 

System: The Garou spends one Gnosis point and rolls 
Manipulation * Survival (difficulty determined by the 
Storyteller based on the instability of the terrain). The 
more successes, the more powerful the effect. On a botch, 
the Garou is caught in the avalanche. 

* Quicksand (Level Four) — The Garou can turn the 
local ground into a sticky mass that can catch foes and 
prevent them from moving easily. This Gift is taught by 
earth elementals. 

System: The Garou spends a Gnosis point and rolls 
Manipulation + Primal-Urge (difficulty 7). Each success 
turns a 10-foot area of ground into a viscous, sticky sub- 
stance. Anyone in the area save the Garou can only move 
at half walking speed, and no combat maneuvers requiring 
movement may be executed. Additionally, the difficulties 
for all attacks involving actions more complex than basic 
grappling are increased by one. 

* Curse of Dionysis (Level Five) — The Garou may 
transform any human or Garou into a normal wolf. Garou 
will stay in this form for the duration of the scene; against 
humans, this effect is permanent. This Gift is taught by a 
Wolf-spirit. 

System: The Garou spends one Gnosis point and rolls 
Gnosis (difficulty of the target's Willpower). 

* Gaia's Vengeance (Level Five) — The Garou can 
cause the very features of the land to animate and attack 
intruders: branches will lash out, rocks will roll and smash, 


Chapter Six: Traits 


p/m. am, EN mar ru —————— //, 


vines will trip, water will suck victims under, etc. This Gift 
is taught by an avatar of Gaia Herself. 

System: The Garou spends one Gnosis point and one 
Rage point. He then rolls Charisma * Enigmas (difficulty of 
the area's Gauntlet). The game effects are up to the Story- 
teller. 


Shadow Lords 


The haughty Shadow Lords have powers that allow them 
to dominate others or strike fear into them, the better to 
prove their superiority to other Garou. 

* Fatal Flaw (Level One) — The Garou can discern a 
target’s weaknesses, allowing him an advantage in combat. 
This Gift is taught by a Stormcrow. 

System: The Garou concentrates for one turn and rolls 
Perception + Empathy (difficulty of the target’s Wits + 
Subterfuge). Success allows the Garou to do an extra die of 
damage against the target. Extra successes allow him to 
discern additional vulnerabilities; five successes grant the 
Garou knowledge of all the target’s flaws. 

* Aura of Confidence (Level One) — The Garou 
radiates an aura of strength and command, preventing any 
attempts to read the Garou's aura or detect his weaknesses; 
he reveals no flaws whatsoever. This Gift is taught by an 
Ancestor-spirit. 

System: The Garou rolls Charisma + Subterfuge (diffi- 
culty 7). This must be rolled for each new encounter or 
situation in which the Garou finds himself. 

Clap of Thunder (Level Two) — The Garou may clap 
her hands together, sending forth a shockwave that can 
stun all before her. This Gift is taught by a Stormcrow. 

System: The Garou spends one Gnosis point. All those 
within 10 feet, friend and foe alike, must score at least one 
success on a Willpower roll (difficulty 8) or be stunned and 
unable to act for one turn; on a botch, they are stunned for 
the duration of the scene. The Garou must be in Homid, 
Glabro or Crinos form to employ this power. 

* Luna's Armor (Level Two) — As the Level Two 
Children of Gaia Gift. 

* Icy Chill of Despair (Level Three) — The Garou can 
assume a frightening aspect, seeming to grow larger, more 
looming, shadowy and terrible. Viewers will hesitate and 
stall in fear. This Gift is taught by a Stormcrow. 

System: The Garou concentrates for a turn, spends a 
Gnosis point and rolls Manipulation + Intimidation (diffi- 
culty 7). If successful, enemies viewing this sight must make 
a Willpower roll (difficulty 8), scoring a number of suc- 
cesses equal to the successes of the Garou; failure means 
that the victims must spend Willpower to attack, take 
action against or even verbally oppose the Garou. The 
victims are not controlled by her, merely too cowed to 
struggle against her. This effect lasts for the rest of the 
scene. 


131 


— SL 


* Paralyzing Stare (Level Three) — The Garou can 
direct a terrifying gaze at a target, causing her to freeze in 
paralytic fear. This Gift is taught by a Stormcrow. 

System: The Garou concentrates for one turn, spends 
one Gnosis point, and rolls Charisma * Intimidation (dif- 
ficulty of the target's Willpower). Each success gained on 
this roll freezes the opponent in place for one turn. 

* Open Wounds (Level Four) — The Garou may cause 
the next wound he inflicts on a target to bleed profusely. 
This Gift is taught by a Pain-spirit. 

System: The Garou spends one Gnosis point and rolls 
Strength + Medicine (difficulty of the target’s Stamina + 
3). If the roll succeeds, the target will bleed, losing one 
Health Level per turn fora duration of one turn per success. 
This is not aggravated damage. 

* Strength of the Dominator (Level Four) — The 
Garou, by force of command, draws from another's anger to 
feed his own. This Gift is taught by a Stormcrow. 

System: The Garou rolls Wits * Intimidation (difficulty 
of the target's Willpower). For a number of turns equal to 
the successes scored by the Garou, the victim will lose one 
Rage point per turn, while the Garou will gain that Rage 
point. This may be attempted only once per target per 
scene. 

* Obedience (Level Five) — The Garou becomes the 
ultimate alpha leader, commanding others to do as she 
wishes. This Gift is taught by a Stormcrow. 


System: The Garou spends one Gnosis point and rolls 
Charisma + Leadership (difficulty 8). All in the vicinity 
must make Willpower rolls (difficulty 8). Failure to match 
or exceed the Garou's successes means that listeners must 
obey the commands of the Garou. The degree of obedience 
varies according to the number of successes: one success 
means the listeners can be persuaded to do something they 
don't mind doing; three means they'll pretty much do what 
the Garou tells them so long as they aren't utterly opposed 
to it; five successes means the listeners will undertake 
virtually suicidal actions. 

* Shadow Pack (Level Five) — The Garou may sum- 
mon a shadowy duplicate of himself, or even multiple 
shadows, to stand beside him in battle. These shadows 
eerily resemble the Garou and have the same powers. This 
Gift is taught by a spirit of Night or a Chimerling. 

System: The Garou must spend a variable number of 
Gnosis points and succeed in a Gnosis roll (difficulty 8). 
For each Gnosis point spent, the Garou summons an exact 
duplicate of himself to fight by his side. These Garou have 
identical Attributes and: Abilities, but not fetishes; they 
may not use Gnosis or Willpower, and each has only one 
Health Level (any attack that is not soaked destroys it). 
The shadow-Garou last for one scene. 


Silent Striders 


The mysterious Silent Striders ever travel across Realm 
and Umbra alike. Their Gifts allow them to travel faster 
thanothersand to reach places inaccessible to other Garou. 


132 


Werewolf: The Apocalypse 


p mem cr m —n — — ro y; 


* Sense Wyrm (Level One) — As the Level One Metis 
Gift. 

* Speed of Thought (Level One) — The Garou can 
double her land speed. This Gift is taught by a Roadrunner- 
or Cheetah-spirit. 

System: The Garou spends one Gnosis point. The effect 
lasts for one scene. 

+ Blissful Ignorance (Level Two) — As the Level Two 
Ragabash Gift. 

* Messenger's Fortitude (Level Two) — The Garou 
may run at full speed for three days without the need for rest, 
food or water. After the duration expires, the Garou must 
sleep for a week. This Gift is taught by a Camel- or Wolf- 
spirit. 

System: The Garou spends one Gnosis point and may do 
nothing save run; for an additional Gnosis point, he may 
imbue the effects of this Gift upon another being. 

* Adaptation (Level Three) — The Garou may exist in 
any environment, regardless of pressure, temperature, or 
atmospheric composition. The Garou also takes no damage 
from poison or disease, though concentrated flame or 
radiation still affects the Garou normally. This Gift is 
taught by a Bear-spirit. 

System: The Garou spends one Gnosis point and rolls 
Stamina * Survival (difficulty 7). The effects last for one 
hour per success and may be extended by spending Gnosis. 
By spending another Gnosis point and rolling again, the 
Garou may affect another with this Gift. 


* The Great Leap (Level Three) — The Garou can 
jump incredible distances in one bound. This Gift is taught 
by a Jackrabbit-spirit. 

System: The Garou spends one Willpower point and 
rolls Strength * Athletics (difficulty 6). Each success en- 
ables the Garou to leap 100 feet. 

* Attunement (Level Four) — This Gift is similar to 
the Bone Gnawer Gift, but may be used only in the 
wilderness. By standing in a particular area, the character 
can commune with the spirits of the area, thus getting an 
overview of what exists or has happened in the area — 
rough population, secret trails, places of note and so on. 
This Gift is taught by an Owl-spirit. 

System: The Garou spends one Gnosis point and rolls 
Perception * Survival (difficulty 6). The amount of in- 
formation gained depends in the number of successes; on a 
botch, the spirits lie. 

* Speed beyond Thought (Level Four) — The Garou 
may run at 10 times normal speed. The Garou may do 
nothing save concentrate on running. The effects last for 
eight hours, after which the Garou will be famished and 
must eat immediately or risk frenzy and worse... This Gift 
is taught by a Cheetah- or Air- spirit. 

System: The Garou spends one Gnosis point and rolls 
Stamina * Athletics (difficulty 7). 

* Gate of the Moon (Level Five) — This power only 
works at night, and there must be at least a sliver ofa moon 
in the sky. The Garou can open a special type of Moon 
Bridge, allowing instantaneous travel to her destination. 
This Gift is taught by Lunes. 

System: The Garou spends one Gnosis point for every 
100 miles she wishes to travel, and rolls Intelligence + 
Alertness (difficulty depends on the distance of the journey 
and the accuracy with which she knows her destination — 
up to 10 for a far journey to an unknown place). Success 
enables the Garou to travel to that place instantly. She will 
be disoriented for a turn upon arrival unless she scored at 
least three successes. A botch means that the character is 
hurled through space in a random direction, arriving far 
from herdestination (oreven high in theair...). The Garou 
may take others with her by spending one Gnosis point per 
person. 

* Reach the Umbra (Level Five) — The Garou may 
pierce the Gauntlet and instantly travel to the Umbra at 
will, without the need for a reflective surface. This Gift is 
taught by an Owl-spirit. 

System: The Garou simply wills herself to step sideways. 
She does not have to make the usual Gnosis roll and can 
never get "caught." 


Silver Fangs 


As the leaders of the Garou, the Silver Fangs command 
the force of Gaia's will. 

* Lambent Flame (Level One) — The Garou can cause 
asilvery light to ignite around her body. This Gift is taught 
by a Lune. 


Chapter Six: Traits 


Y/O TIA EN A ni -————— À 


System: The Garou must spend one Willpower point. 
The effect lasts for the duration of the scene. The light 
illuminates a 100-foot radius, and the ensuing glare adds 
one to the difficulties of all hand-to-hand attacks on the 
Garou; the difficulties of all missile attacks, however, are 
reduced by one. 

* Sense Wyrm (Level One) — As the Level One Metis 
Gift. 

* Awe (Level Two) — The Garou, simply by her 
bearing and speech, proves to others her mastery and right 
to rule the other tribes. This Gift is taught by a Falcon- 
spirit. 

System: The Garou rolls Appearance * Empathy (diffi- 
culty ofthe target's Willpower). If successful, the difficulties 
for all Social rolls made by the Garou against that target are 
reduced by one, and the target's difficulty to hit the Garou 
in combat is increased by one. 

* Luna's Armor (Level Two) — As the Level Two 
Children of Gaia Gift. 

* Silver Claws (Level Three) — As the Level Three 
Ahroun Gift. 

* Wrath of Gaia (Level Three) — The Garou is 
revealed to his foes as that which Gaia intended him to be: 
Her Chosen Warrior. Wyrm beasts will flee in fear unless 
they can master their instinctual terror of Gaia's Defender. 
This Gift is taught by an avatar of Gaia Herself. 

System: The Garou spends a Gnosis point and rolls 
Charisma + Intimidation (difficulty 6). All agents or min- 
ions of the Wyrm (including Kindred with Humanity 
scores lower than 7) in the vicinity must make Willpower 
rolls (difficulty 7). If a Wyrm creature does not match or 
exceed the Garou's successes, it will flee in terror for the 
duration of the scene. 

* Mastery (Level Four) — The Garou can command 
otherGarou (including Wyrm-tainted Garou such as Black 
Spiral Dancers) to do her bidding. This Gift is taught by a 
Falcon-spirit. 

System: The Garou rolls Charisma + Leadership (diffi- 
culty of the victim's Wits * 3). The Garou can cause the 
target to obey any nonsuicidal command for one turn per 
success. This Gift works only against Garou. 

* Mindblock (Level Four) — The Garou possesses a 
powerful psychic shield, increasing the difficulty of all 
attempts to affect or attack her mentally. This Gift is taught 
by a Falcon-spirit. 

System: All attempts to affect or attack the Garou 
mentally are made against a difficulty of 10. This includes 
vampiric Domination and Presence. 

* Luna's Avenger (Level Five) — The Garou can 
transform her entire body (human, wolf or otherwise) into 
purest silver. She becomes a nigh-unstoppable warrior. 
This Gift is taught by a Lune. 

System: The Garou concentrates for a turn and spends 
one Gnosis point. This Gift confers immunity tosilver, and 
all of the Garou's attacks gain benefits equivalent to those 


133 


conferred by the Silver Claws Gift (Level Three Ahroun). 
In addition, the Garou gains two extra Stamina levels and 
an extra Health Level (if the Garou takes only one Health 
Level of damage during combat, she is unharmed after the 
duration of this Gift expires). The effect lasts for a scene. 

* Paws of the Newborn Cub (Level Five) — The Garou 
prevents a target from using any special or supernatural 
abilities. She is as a newborn cub, with only mundane 
powersat her disposal. This Gift is taught by a Falcon-spirit. 

System: The Garou spends one Gnosis point and rolls 
Gnosis (difficulty of the victim's Stamina * 3). Each 
success removes all special abilities of the opponent (aggra- 
vated damage, claws, Gifts, vampiric Blood Pool, mage 
Spheres, regenerative powers, special attacks, etc.) for one 
turn. 


Stargazers 


The Stargazers’ wisdom and martial practices are re- 
flected in their Gifts. Solitary and contemplative, they can 
solve many puzzles, and their unarmed fighting ability can 
topple even the hardiest Ahroun. 

* Balance (Level One) — The Garou is able to walk 
across any ledge, rope, etc., no matter how thin or slippery. 
This Gift is taught by strange Wind-spirits known to the 
Stargazers. 

Systems: No point expenditure or roll is required. Diffi- 
culties for climbing are reduced by three. 

* Sense Wyrm (Level One) — As the Level One Metis 
Gift. 

* Inner Strength (Level Two) — The Garou may, after 
brief meditation, convert her inner anger into iron resolve. 
This Gift is taught by wise Stargazer Ancestor-spirits. 

System: The Garou concentrates for five minutes and 
rolls Wits * Enigmas (difficulty 8). Each success converts 
one point of Rage into Willpower. 

* Surface Attunement (Level Two) — The Garou may 
attune herself to the surrounding environment, thereby 
gaining the ability to walk at normal speed across such 
surfaces as mud, water, snow and quicksand without falling 
through or leaving tracks. This Gift is taught by the spirits 
of small animals (rabbits, sparrows, mice, etc.), animals 
usually overlooked by other Garou but honored by the 
Stargazers. 

System: The Garou concentrates for one turn and rolls 
Dexterity + Athletics (difficulty 6). 

* Clarity (Level Three) — The Garou is able to see 
through fog, pitch darkness, and even recognize illusions or 
invisibility. This Gift is taught by a Wind-spirit. 

System: The Garou rolls Perception + Enigmas (diffi- 
culty 7). If the Stargazer attempts to see through someone 
else's illusion, the number of successes rolled by the illu- 
sion-creator must be matched or beaten by the Garou. 

* Merciful Blow (Level Three) — The Garou can 
subdue a foe in combat without harming him. This Gift is 
taught by a Mongoose-spirit. 


134 


System: The Garou spends one Gnosis point, attuning 
himself to the body of his foe. If his next blow (hand or 
weapon) strikes and does damage before soak is rolled, the 
Garou may then roll Perception + Medicine (difficulty of 
the opponent’s Wits + Dodge). One or two successes on this 
roll cause the opponent to keel over helpless for the next 
turn; three or more paralyze the foe for the entire scene. 

* Preternatural Awareness (Level Four) — The Garou 
attunes all her senses to her surroundings, thereby becom- 
ing preternaturally aware of her opponent's doings and 
allowing her to anticipate them somewhat. This Gift is 
taught by a Wind-spirit. 

System: The Garou spends one Gnosis point and rolls 
Perception * Dodge (difficulty 7). All opponents' Dice 
Pools to hit the Garou are reduced by a number of dice equal 
to the number of successes. This applies even if the Garou 
cannotsee the attack coming. The effect lastsfor one scene. 

* Ultimate Argument of Logic (Level Four) — As the 
Level Four Theurge Gift. 

* Circular Attack (Level Five) — The Garou can battle 
multiple opponents, not only avoiding their attacks but 
actually channeling them into other foes (or causing a foe 
to strike himself if the Garou is fighting only one foe). This 
Gift is taught by a Wind-spirit. 

System: The Garou spends one Willpower point and 
rolls Wits * Dodge (difficulty of the opponent's Wits * 3, 
or the highest Wits + 3 if facing multiple foes). The Garou 
must be in melee combat, or must be attacked in a firefight 
by two or more foes. Each success enables the Garou to 
avoid and redirect one attack. Example: If the Garou had a 
Wits of 4, a Dodge of 4, and was fighting six foes, each with 
a Wits of 2, the Garou would roll eight dice against a 
difficulty of 5. If he rolled a 6, 10, 1, 9, 2, 5, 7, and 3, he 
would avoid four attackers (the botch cancels one success), 
who would all roll to hit each other or another of the 
Garou's foes. Two of the foes would strike normally, but 
could still be dodged by the Garou. 

* Wisdom of the Seer (Level Five) — By gazing into the 
night sky for an hour, the Stargazer can ask a question and 
have it answered. This Gift is taught by a Chimerling. 

System: The Garou spends one Gnosis point and rolls 
Intelligence * Enigmas (difficulty 7). If successful, the 
Garou can answer any one question (i.e., ask the Story- 
teller). The clarity of the information depends on the 
number of successes, and it is rare to gain a complete and 
straightforward answer. 


Uktena 


The sly and cunning Uktena are masters of magic and 
animal powers. 

* Sense Magic (Level One) — The Garou is able to 
sense Garou rituals and Gifts, the Thaumaturgy of the 
Tremere, the Spheres of the mages, fetishes, and other 
magical phenomena. This Gift senses the presence of magic 
and its general strength; it reveals only basic information 


Werewolf: The Apocalypse 


p/m. am, EN amar n ———————— M 


about the magic itself (i.e., whether it is a mage Sphere or 
vampiric Thaumaturgy, but not the specific type of Sphere). 
This Gift is taught by a spirit servant of Uktena. 

System: The Garou rolls Perception * Enigmas. The 
difficulty is based on the strength and subtlety of the magic. 
The radius is 10 feet per success rolled. 

* Shroud (Level One) — The Garou may create a patch 
of inky black darkness. This Gift is taught by a spirit of 
Night. 


The Garou spends one Gnosis point and rolls 
st a variable difficulty (3 for twilight, 6 for 
indoors, 9 for high noon). For each success, a 10' by 10' area 
of the Garou's choice is covered in pitch-black darkness. 

* Spirit of the Bird (Level Two) — The Garou may 
hover and float in the air. This Gift is taught by any Bird- 
spirit. 


System: The Garou spends one Gnosis point. He may 
move at 20 mph, and the duration is one hour. Maneuver- 
ingrequiresa roll of Dexterity + Occult, and the difficulties 
of all complex actions, such as combat, are increased by 
two. 

* Spirit of the Fish (Level Two) — The Garou can 
breathe underwater and swim as fast as he can run in Hispo 
form. This Gift is taught by any Fish-spirit. 


System: The Garou spends one Gnosis point and rolls 
Stamina * Animal Ken (difficulty 6). The effect lasts for 
one hour per success. 


Chapter Six: Traits 


* Call Flame Spirit (Level Three) — The Garou may 
summon a spirit of fire to perform one task for her. She must 
have a fire source for this Gift, even if it is only a cigarette 
lighter. The fire spirit will ignite flammable objects or hurl 
itself at her foe, blasting it in a great explosion as it departs 
the material world. This Gift is taught by a fire elemental. 

System: The Garou spends one Gnosis point and rolls 
Manipulation * Occult (difficulty 8). The spirit's explo- 
sion inflicts three dice of aggravated fire damage. A botch 
on the summoning roll calls a hostile spirit... 

* Invisibility (Level Three) — This Gift makes the 
Garou invisible tosight and difficult to hear or smell. When 
employing this Gift, the Garou must concentrate on its use 
at all times; the Garou may not move any faster than half 
speed, nor may he do anything that would distract her. This 
Gift is taught by a spirit servant of Uktena. 

System: The Garou concentrates for a turn and spends 
a Gnosis point. He then rolls Intelligence + Occult against 
adifficulty set by the Storyteller (based on conditions). The 
number of successes must be recorded; anyone who at- 
tempts tosee through the invisibility must roll more successes 
on a Perception + Alertness roll than the Garou rolled 
when invoking this Gift. 

* Call Elemental (Level Four) — The Garou is able to 
call one of the four classical elementals (air, earth, water, 
fire) of his choice to him (see Elementals, pp. 266-276). 
This Gift is taught by any one of the elementals. 


135 


System: The Garou spends one Gnosis point and rolls 
Gnosis (difficulty of the area's Gauntlet) to summon the 
elemental. He must then roll Manipulation * Occult (dif- 
ficulty 7) to cause the elemental to look favorably upon 
him. Atthe end of the scene, the elemental will return from 
whence it came. 

* Hand of the Earth Lords (Level Four) — The Garou 
can telekinetically move substances weighing up to 500 lbs. 
This Gift is taught by an earth elemental and an air 
elemental. 

System: The Garou spends one Gnosis point and rolls 
Dexterity * Occult (difficulty 6). The effect lasts for one 
turn per success. 

* Fabric of the Mind (Level Five) — As the Level Five 
Galliard Gift. 

* Fetish Doll (Level Five) — The Garou may harm a 
victim from afar by mutilating a doll he constructs in the 
victim's image. He must have a part or article from the 
being against whom he plans to employ this Gift. He must 
then construct a mannequin in the shape of the victim. 
This Gift is taught by a strange Umbral spirit. 

System: The Garou spends a week and rolls Perception 
* Repair (difficulty 8) to construct the doll. To harm the 
victim, the Garou rolls Intelligence + Medicine (difficulty 
of the victim's Willpower). Each success inflicts one die of 
aggravated damage, up to a maximum of 10 — beyond 10, 
the doll is so mutilated that further damage is impossible. 


Each failure on the roll subtracts one from the 10 possible 
dice, and a botch destroys the doll without harming the 
victim. 


Wendigo 


The bitter Wendigo fight to save their dwindling lands 
from human and Garou encroachment. Their Gifts are 
powers from the frozen north and their totem. 

* Call the Breeze (Level One) — The Garou may 
summon a strong (20 mph), chill breeze and direct it at 
whim. The breeze will disperse clouds of vapors or insects, 
and will chill anyone not prepared for the cold. This Gift is 
taught by a spirit servant of Wendigo. 

System: The Garou may call this breeze merely by 
whistling. Anyone relying at all on hearing will have one 
fewer die on any Perception roll related to that sense. 

* Camouflage (Level One) — When in the wilderness, 
the Garou is extremely hard to see, for she can blend into 
the woods. This Gift is taught by a Deer-spirit. 

System: The difficulties of all rolls to spot the Garou are 
increased by three, provided the Garou is in the wilderness. 

* Cutting Wind (Level Two) — The Garou may 
summon a painfully bitter blast of wind, which he may 
direct at foes. This Gift is taught by a spirit servant of 
Wendigo. 

System: The Garou spends one Willpower point. To 
direct the wind in combat, he rolls Dexterity * Occult 
(difficulty 6). Anyone hit by the wind loses two dice from 
all actions taken that turn, and has one fewer die on the 
next turn. The wind might also knock foes off ledges, into 
pits, etc. The wind lasts for the scene. The range is calcu- 
lated according to the modifiers for firearms. The medium 
range is 20 yards; the Garou receives no modifier at this 
range. Twice this range (40 yards) is the farthest the wind 
can be directed. The difficulty is increased by one. On the 
other hand, attacks made at targets within a yard of the 
Garou are considered "point-blank" (difficulty 4). 

* Speak with the Wind-Spirits (Level Two) — The 
Garou can understand and speak with Wind-spirits. In 
addition, he may ask one question of the aerial spirits that 
ride the winds ofthe world (their attention span is too short 
for anything more). The question must have something to 
do with the nearby area (they quickly forget what they see). 
This Gift is, of course, taught by any aerial spirit. 

System: The Garou does not need to spend points or roll 
to understand or speak with Wind-spirits. To ask a ques- 
tion, however, the Garou must spend one Gnosis point and 
roll Manipulation * Expression (difficulty 7). The number 
of successes indicates the accuracy of the information; on a 
botch, the spirits lie. 

* Chill of Early Frost (Level Three) — The Garou 
invokes the spirits of winter in a great ritual, summoning 
biting winds that whistle and shriek through the area. The 
chill is as much mystical as it is physical, sent from the 
domain of great Wendigo himself. 


System: The Garou chants for an hour and spends one 
Gnosis point. She then rolls Intelligence * Occult against 
a difficulty depending on the temperature (4 if it is already 
winter, 6 on a 70? F spring day, 9 in the midst of a summer 
heat wave). Success drops the temperature in a five-mile 
radius to below freezing (or even subzero if it was already 
winter). Anyone without a natural fur coating (humans, 
Kindred, Garou in Homid or Glabro form) subtract two 
fromall Dice Pools. The effects last for one hour per success. 

* Sky Running (Level Three) — The Garou gains the 
ability to run at 50 mph through the skies. The Garou must 
continually remain in motion, or he falls. The Garou leaves 
a track of fire in the sky as he runs. This Gift is taught by a 
spirit servant of Wendigo. 

System: The Garou concentrates for one turn and 
spends one Willpower point. The Gift lasts for four hours 
and may be replenished by further Willpower expenditure. 

Attunement (Level Four) — As the Level Four Silent 
Strider Gift. 

* Call the Cannibal Spirit (Level Four) — The Garou 
must chant and dance for a full hour under the night sky to 
invoke this Gift. If the summons is successful, a Wendigo 
avatar (see The Wendigo, pg. 265) will answer the summons. 
Theavatar will track downa victim of the Garou's choosing 
(the Garou must have an article or part of the victim) to eat 
his heart. 

System: The Garou spends one Gnosis point and one 
Rage point. She then rolls Charisma + Occult (difficulty 
8). If the roll botches, or the Wendigo avatar is thwarted in 
its mission, it will return to kill the summoner. 

* Invoke the Spirits of the Storm (Level Five) — The 
Garou may summon just about any weather effects he 
desires: a blizzard, a monsoon, a tornado, a thunderstorm, a 
pea-soup fog, whatever. This Gift is taught by a spirit 
servant of Wendigo. 

System: The Garou spends one Gnosis point and rolls 
Willpower against a variable difficulty (determined by the 
Storyteller based on the nature of the effect and the 
difference between it and the prevailing climate). The 
effects cover a 10-mile area per success rolled; if a thunder- 
storm is called, each additional Gnosis point spent enables 
the Garou to call down a lightning bolt or tornado on his 
enemies (Dexterity + Occult to hit; 10 dice normal dam- 
age). 

* Heart of Ice (Level Five) — The Garou must know 
the name of the being to be affected by this power, and must 
whisper it to the vengeful winds. Subsequently, the victim's 
heart or other internal organs begin turning to ice, gripped 
by the curse of Wendigo. This Gift is taught by a spirit 
servant of Wendigo. 


System: The Garou spends one Gnosis point and rolls 
Wits + Occult (difficulty of the target’s Stamina + 4); each 
success causes one automatic Health Level of damage, 
accumulating at one per turn until the number of Health 
Levels lost equals the number of successes. This damage is 


Chapter Six: Traits 


ES S R: ——— 7a 


u nf SL INT ABA BHL Y at 


aggravated and may not be soaked. Vampires affected by 
this power have their blood coagulate, losing five Blood 
Points per success; if this reduces them to zero, they enter 
torpor. 


Rites 


There in the midst of it so alive and alone 

Words support like bone. 

— Peter Gabriel, “Mercy Street” 

Rites are the outward forms of the Garou's rituals and 
celebrations. Rites form and reinforce the spiritual and 
social ties binding the Garou to each other and to Gaia 
herself. The common bond formed by rites resonates in the 
souls of all Garou. Many Theurges and most Stargazers 
maintain that without the continuous practice of such 
rites, the Garou would lose their ties to Gaia Herself. In so 
doing, the Theurges and Stargazers warn, the Garou may 
become something less than their true selves, perhaps even 
devolving into simple wolves and humans instead of Gaia’s 
chosen. 

Through rites, Garou weave the social, emotional and 
religious fabric connecting Garou to Garou, pack to pack, 
and tribe to tribe. When Silver Fang meets Black Fury or 
Stargazer meets Glass Walker, the rites of their ancestors 
allow common ground where all know how to tread. Many 
a meeting between Garou of differing tribes and packs 
been saved from devolving into mere dominance games or 
worse by the use of a Rite of Contrition to ease communi- 
cation. 

Rites also allow tribes and packs the freedom to define 
themselves and to develop their unique roles in Gaia’s 
defense. Tribes, and many individual septs, have their own 
rites and their own versions of common rites. The raucous, 
howling debauchery of the Fianna’s Rite of Spirit Awaken- 
ing has little external similarity to the Shadow Lords’ dark 
and brooding rite of the same name. Yet the essence and 
purpose of the two rites are the same. _ 


Types of Rites 


As stated above, rites have both religious and magical 
connotations, and serve both social and mystical purposes. 
Most rites can be enacted in either the Umbra or the 
mundane world. Rites may be grouped into categories 
defined by the purpose each type of rite serves for the Garou 
and for Gaia. The most common types are: Accord, Caern, 
Death, Mystic, Punishment, Renown, Seasonal and Minor 
Rites. Unless an individual rite states differently, all basic 
requirements given for that type must be fulfilled in order 
to perform a rite successfully. 


Description and requirements for each type are listed 
below, along with common rites of that type. 

A Garouis free to learn any type of rite so long asshe can 
find someone to teach it to her. However, auspice usually 


137 


determines the rites a Garou is expected to learn (see 
Auspice Roles, below). 


Enacting a Rite 


Rites 
known as the ritemaster, though certain Minor Rites and 
Mystic Rites may be conducted by a solitary Garou. Most 
rites require the presence of at least three Garou. 


re generally group affairs led by an individual 


Rites usually require great concentration and skill on the 
part of the celebrant. A rite takes 10 minutes per level to 
cast, while Minor Rites take from two to five minutes to 
enact. Rites almost always require some form of trinket or 
special material. The general requirements for particular 
categories of rites are detailed above. 

It is the responsibility of the ritemaster to ensure that all 
the requirements of the rite are met and that all Garou 
present participate fully in the rite. The ritemaster must 
then roll to determine the success of the rite. The exact 
nature and difficulty of the roll vary with each rite. Story- 
tellers may decrease the difficulty of a roll if the ritemaster 
and participating Garou perform (roleplay) the rite par- 
ticularly well. 

For every five Garou beyond the base number required 
who are present and contributing Gnosis at the rite (in 
addition to the ritemaster), the difficulty level of the rite 
decreases by one. 


138 Werewolf: The Apocalypse 


p mem cr mr Rr Sr IY | 


OTA 


ve 


Some rites require the expenditure of Gnosis, although 
many do not. Unlike Gifts, rites are considered to be a 
natural way of affecting the natural order. Garou believe 
that if a rite is performed properly, the effect will naturally 
occur, just as with any scientific theory of cause and effect. 
If you drop a rock, it will fall; it you correctly perform a rite 
as it was handed down to you by your ancestor's ancestors, 
then the desired effect will occur. However, some rite: 
require Gnosis; these rites are particularly powerful breaches 
of the natural order. 


Learning a Rite 


The tribal elders who teach rites were themselves taught 
by their elders, who were taught by their elders, and so on 
back through the ages. In order to gain the knowledge (and 
tacit permission) to perform a rite, a young Garou must 
approach an elder who possesses such knowledge. In the 
vast majority of cases, the elder will demand payment (in 
the form of talens) from the young whelp in question; the 
number of talens required varies with the amount of teach- 
ing needed (level of the rite) and the elder's opinion of the 
cub (comparative Rank and roleplaying). Elders will often 
allow the young Garou to do a favor instead of, or in 
addition to, donating talens. Such favors may range from 
providing the elder with fresh rabbit meat and cavi 
three full moons to tracking down an old enemy of the 
elder’s and tearing out his throat. In any event, the favor 


lo 


r for 


asked is normally proportionate to the power and impor- 
tance of the rite the young Garou wishes to master. 

Learningarite isan extendedaction. A Garou must have 
aRituals Knowledge at least equal to the levelofthe riteshe 
wishes to learn, and must spend time — at least one week 
per level of the rite she wishes to learn (three days for Minor 
Rites) — with the elder who knows the rite. The Garou 
must roll Intelligence + Rituals (difficulty of 10 minus 
Intelligence). The number of successes required equals the 
level of the rite. One roll may be made per period of 
teaching (one week for a Level One rite, three weeks for a 
Level Three rite, etc.). If the student fails a roll, she must 
spend a Willpower point to continue her studies. If she 
botches a roll, she is not yet ready to learn the knowledge 
she seeks; she must wait at least three turnings of the moon, 
or until she has more life experience, to try again. 

A character can begin the game with knowledge of rites 
by purchasing the Rites Background. Subsequently, how- 
ever, rites can be learned only through roleplaying; they 
may not be purchased with experience points. 

Unlearned Rites: A character can attempt to enact a 
rite in which he has previously taken part, but which he 
does not know. Needless to say, he has little chance of 
success. The difficulty is three higher than normal, and he 
must spend double the amount of Gnosis points (if any are 
required). In addition, elder Garou often see such an 
attempt as impertinent or even sacrilegious. Attempting an 
unlearned rite in the presence of an elder may decrease the 
Garou's Honor or Wisdom in the eyes of his tribe. 


Auspice Roles 


Not all Garou have a natural affinity for leading the 
Great Rites. Many are content to know some Minor Rites 
anda smattering of rites most significant in their own eyes. 
In fact, Garou traditionally view werewolves born under 
certain auspices as the rightful ritemasters of the tribes. In 
particular, Theurges and Philodox are groomed for such 
positions from the time they first enter the sept as adoles- 
cent cubs. It is almost unheard of for a Garou of either 
auspice not to have at least some skill in the enactment of 
rites. In general, Theurges tend to learn Mystic Rites, 
Seasonal Rites, and Caern Rites, while Philodox tradition- 
ally learn Rites of Accord and Rites of Punishment. 

This is not to say that Garou of all auspices do not learn 
rites, or occasionally lead rites. Galliards are likely to lead 
Rites of Death and Renown. Ragabash and Ahroun may 
also learn and enact rites, although the sept is unlikely to 
encourage such behavior unless there is a particular reason 
for such a Garou to lead a rite. For example, an Ahroun 
might lead his war party in a Rite of Wounding after a cub's 
first battle. It is wise to remember that individual packs are 
often (but not always) more flexible when interpreting 
such traditions, being more concerned with which packmate 
will best carry out a rite than with following every musty old 
tradition. Any Garou can learn a Mystic Rite, regardless of 
auspice. 


Chapter Six: Traits 


a //. 


Rites Chart 


Roll Difficulty 
Cha + Rituals 7 

varies (max. Gnosis) 7 

Cha + Rituals 8 - Rank 
Wits + Rituals 

Cha + Rituals 

Cha + Rituals 

Sta + Rituals 


Type 
Accord 
Caern 


Death 


Mystic 
Punishment 


Renown 
Seasonal 


Minor Rites 


Rites of Accord 


Rites of Accord restore a place or particular Garou to 
harmony and balance with Gaia. These rites purify and 
renew by bringing the object of the rite through a symbolic 
rebirth from Gaia's womb. 

System: Any Garou attempting to perform a Rite of 
Accord must possess a talen, a fetish, or some piece of Gaia 
never touched by minions of the Wyrm or by human hands 
(for example, a willow branch from a remote forest or a 
stone from a protected caern). The ritemaster makes a 
Charisma + Rituals roll (difficulty 7 unless otherwise stated). 


ite of Cleansing 


Level One 

This rite purifies a person, place or object, allowing it to 
be used without fear of contamination by the Wyrm. To 
perform this rite the Garou must inscribe a circle on the 
earth, walking widdershins (counterclockwise) around the 
afflicted person(s) or object(s) while holding a smoldering 
branch or torch. She must use a branch (preferably willow 
or birch) dipped in pure water or snow to asperge the object 
or person cleansed. As this is done, all Garou present 
release an eerie, otherworldly howl inan attempt to “frighten 
away” and thus banish the corrupting influence. Ideally, 
this rite is performed at dawn, but it can be performed at any 
time. 


none 


System: This rite can be cast upon more than one person 
or object, but the leader must spend one Gnosis point on 
each extra thing or person in need of cleansing. The 
difficulty level equals the Gnosis of the spirit that inflicted 
the contagion (maximum of 10). Only one success is 
required. Ifthe rite is performed at dawn, the difficulty level 
of the rite is reduced by one. Note that this rite cannot heal 
wounds or damage caused by contamination (see the Fianna 
Gift: Resist Toxin, pg. 127); it only removes any existing 
contamination. 


Rite of Contrition 


Level One 

This rite is a form of apology; it is often used to prevent 
the enmity of spirits or Garou whom an individual has 
annoyed, or to prevent war between septs or tribes. The rite 
most often involves the enactor dropping to her belly and 
sliding forward. The Garou may also whine and lick his 
paws or hands. If performed well, however, a simple incli- 
nation of the head may suffice. To enact this rite successfully, 
the Garou must either give a small gift to the offended 
individual or, in the case of a spirit, possess some aspect of 
the spirit in question (for example, a clay falcon if the 
Garou is appealing to the totem spirit Falcon). 

System: The difficulty level of the rite equals the Rage 
of the target spirit or Garou (maximum of 10). One success 
is considered enough for a gracious apology, but may not be 
enough to mend friendships or forgive grevious errors. The 
more successes, the greater the wrong that can be forgiven. 
Garou who refuse to recognize a Rite of Contrition are 
looked upon badly by elders; most spirits will always accept 
a well-performed rite. This effect lasts until the Garou 
performs an action that could harm or insult the other. 


Rite of Renunciation 


Level Two 

In this rare rite, a Garou rejects the auspice under which 
he was born and chooses a new auspice. The rite must be 
performed during the phase of the moon the Garou wishes 
to embrace. Water from a silver basin exposed to Luna's 
radiance is poured over the naked Garou, washing him 
clean of all he once was, including all Rank. He is now free 
to start anew as a member of his adopted auspice. Well, 
almost free — many Garou view such a “Shifting Moon” 
with suspicion. The Shadow Lords and Silver Fangs in 
particular see this rite as a grave insult to Luna and are 
loathe to trust those Garou who cannot bear the weight of 
their assigned burdens. 

System: A Garou who changes auspices must start anew 
at Rank One. Although the Garou may keep any Gifts 
already learned, he may never learn new Gifts from his old 
auspice. However, Gifts of his adopted auspice are now 
available to him. Sometimes this rite is performed for 
purposes other than shifting auspice, such as when a Garou 
wishes to give up his name and start over in Garou society. 
(See Renunciation, pp. 195-196.) 


Caern Rites 


These rites are of vital importance to Gaia, for they aid 
in the opening, protection, and renewal of the sacred spaces 
dedicated to Gaia. Without such rites, the mystical flow of 
Gaia’s spiritual nourishment might cease, and her children, 
the Garou, might no longer rest themselves within her 
protecting bosom. Without such renewal, even the strong 
hearts of the Garou would grow weary of battle. 


140 Werewolf: The Apocalypse 


fA LAN UR, REPAIR UE RR ER —————— P 


System: A Garou can only perform Caern Rites while 
within a caern. The Dice Pool required varies with each 
particular rite, but the maximum number of dice used 
cannot exceed the ritemaster's Gnosis. Unless otherwise 
stated, the difficulty of such a roll is 7. 


Moot Rite 

Level One 

This rite is required to open any sort of moot. At such 
moots, the caerns of the Garou are recharged with Gnosis. 
The rite always includes a prolonged howl led by a Garou 
known as the Master of the Howl. The howl varies by tribe 
and sept, but always expresses the unique nature of the sept. 
All Garou involved must form a circle within the caern 
itself before they commence howling. There are numerous 
variations on the basic requirements — the Red Talons 
often bite their own paws and scratch their blood into the 
earth, while the Uktena pass their most powerful fetish 
from one to another as each in turn adds her voice to the 
howl — but the howl must always echo forth and the 
eternal circle form. 

System: The rite must be performed at least once per 
month to keep a caern consecrated. During the course of a 
moot, the participants must empower the caern with five 
Gnosis points per caern level in order to replenish it fully. 


Rite of the Opened Caern 


Level One 

Caernsare highly spiritual places and are sacred to those 
who create them. Each caern has a specific power associ- 
ated with it, generally ofa beneficial nature. Thus, there are 
caerns of Rage, caerns of Gnosis, Strength, Enigmas, etc. If 
acharacter is knowledgeable enough, she may be able to tap 
into the caern's power and use it herself. This is commonly 
called “opening” a caern. Opening a caern should not be 
attempted lightly. Caerns do not easily give up their ener- 
gies, and failure to harness such power properly can result 
in serious damage to the Garou. 

Each caern has its own requirements of the ritemaster. 
The ritemaster must prove herself worthy of the caern's 
energies. In order to open a caern of Enigmas, a Garou 
might walk a spiral path while calling out the Greek myth 
of Persephone, while to open a caern of Rage, the Garou 
might transform into Crinos and chant forth the litany of 
his ancestors who have fallen to the Wyrm. The key is 
forging a connection to the particular spirit of the caern. 


System: To open a caern, a character engages in a resisted, 
extended success test of Wits + Rituals (difficulty 7). The 
number of successes needed equals the caern's level. 

The character is opposed by the caern spirit. The caern 
spirit uses its caern level as a Dice Pool. Its difficulty equals 
the character's Gnosis, while the number of successes 
needed equals the character's Willpower. The first one to 
garner the necessary number of successes wins. 


If the character wins the test, she can add the caern's 
rating to her Dice Pool when performing actions appropri- 
ate to that caern's focus. If she loses, however, she takes 
wounds equal to the number of successes by which the 
caern beat her. A botch indicates the wounds are aggra- 
vated. These physical and spiritual wounds are the results 
of a backlash of spiritual energy. 

See the Caerns Chart (pg. 170) for a list of caern types, 
their powers and the spirits that can often be encountered 
near them. 


The Badger's Burrow 


Level Four 

The guardians (sept members) of the caerns become so 
connected to their bawn that they can sense all that goes on 
within its boundaries. The ritemaster enacting this rite 
gazes intently into a bowl of water, pool of ink, mirror or 
some such. At the same time, the Garou pours a small 
amount of witch hazel or other strongly scented astringent 
(such as urine) on the ground in front of her. Any other 
Garou watching or participating encircle the ritemaster 
and growl softly in the backs of their throats. Some of the 
younger Garou (Glass Walkers and Wendigo in particular) 
enhance the ritual through the use of mild psychotropic 
drugs, although many Garou frown upon this practice. 

System: The celebrant must make a successful Percep- 
tion * Rituals roll against the difficulty level below. Each 
success enables the ritemaster (often the Caern Warder) to 
ask one question regarding a defined area. The difficulty 
varies with the size of the area (see below). Failure indicates 
that the Garou sees nothing, while a botch means the 
Garou sees what she desires to see, regardless of the truth. 


Area Difficulty 
Small Room 5 
Ballroom 


6 
House 7 
Acre of Land 8 
Small Forest 9 


Rite of the Opened Bridge 


Level Four 

This rite creates a Moon Bridge, a shimmering portal 
serving as a mystical means of transportation between two 
caerns. Such Moon Bridges are vital links between the sacred 
spaces of Gaia. Once per year a caern must renew its connec- 
tion with other caerns to which it wishes to maintain Moon 
Bridges. This rite is always held during a moot and must be 
enacted simultaneously by both participating caerns. 

The primary requirement to open a Moon Bridge is a 
Moongem, or Pathstone as it is most often called. Pathstones 
are found in the Umbra and are often the objects of quests. 
These extraordinarily rare stones resemble flat pearls with the 
imprint of a wolfs paw on one side. It is possible to steal a 
Pathstone from a caern, but such a theft is considered blasphe- 
mous and may well result in war between two Garou septs. 


Chapter Six: Traits 


The rite establishes (orreestablishes) aspiritual connection 
between the Pathstone of one caern and the Pathstone of a 
second caern by way of the two caerns' totem spirits. At the 
rite's culmination, a Moon Bridge opens between the two 
participating caerns. During this time Garou from both septs 
can travel between the caerns to join in a wild revel. Moon 
Bridges allow Garou to traverse distances in 1/1000th the 
normal time required. This rite must be renewed once every 13 
moons (roughly a year). 

System: This rite is very potent. Characters may occa- 
sionally perform this rite, but more often Storyteller-run 
mystics will enact the ritual, although the characters will 
often help in some way. 

The roll is Wits * Enigmas (difficulty 8 minus the level 
of the ritemaster's own caern). The ritemaster may spend 
Willpower on the roll. If her pack totem is the same as the 
totem of the caern, she receives a bonus of three dice to the 
roll. If the rite was previously unsuccessful, the difficulty 
level ofthe rite is increased by one. The ritemaster needs to 
obtain a number of successes equal to the target caern's 
level to complete the rite. 

If the rite succeeds, the Moon Bridge opens immediately 
andthespirit-bond between the two Pathstones is established. 
Moon Bridges may now be opened at any time between the 
two caerns. The Bridges may be opened with the Rite of the 
Opened Caern (see above) or the Ragabash Gift: Open Moon 
Bridge (if performed at the caern). If the rite fails, no Moon 
Bridge opens, and the rite must be tried again next year. Moon 


141 


Bridges to the caern may still be opened, but they are notassafe 
as they might be... 

Iftherite botches, no Moon Bridge opens, and the Pathstone 
in the caern is scorched by the badly handled energies. 
Botching this rite often leads to another rite — the Rite of 
Ostracism, performed against the offending Garou. 

See the Caerns Chart (pg. 170) for Moon Bridge dis- 


tances. 


Rite of the Shrouded Glen 


Level Four 

This rite causes an area within the Umbra to become 
invisible, so that it cannot be seen from any other area of 
the Umbra. There must always be at least five participants 
in this ritual, and a ritual fast lasting at least three days is 
required to purify the participating Garou. The Uktena, 
who are particularly adept at this rite, maintain that all 
participants must come to the rite with their bodies clad 
only in painted symbols representing earth, air, water, fire, 
and (for the ritemaster) the spirit world. 

System: The difficulty of this roll is the caern’s Gauntlet + 
4, Any participating Garou can contribute Gnosis to this rite. 
Ten Gnosis points must be spent to make the effect perma- 
nent. Otherwise, the number of successes achieved equals the 
number of hours the Umbral Glen remains hidden. If the area 
the Garou attempt to hide is larger than the caern itself, the 
amount of Gnosis required increases by two for each one-mile 
radius the participants attempt to enshroud. 


ite of Caern Building 


Level Five 

This powerful rite creates a caern, a permanent area 
where the spirit world and the physical world touch. Simply 
reciting the rite draws the attention of the Wyrm's servi- 
tors, and actually performing the rite has been known to 
prove fatal. Only the most powerful and wise mystics dare 
lead such an undertaking. 

A powerful Theurge is almost always selected to perform 
this most sacred of rites. Many Garou must channel their 
energy through a powerful leader to have even a hope of 
success. Whole packs have been known to die in agony 
should the attempt fail. 

Once the physical focus for the heart of the caern is 
chosen, the area must be cleansed of all taint in preparation 
for its transformation. All Garou participating in the rite 
must undergo a Rite of Cleansing. The ritemaster performs 
a series of minor rituals, meditation, and other physical 
preliminaries to prepare for her awesome task. 

Sentries must be posted (very often the players' charac- 
ters), for servants of the Wyrm almost invariably attempt to 
disrupt such a great rite. Only the mightiest warriors are 
chosen for such an assignment, and their protection is 
critical to the success of the rite. The leader of the rite is 
helpless while he chants a long litany of verses designed to 
draw a great spirit into the prepared caern. Although it is 


142 Werewolf: The Apocalypse 


JI UR, Ps AT ET ER ee 


possible to create a specific type of caern, most leaders leave 
this to Gaia and accept whatever caern she grants the sept. 

Because an enormous amount of Gnosis is needed to create a 
newcaem, aminimum of 13 Garou, one foreach moon of the year, 
must participate in this rite. Regardless of the number of Garou 
aiding her, the ritemastercan only channel such a powerful stream 
of Gnosis through her system once per hour. The rite must be 
performed at night. This means that in most places and at most 
times of the year, the ritemaster has only eight rolls (one per hour) 
to accomplish her task. This makes success fairly unlikely. If, 
indeed, the rite does fail, all involved suffer five wounds. These are 
not aggravated, but are very painful and always leave small 
teardrop-shaped scarsscattered across the Garou's body. Such scars 
areconsidered marksofbravery, and these “Tears ofGaia” are often 
highlighted by tattoos or paintand worn with pride by the Garou. 
The Garou say the scars are the result of Gaia crying out for her 
children’s pain. 

Time: The rite must be performed between the hours of 
sunset and sunrise during the waxing of the moon. Only the 
Black Spiral Dancers create caerns during the moon's 
waning. 

System: The rite requires an extended roll of Wits + 
Rituals, though the leader may only use as many dice as she 
has Gnosis. The difficulty is always 8, and 40 successes are 
needed. Only one roll can be attempted per hour of the 
ritual. 

Once the leader scores the required number of successes, 
all those involved in the rite must contribute Gnosis points 
— 100 are needed. If the total Gnosis available is not 100, 
all those participating in the rite begin to suffer aggravated 
wounds. Each wound counts as three more Gnosis points 
toward the total. 

Botches during this rite are particularly deadly. All 
characters involved suffer seven Health Levels of damage, 
which means that even a Garou previously at full health 
becomes Incapacitated. Those Garou reduced to below 
Incapacitated must roll on the Battle Scars table, adding 
one die to the roll. 

Ifthe minimum number of successes is rolled (40), the caern 
isranked Level One. The Gauntlet of such an area is 4, and the 
spirits bound into the caern will grant powers approximately 
equal to Level One Gifts. Every five additional successes raises 
the level of the caern by one, correspondingly raising the 
magnitude of the powers the caern grants. At Level Three the 
Gauntlet of the area is 3, while at Level Five it is but 2. 
Immediately upon the rite’s successful completion, the 
ritemaster must sacrifice anumber of permanent Gnosis points 
equal to the level of the caern. 

Ifa player's character should somehow assume the role of 
ritemaster and succeed, she receives three points of Glory, 
five points of Honor and seven points of Wisdom. Anyone 
else participating in the rite receives five points of Glory 
and three points of Honor. This is a legendary task and 
should be suitably rewarded. 


zi uL 


EN. 


m SN N 
Rites of (Death 


Garou perform Rites of Death both to honor the de- 
parted and to reaffirm their connection to the cycle of life, 
death, and rebirth. In facing and acknowledging death as a 
necessary part of the dance of life, the pack and sept releas 
themselves from the debilitating poisons of grief and fear. 

System: The ritemaster must make a Charisma * Rituals 
roll (difficulty 8 minus the Rank of the honored Garou). 


Gathering for the (Departed 


Level One 

This is a rite for the newly dead. It is most often 
performed by either a Galliard or a packmate of the de- 
parted Garou. This rite varies dramatically from tribe to 
tribe. For example, a Fianna ritemaster leads the sept in the 
telling of tales, both raucous and heroic, about the fallen 
Garou. In contrast stands the Wendigo's solemn rite, in 
which the ritemaster and all the fallen one's packmates 
stand on the highest peak available, tails to the wind, and 
howl out their pride and grief to speed their companion 
onward to her next life. What matters is not the exact form 
the rite takes, but the acknowledgment itself. 


System: The ritemaster leads the release of the Garou's 
combined emotions into the spirit world. Such emotions 
are said by the Uktena to have a real impact upon the 
Umbra and may help to ensure that the departed Garou 


ur LI aD VP FERA AULA CUR namen pr 


remembers something of her previous lifetime (i.e., the 
character'snext incarnation has the Past Life Background). 


Rite of the Winter Wolf 


Level Three 

This solemn and bleak rite is performed by a Garou who 
is too wounded or aged to fight with his tribe. The Garou, 
upon announcing that he will undergo this rite, sits at the 
center of a gathering of his pack- and septmates. This 
meeting is an onerous, solemn affair during which the 
Moon Dancerssing hymns of the celebrant's life and deeds, 
and invoke the spirits for glory in the next world or life. The 
celebrant then slowly and proudly walks through the closed 
ranks of the tribe. As he passes his people, they begin 
howling a dirge similar to that sung during the Gathering 
for the Departed. Some Garou beat heavy drums or play 
mournful pipes as the celebrant drags himself to a secluded 
site where he ends his life, usually with a silver klaive. 

Immediately after the suicide, the Gathering for the 
Departed is performed. This rite is most often performed by 
members of the Red Talons and Get of Fenris; it is almost 
unheard of among the Children of Gaia. 


System: This rite is always performed at night and 
requires that at least three other Garou be present to 
acknowledge the solemn event. The weapon used by the 
Garou must be silver, although it need not be a klaive. 


Mystic Rites 


Mystic Rites bring the Garou into direct contact with 
the Umbra and/or spirit-beings. Unlike most other rites, 
these rites are most often performed by a lone Garou. 

System: When performing a Mystic Rite, the ritemaster 
must make a Wits + Rituals roll (difficulty 7 unless other- 
wise stated). 


Baptism of Fire 

Level One 

Most tribes attempt to track down all children born to 
their Kinfolk within one month of the children’s birth to 
see if they “share the blood.” Those who are Garou are 
“baptized” in the light of their auspice moon, beside a rite 
fire. Such a baptism most commonly involves mingling 
ashes with a few drops of Garou blood; the mixture is then 
touched to the child’s ears, nose, eyelids, and tongue. 

In the presence of one of the lesser tribal spirits, known 
as a Kin-Fetch, the babe is then held up to the moonlight 
while the baptizing Garou howls Gaia’s greeting to the 
newborn. The ritemaster then has the Kin-Fetch kiss the 
infant. The spirit’s fiery kiss inscribes a spiritual brand upon 
the babe in the form of the newborn's tribal pictograph. 
This mark is not visible on the newborn’s body; the only 
mark left is spiritual. It is impossible to remove this spiritual 
brand. Such a mark can be traced and recognized by all 
Garou (including the Black Spiral Dancers, who all too 


Chapter Six: Traits 143 


| 


often track down cubs of other tribes and capture them in 
order to create more of their foul number). 

The participating Kin-Fetch spirit is assigned to watch 
over the young Garou as she grows to maturity, so that the 
tribe may always know the child's location and whether she 
isendangered. When the child is about to undergo the First 
Change and is ready for the Rite of Passage, the spirit alerts 
the tribe. Unfortunately, such minor spirits are notoriously 
weak-willed and easily distracted. All too often a Kin-Fetch 
loses track of its charge or becomes lost itself, leaving the 
young cub on her own. Such “lost cubs" often become 
Lunatics or recluses, terrified of themselves and unable to 
understand their powerful primal urges. 

System: The ritemaster makes a Charisma + Rituals roll 
(difficulty 6). Only one success is required, but additional 
successes improve the chance that the Kin-Fetch will keep 
track of the child. This rite must be performed at night 
under the moon in which the child was born. Although this 
rite is normally performed within a month of birth, the 
brand can be inscribed at any time before the cub reaches 
adolescence and undergoes her First Change. 


Rite of Binding 

Level One 

This rite binds a spirit to a Garou, making it his servant. 
The more powerful the spirit, the more difficult the process. 
Although any encountered spirit is subject to binding, the 
Garou generally feel that spirits should be bound only when 
needed; they do not feel good about binding spirits for great 
lengths of time. This point does not go uncontested, how- 
ever, particularly by the mystics of the Uktena tribe. 

Spirits trapped through this rite may be bound into 
temporary service, or into objects to create talens (see 
Fetishes and Talens, pp. 184-185). No spirit willingly allows 
itself to be bound unless it is friendly to the binding 
character's totem. Spirits can be bound into objects, places 
and people, although the Garou generally don't perform 
the last feat unless the need is great. Failing this rite can be 
dangerous, for the spirit is very likely to become hostile and 
attempt to harm the mystic. 

System: A Garou can only attempt this rite in the 
presence of a spirit, and it is usually performed in the 
Umbra. When attempting to bind a spirit, a Garou must 
first spend a number of Gnosis points (minimum one). Each 
point of Gnosis spent reduces the spirit's Gnosis rating by 
one. The Garou must then roll his own Willpower (diffi- 
culty of the spirit’s adjusted Gnosis). The number of successes 
indicates how long the spirit may be forced into service 
(one week per success). In the case of a talen, the spirit is 
bound until the object is used. 

See the Appendix for examples of spirits and a list of 
sample talens. 


Werewolf: The Apocalypse 


[PPO Ps CERATI Ps SEE ER ——À 


Rite of the Questing Stone 
Level One 


This rite allows the Garou to find someone or something. 
The Garou must know the name of the object or individual. 
The difficulty of the rite is reduced if the Garou has some 
piece of the object or person (for example, a clipping of hair 
or piece of cloth). The Garou must dangle a stone or needle 
from a thread while concentrating on the item or person 
sought. Glass Walkers often use maps and substitute a 
compass for the traditional stone and thread. 

System: Standard roll. If the Garou has a piece of the 
item or individual, the difficulty is reduced by one. The rite 
only gives the Garou a sense of the object’s general loca- 
tion, not its exact position. 


Rite of Talisman Dedication 


Level One 

This rite allows a Garou to bind objects to her body, 
allowing these objects to fit the Garou’s various forms 
(jeans will grow to accommodate the size increase of the 
Crinos form, etc.) and accompany the Garou into the 
Umbra. Such talismans are most commonly mundane items, 
for spiritual items such as fetishes and talens automatically 
remain with the Garou in all forms. A Garou most often 
performs this rite during the phase of the moon under 
which he was born. Each auspice has its own peculiar ritual. 

System: The cost is one Gnosis point per object dedi- 
cated, and a Garou may never have more objects bound to 
himself than his Gnosis score. Certain particularly large 
objects (Storyteller’s discretion) are considered more than 
one for the purpose of “cost.” 

The Storyteller and the player should decide what hap- 
pens to the object when the character assumes certain 
forms. For example, when the character assumes Crinos 
form, her backpack’s straps may simply grow to fit around 
her shoulders (although the pack still cannot hold more 
items than normal). When the character is in Hispo form, 
her knife may meld with her body. In such cases, the object 
will appear asa tattoo; others must spend a Willpower point 
to remove the object from the character. 


Rite of Becoming 

Level Two 

This rite is cast only at an Anchorhead domain. It 
enables the Garou to travel into the Deep Umbra. To 
perform this rite, the Garou must make a braid from three 
of her hairs, three pieces of fine copper wire, and three 
tendrils of ivy or other vine. Lengths of silk thread are 
sometimes substituted for the hair or wire. When the braid 
has been constructed, the Garou ties it around his own wrist 
and howls three words of power. The Uktena often drink a 
bitter potion that loosens the Garou’s spirit from the 
Tellurian, while the Black Furies always perform this ritual 
in threesomes, never traveling the Deep Umbra alone. 


un LR 


System: If the braid is destroyed while the Garou is in the 
Deep Umbra, the Garou takes one Health Level of damage 
and risks becoming lost forever if he does not immediately 
return to the Near Umbra. 


Rite of Spirit Awakening 

Level Two 

This rite isused toawakenasleeping (inactive) spirit. To 
perform this rite, a Garou must play a rhythm on some form 
of instrument (drums being the most common). While the 
Garou plays, other participating Garou (ifany) pace around 
the ritemaster, howling and growling in counterpoint to 
the beat. 

When performed on a mundane item, this rite enlivens 
the object's spirit, causing it to awaken and appear in the 
Umbra. For example, if the rite is performed on a VW bus, 
any Garou stepping sideways could see the bus as a true part 
of the landscape. However, it would appear as a stationary 
object in the Penumbra unless someone on the physical 
plane began to drive it, in which case it would appear as a 
driverless vehicle to anyone on the Umbra. 

When performed on plants, this rite is known as sancti- 
fication. Plant-spirits are benevolent, and an awakened 
Plant-spirit will lend its powers as though it were a talen 
(one use). Different plants grant different abilities when 
sanctified. Forexample, sanctified foxglove protects against 
faerie magic (adding two to the difficulty of any faerie 
spell). 

System: The ritemaster must play a musical instrument 
orsing a song (talent doesn't matter). The difficulty of the 
roll is the spirit’s Rage. Failure means that the spirit remains 
dormant. The Storyteller must decide whether the spirit is 
hostile or friendly to its awakener. Awakening a spirit does 
not allow any control over it; that requires either a Rite of 
Binding or a Gift. 


Rite of Summoning 

Level Two 

Garou mystics are adept at calling spirits. This ability can 
range from summoning minor Gafflings to invoking totem 
spirits to seeking counsel with Incarna. Summoning spirits 
involves complex rituals, long periods of meditation and 
tribal mantra chanting. Within the spirit world this process 
is far easier. This rite compels spirits to seek those who call 
them; furthermore, once the summoning is successfully 
completed, the spirit cannot escape its caller and must 
attend the mystic. Many spirits, particularly minor ones, 
are too weak to resist a powerful summoning; powerful ones 
come out of curiosity. The chance of a successful summon- 
ing depends upon the skill of the mystic, the power of the 
spirit, and the strength of the area's Gauntlet. 

System: The ritemaster must pierce the Gauntlet just as 
if he were entering the Umbra (Gnosis roll against the 
Gauntlet). A mystic already within the Umbra is not 
required to pierce the Gauntlet. The power level of the 


Chapter Six: Traits 


A 
spirit determines the difficulty level of a successful sum- 
moning. The Storyteller can determine target numbers 
from the chart below: 


Spirit Type Target Number 


Gaffling 4 
Jaggling 5 
Totem avatar 7 
Incarna 8-9 


Celestine Avatar 10 

For each hour the Garou spends invoking the spirit, his 
target number drops by one. No target number may fall 
below 3. The Garou must then make a Gnosis roll and 
achieve as many successes as possible, with the following 
results: 


Successes Effect 
1 Spirit comes eventually and is initially hostile 
2 Spirit manifests quickly, but is still ini- 
tially hostile 
3 Spirit comes immediately and is neutral 
Spirit comes immediately and is passively 
benign 
5 Spirit comes immediately and is friendly 


A botched roll is likely to have disastrous results. Often 
a botch summons the wrong type of spirit in great numbers 
or with great hostility. Botches can quite easily cause a 
swarm of Banes to appear. 


145 


The Storyteller should feel free to adjust the above tables 
as she wishes. In certain cases, a Garou who attempts to 
summon a specific spirit will have no chance of success; at 
other times, he will have almost no chance of failure. The 


Storyteller is advised to treat each use of this rite individu- 
ally and to use common sense in her decisions. 

A Garou who successfully summons an Incarna avatar 
gains two points of Wisdom. 


Gite of the Fetish 


Level Three 

This rite allows a Garou to create a fetish (an object with 
a spirit bound into it). To do this, the Garou must first 
cleanse the potential fetish by placing it under running 
water (even tap water), burying it in pure earth, exposing 
the object to constant breezes or suspending it above flame 
for three consecutive nights. The Garou must then force or 
persuade a spirit to enter the prepared object. The Fianna 
claim that cajoling or flattering a spirit produces the best 
results, while the Bone Gnawers and Silent Striders claim 
that bribery (expending Gnosis) works best. 

System: Roll Wits + Rituals (difficulty 10). Each point 
of permanent Gnosis the Garou spends during the rite 
reduces the difficulty by two. A botch indicates the spirit is 
suddenly released (if the spirit was coerced into participa- 
tion, it will almost assuredly attack). If the Garou is 
attempting to force a spirit into the fetish, she must first 
attack the spirit and reduce it tozero Power before attempt- 


146 


ing to bind it into the fetish. A newly created fetish will not 
work until the bound spirit has recharged its Power (see 
Recharging Power, pg. 184). 


Rite of the Totem 


Level Three 

This rite binds a totem to a group of Garou. It is most 
often performed during the formation ofa pack. During this 
rite, all Garou who wish to bind their destinies to a particu- 
lar totem spirit must coat their eyes with an infusion of 
saliva and mugwort (or another substance holy to Gaia) 
and step sideways into the Umbra. In the spirit Realms, the 
ritemaster leads the Garou in a hunt for the spiritual spoor 
left by a totem spirit. Such evidence varies with the spirit, 
but is always found by Garou worthy of the totem's atten- 
tion. Even tracking down the spirit does not guarantee 
success, for the totem must decide whether the Garou are 
worthy to become its fosterlings. An undecided totem may 
require a quest of the supplicants, though this is almost 
never required if the pack has just successfully completed a 
Rite of Passage. 

System: Characters must purchase the Totem Back- 
ground to benefit from this rite. Otherwise, the rite is 
simply not performed. 


Ounishment (Rites 


Punishment Rites levy the sanction of the tribe or sept 
against a transgressing Garou. Such rites strengthen the 
Garou by clearly establishing the limits of acceptable be- 
havior. By joining in the punishment, each Garou 
strengthens her commitment to the pack over the indi- 
vidual. 

System: Punishment Rites are only performed for major 
transgressions or after less structured punishments fail to 
cause a Garou to mend her ways. The ritemaster must make 
a Charisma + Rituals roll (difficulty 7 unless otherwise 
stated). A failed rite is considered a sign from Gaia that the 
offending Garou’s crimes are not considered significant 
enough to warrant such a punishment. 


Rite of Ostracism 


Level Two 

Thisrite isafairlycommon punishmentfor lesser crimes, 
yet its effects can be devastating during wartime. This rite 
estranges the punished Garou from her tribe, sept, and 
sometimes even pack. The tribe will thereafter treat the 
individual as a nonentity. She is ignored as much as possible 
and forced to fend for herself for even basic needs, although 
no hostile actions are taken against the non-wolf (in theory 
at least, though some Garou have been known to injure 
ostracized Garou "accidentally"). In a life-or-death situa- 
tion, the tribe (friends and packmates in particular) might 


Werewolf: The Apocalypse 


— FR 


aid the offender, but even then only grudgingly. Otherwise 
the punished Garou is ignored utterly. Garou present at this 
rite form a circle (around the chastised Garou if present), 
and each participant calls out (once to Gaia, then to her 
brethren) the name of the offender, followed by the words: 
"of all Gaia's children, I have no such brother/sister.” The 
speaker then turns widdershins to face away from the circle. 
Once all present have spoken, the Garou drift away into the 
night. 

System: This punishment normally lasts from one phase 
of the moon to the next. It can, however, last as long as the 
sept or tribe leaders desire. For serious crimes the punish- 
ment may even be decreed permanent, essentially exiling 
the offender from her tribe. 

The ostracized Garou loses one point of Glory, five 
points of Honor, and one point of Wisdom. 


Stone of Scorn 


Level Two 

The Stone of Scorn isa rock imbued with malicious spirit 
personifications of shame, sorrow, and the like. Some septs 
have a permanent Stone of Scorn to which an offender is 
dragged, although most merely imbue a small stone with 
mocking energies. Starting with the ritemaster, this stone 
is passed to each Garou present at the rite. The scorned 
Garou is forced by his septmates to sit and watch. As each 
Garou receives the stone, he carves or paints a symbol of 
derision, shame, etc. onto it while telling a mocking or 
embarrassing tale about the offending behavior and other 
flaws of the scorned Garou. Moon Dancers are particularly 
creative in their verbal portrayals ofthe miscreant. This rite 
often lasts all night, with successive stories becoming more 
and more outrageous and derogatory. Once the night ends, 
so does the punishment, although the best stories and 
insults are often whispered behind the offender's back for 
some time to come. Such behavior causes the Garou to lose 
Renown for a time. 

System: Standard roll. The punished Garou usually 
loses eight points of Honor and two points of Wisdom until 
he performs an honorable deed, thus removing the taint of 
scorn. 


Uoice of the Jackal 


Level Two 

This rite is performed when a Garou's behavior has 
shamed not just herself, but her entire sept or tribe. When 
the ritemaster performs this rite, he blows a handful of dust. 
or ashes onto the offender and speaks the following: “Be- 
cause thy (cowardice/gluttony/selfishness/etc.) has proved 
thee to be of jackal blood, let thy voice proclaim thy true 
breed!" Asthe dust and words envelop the punished Garou, 
her voice changes. Thereafter, she will speak in an annoy- 
ingly shrill and piercing nasal whine until the ritemaster 
repeals the punishment. 


Chapter Six: Traits 


System: Jackal-hounds, as such punished Garou are 
known, subtract two from all dice used in Social rolls. They 
also lose two points of Glory and five points of Honor. The 
ritemaster can repeal this punishment at any time, al- 
though for particularly serious crimes it may be made 
permanent (and the Renown loss always remains). Certain 
jackal-hounds have redeemed their true voices by complet- 
ing a quest of great benefit to Gaia. 


The Hunt 


Level Three 

The Hunt is called against Garou who have committed 
capital crimes, yet still retain a vestige of honor. Murderers 
(although not treasonous ones) and the like are Hunted. 
All Garou participating in a Hunt streak their bodies with 
ancient symbols in paint or clay. These symbols mark the 
Garou as part of a Hunting Pack, and all other Garou will 
make way for Hunters so marked. It isan honor to be chosen 
for inclusion in a Hunt. The ritemaster, or Master of the 
Hunt, leads the pack. The Hunt is just that; the criminal is 
hunted down and killed by the pack. There is no quarter 
given, although (for what it's worth) death exculpates the 
condemned Garou. Many tragic stories tell of Garou forced 
to choose between violating their word and committing a 
grave crime. Such Garou, so the stories go, chose to honor 
their word and were Hunted, but displayed such valor 
during their last stand that they gained much posthumous 
Renown. 


147 


System: This rite can be roleplayed using the tracking 
rulesgiven in Chapter Nine: Drama; alternatively, it can be 
simulated by rolling the ritemaster's Charisma * Rituals 
(difficulty of the condemned's Rank + 4). Failure means 
that the condemned fought well and is accorded much 
posthumous Glory, while a botch means he eluded his 
Hunters and can live out his life as a ronin. 


Satire Rite 

Level Three 

A more serious version of the Stone of Scorn, a Satire 
Rite is a special song, dance and/or drama crafted by the 
Half Moons and Moon Dancers for the sole purpose of 
ridiculing the offender. This rite is always performed at a 
moot while the offender sits in full view of the sept. Because 
the Garou keep careful oral histories, the Satire will be 
remembered and passed down through the ages. Any Garou 
so "honored" loses much Renown. Children will snicker as 
they sing lewd verses, and adults will forever use some of the 
wittier quotes and embarrassing movements when referring 
to the offender. While such stories are usually confined to 
members of the offender's own tribe, Tricksters and Moon 
Dancers are all too happy to spread the new Satire to any 
Garou they encounter. 

System: The difficulty of this rite is the offender's 
current Rank + 4. If successful, the offender loses one 
permanent Rank level (reduce his Renown to the begin- 
ning amounts for the next lowest Rank). The Garou can 
earn new Renown and Rank normally. If this rite fails, the 
Garou loses no Rank, while a botch causes the ritemaster to 
lose five points of Wisdom as she becomes the object of the 
rite. 


The Rending of the Veil 


Level Four 

Sometimes known as Actaeon’s Folly, this rite is used to 
punish a human who greatly offends the Garou. The offense 
does not have to be against the Garou per se, but may be any 
act against Gaia or her children. This rite drops the Veil, 
forcing a human to see and remember the Garou for the 
duration of an all-night hunt. The ritemaster leaves a small 
bag of burning dung and herbs near the sleeping victim. 
When the victim awakens, the Veil has been burned away 
from his mind. The following hunt may or may not end in 
the human's death. Those humans left alive are often 
rendered insane, their unprepared minds unable to accept 
the truth revealed by the rite. Some few, however, actually 
overcome their fear and heal. 

System: The ritemaster must place the specially pre- 
pared bag of dung and herbs within 10 feet of where the 
victim sleeps. The bag will begin to smolder when the 
ritemaster performs the rite. The ritemaster does not need 
to be near the bag to enact the rite. Failure leaves the Veil 
intact; a botch causes the Garou herself to fall under the 
Delirium for one night. 


148 Werewolf: The Apocalypse 


Oe a aT 


Remember: only the Crinos form causes a Delirium 
reaction, although the Storyteller, in certain circumstances, 
may allow a Glabro or Hispo to instill it. 


Gaia's Vengeful Teeth 


Level Five 

One of the greatest punishments among the Garou, this 
rite is reserved for traitors: those who consort with the 
Wyrm, cowards whose actions (or lack thereof) cause the 
deaths of many others, and the like. The traitor is taken by 
at least five Garou to a spot of hard, cracked earth and 
stones. The ritemaster then stabs a sharpened twig or stone 
into her own hand as she recites the traitor’s sins against 
Gaia. Smearing her blood over the traitor’s eyes, ears, and 
forehead, the ritemaster cries in grief and rage. As the blood 
and tears drip to the hard ground, the rite takes effect. From 
that moment on, whatever of Gaia touches the traitor 
transforms into razor-sharp silver so long as it touches his 
flesh. The traitor is then chased like a dog by Crinos 
hunters. The ground beneath the traitor chews into his 
feet, and his death becomes an agonizing ordeal. The 
offender's name is then stricken from all histories and will 
be spoken only as a curse from that moment forward. 

System: So long as the ritemaster's blood touches the 
traitor's body, the traitor cannot step sideways into the 
Umbra. No one survives this rite. 


Rites of Renown 


These rites celebrate both the specific accomplishments 
of an individual Garou and his achievement of a new 
station in the pack or sept. Garou long to receive such rites 
as much as they fear facing a Rite of Punishment. 

System: When performinga Renown Rite, the ritemaster 
must make a Charisma + Rituals roll (difficulty 6 unless 
otherwise stated). 


Rite of Accomplishment 


Level Two 

This rite is used to honor a Garou and recognize the trials 
he has endured to attain his current standing. An elder will 
call the honored Garou forward, much as the Garou might 
be called forward should the elders want to punish or 
criticize her. As the Garou advances, the elder begins 
listing all of the things the Garou did to gain the new 
Renown. The Rite of Accomplishment then takes place, 
and anyone who wishes to speak on behalf of the Garou 
being honored may do so. In conclusion, the elder says 
something along the lines of, “She is made greater in her 
tribe, her sept, and greater among the People everywhere. 
Let this be known.” 

System: This rite is performed when a Garou has 10 
points of temporary Renown in a category and wishes to 
gain a point of permanent Renown. The difficulty is only 4 
unless someone disputes the rite (see below). The difficulty 
in this instance is raised to 6. Only one success is required. 


— SL 


A failure on the roll is considered indicative of a failing in 
the applicant — the ritemaster will receive a portent from 
Gaia showing the unworthiness of the applicant. If the roll 
botches, the applicant must undergo a penance before 
anyone will again give him the Rite of Accomplishment. 
Such is the injustice of society. 

It is possible, although rare, that someone will try to 
dispute the rite. In this case, the disputer stands and heckles 
the ritemaster as he performs the rite, making bold asser- 
tions about the negative qualities of the applicant. The 
applicant so insulted must make a Rage roll not to frenzy; 
if he frenzies, the rite is over. If he keeps his cool, and the 
rite is successful, then no one can rightfully question his 
worthiness for at least three moons (no one can dispute any 
Rites of Accomplishment performed upon him during the 
next month and a half). 


Rite of Passage 


Level Two 

After a cub undergoes his First Change and becomes 
aware that he is Garou, he must undergo his Rite of Passage. 
Garouare not accorded adulthood or respect until they pass 
this seminal rite; they are mere cubs until that time. This 
rite is a dangerous quest meant to prove the Garou's 
courage, honor and wisdom through harsh trials. However, 
few cubs undergo this rite alone; they are often joined by 
their pack-to-be, other cubs who are also coming of age at 
the same time. This would-be pack is sent out into the 
world with a definite goal to achieve, and forbidden to 
return until it has tried its best to accomplish this goal. 
Different tribes impose different goals. A Wendigo rite 
often takes the form of a visionquest, while the Get send 
their cubs into combat with Wyrm-spawn. Invisible spirits 
sometimes accompany the cubs in order to watch over them 
and report their doings to the elders. 

If the cubs succeed in their quest, a ritemaster performs 
this rite upon them, marking them with a pictogram that 
brands them as full-fledged Garou. These pictograms are 
usually painted, but the Red Talons carve them into the 
flesh of the young heroes. 

If the cubs fail, however, they are considered second- 
classcitizensuntil anotheropportunity to prove themselves 
arises. 


Rite of Wounding 

Level One 

This rite celebrates the first battle wound received by a 
Garou. Each tribe marks this moment differently, but all 
honor this sign of courage. Many tribes rub ash into at least 
part of the wound to form a scar of remembrance. The Get 
of Fenris always end this rite with a fierce all-night revel 
filled with drinking and fighting. By contrast, the Stargaz- 
ers end their Rites of Wounding with long philosophical 
discussions on the nature of bravery and the spiritual 
significance of the Garou’s place and manner of wounding. 


——^—€————^—«-—-—-——-———————————— NN 


System: Only the wounded Garou and the ritemaster 
must be present for this rite, although it is normally per- 
formed in the presence of the Garou's pack and sept. The 
wounded Garou receives two points of Glory if this rite 
succeeds. 


Seasonal 


Seasonal Rites vary from tribe to tribe and place to place. 
Each tribe and sept has its own means of celebrating the 
turning of the seasons. Some septs celebrate only the major 
rites of the solstices and equinoxes; others perform a rite at 
least once per moon. The rites below are performed by all 
Garou tribes. They are the fundamental rites celebrating 
Gaia's constant cycle of life-in-death-in-life. 

These rites renew the Garou's connection to Gaia as the 
Earth Mother. Some Garou even believe that were such 
rites to cease entirely, dire repercussions would result. A 
few of the more mystic (or perhaps just crazier) Garou insist 
that if such rites weren't performed, Gaia herself might find 
nopoint in continuing the cycle, and the world would enter 
a perpetual Fimbulwinter...or worse. 

System: Seasonal Rites must, obviously, occur at the 
exact time of year the particular rite celebrates, and at least 
five Garou must attend. When performing the rite, the 
ritemaster must make a Stamina * Rituals roll (difficulty 8). 
If performed at a caern, the difficulty of the roll is 8 minus 
the caern's level. Thus, a seasonal rite performed at a Level 
Three caern has a difficulty of 5 (8 - 3). 


Rite of the Winter Winds 


Level Two 

The night of the winter solstice is the longest night of the 
year. It is the time of birth pangs as Helios is reborn and the 
days begin to lengthen. Even in the depths of Winter, the 
Garou, children of the moon, ritually celebrate the time of 
life-in-death. Certain Garou believe that if this rite is not 
performed, the nights will continue to lengthen until Gaia 
has fallen into a terrible twilight state of perpetual pain. 
Most modern Garou consider this mere superstition, but 
even such skeptics participate enthusiastically in the rite. 

The Rite of the Winter Winds has many variants. In the 
most common version, the ritemaster gathers the Garou in 
acircle around a small bonfire. She then leads the group in 
an extended howl that begins as a low, rumbling growl and 
eventually rises to an ululating crescendo. When the 
ritemaster feels the tension is at its height, she leaps 
forward, snatches up a burning brand (or in some cases an 
electric lantern) and runs into the woods. The other Garou 
follow her, grabbing branches as they go. Runningas swiftly 
as they can, the Garou make as many frightening and 
strange noises as possible. This rite is performed both to 
encourage Gaia’s labor in giving birth to the sun, and to 
frighten off any minions of the Wyrm that might be lurking 
about, ready to snatch the newborn sun or harm Gaia as she 
turns her attention away from the surface world. 


150 


Werewolf: The Apocalypse 


EE ES R ne 


The ritemaster finally leads the howling pack back to the 
bonfire, where they hurl their branches into the conflagra- 
tion. Once the fire is raging, the Garou celebrate with a 
revel that lasts until dawn, at which time they greet the 
newborn sun with one last, triumphant howl. 


Rite of Reawakening 

Level Two 

This rite takes place at the vernal equinox. The rite 
begins at sundown as the ritemaster leads the gathered 
Garou ona quest into the Umbra. Such a quest is sometimes 
symbolic, but more and more often as the time of the 
Apocalypse draws nigh, the questors seek true danger (or it 
finds them) in the Umbral Realms. 

The quest always involves seven trials. These trials 
represent the seven gates that bar the way to the Under- 
world. Such trials vary dramatically from tribe to tribe, but 
there are always a variety of challenges presented to the 
members. One test might involve facing a Bane in combat, 
while another challenge might consist of finding a fetish 
lost within the Deep Umbra. Each test requires the partici- 
pants to relinquish something of themselves, be ita cherished 
personal fetish, an old grudge, or false pride. If the Garou 
can win their way past these challenge gates, they can 
renew the Earth, banishing the winter-spirits and paving 
the way for the green, growing season. 

At the end of the rite the Garou return to their bodies. 
At this time many tribes seek out Garou Kinfolk, or other 
humans and wolves, and reacquaint themselves with the 
joys of the flesh, celebrating the incredible beauty of life 
and the necessity of its continuation in future generations 
of Garou. Not surprisingly, this is the night when a large 
percentage of metis cubs are conceived. Although such 
couplings are always taboo, the intense drama of the rite 
sometimes overrides such concerns. 


The Great Hunt 


Level Two 

The Garou perform this rite every Midsummer's Eve. 
This is the time of the year when Helios stays longest in the 
sky and is thus at the zenith of his influence. Even as the 
sun’s radiance unveils the protective mysteries of the dark- 
ness, so the Garou revoke all subtleties and allow their 
howls of Rage and power to fill the world. On this one day 
and night, the creatures of the Wyrm find it immensely 
difficult to hide from Gaia's warriors. 

Exactly at midnight, just as Midsummer begins, the 
ritemaster calls upon Gaia to bring to the attention of the 
sept a creature or creatures worthy of the Great Hunt. In 
preparation the Garou chant, howl, and tell tales of brav- 
ery. Also common is a ritual bloodletting, wherein each 
Garou cuts herself and sheds some of her blood into a large 
bowl. The mingled blood is then painted in the form of 
pictograms on the forehead or breastbone of each of the 
hunters. At dawn Gaia sends the waiting sept a sign 


proclaiming the target of the Great Hunt. This sign may 
come in any form, from a vision seen by an entranced 
Wendigo ritemaster to a news story flashing on the screen 
ofan old television in a Bone Gnawer caern. Although the 
person or creature chosen by Gaia is almost always associ- 
ated with the Wyrm, on rare occasions Gaia demands that 
one of her own be sacrificed in the Hunt. Only the greatest 
warriors are ever chosen as the targets of a Great Hunt, and 
Gaia only demands such a sacrifice from her children in 
times of great need, for the freed spirit of such a warrior is 
said to transform immediately into an avenging angel for 
Gaia. 

The Garou have only until midnight to complete the 
Hunt. If successful, the blood of the fallen creature is spilled 
onto Gaia’s soil (or into the ether if the Hunt takes place on 
the Umbra) as a sacrifice to Gaia. If the hunters fail to slay 
their quarry, it is considered a terrible omen for the coming 
year. Some Theurges say that no sept will succeed at the 
Great Hunt during the year of the Apocalypse. At the least, 
a failed Hunt means poor luck for the sept in the year to 
come. Anyone participating in a successful Great Hunt 
gains Glory. The danger of the particular Hunt determines 
the amount of Glory gained. 

Systems: Garou participating in a successful Great Hunt 
gain three points of Glory. If the Hunt is unsuccessful, each 
participating Garou loses two points of Glory. In addition, 
the difficulty levels of all rites performed by the sept are 
increased by one until the next Midsummer. 


Rite of Keres 


Level Four 

The Rite of Keres takes place on the night of the 
autumnal equinox. Keres was a Garou bitch who lived in 
ancient times. Her tribe is unknown, although the Black 
Furies readily claim Keres as their own. As legend has it, 
Keres was so fiercely protective of her packmates that when 
she was trapped in a cave, surrounded by minions of the 
Wyrm, with only the bodies of her fallen companions for 
company, Keres consumed them rather than let Wyrm- 
creatures contaminate the noble bodies with their foul 
touch. Keres then charged into battle. Empowered by the 
spirits of her companions, she slew nine times nine great 
Wyrm beasts before she herself fell. Such was Keres’ bravery 
that Gaia allowed her and the collected spirits of her 
packmates to run together in the Deep Umbra forever as 
spirit-Furies. To this day, certain Garou mystics report brief 
encounters with the fiercely beautiful spirit-pack. 

The Rite of Keres is a solemn event in which the 
ritemaster leads the Garou in a howling dirge for all those 
who have died in the service of Gaia. At this time it is 
considered proper for even the bravest warriors to voice 
their anguish, loss, and fear, and to take comfort in those 
companions still alive. The gathered Garou sit in a large 
circle representing the neverending circle of Gaia’s em- 
brace. Each Garou in turn tells a tale of personal grief. As 
he finishes his story, the Garou flings a physical represen- 


Chapter Six: Traits 


tation of his fear and grief, known as a Talisman of Keres, 
into the center of the circle. Before the ceremony, each 
Garou creates his own talisman out of some form of wood. 
A Black Fury might carve a representation of herself with 
bowed head, while a Silent Strider’s talisman might consist 
of a paper wolf with broken legs. The talisman need be 
meaningful only to its creator. 

The ritemaster is the last Garou to spin her tale and cast 
in her talisman. As she casts in her talisman, she focuses the 
anguish of the tribe through her body, calling out to the 
spirit of Keres to consume the talismans and grant strength 
to the Garou. If the rite succeeds, the Garou will sense the 
spirit of Keres as she consumes the talismans in a sudden 
blast of flames. After the talismans are consumed, the 
Garou each taste the remaining ashes, taking some small 
part of the strength of Keres into themselves. The ritemaster 
then leads the Garou in a revel to celebrate the purging of 
the Wyrm-taint they have cast forth. 


Systems: Any Garou participating in a successful Rite of 
Keres may make a Stamina + Rituals roll (difficulty 7). If 
successful, the participant receives one permanent point of 
Willpower for casting forth her inner fears and pain. Failure 
causes the ritemaster to lose Honor in the eyes of the tribe; 
a botch may cause Keres to attack the sept instead of the 
bonfire, for she abides weakness in no Garou. 


Minor Gites 


Minor Rites are the rituals that the Garou incorporate 
into daily living. Almost all Garou know and use at least a 
few such Minor Rites. 

There are an almost infinite variety of Minor Rites 
available to the Garou. The rites below are but a small 
sampling. Many Garou develop their own unique Minor 
Rites to help them reaffirm their connection to Gaia, their 
totem spirit, or each other. 

System: Players may purchase Minor Rites at one-half 
the normal Background cost (two for one). Similarly, 
Minor Rites may be learned in half the time it takes to learn 
other rites. Minor Rites take only two to five minutes to 
enact, much less time than other rites require. Garou who 
regularly perform a Minor Rite find it easier to achieve 
certain goals. The Storyteller should occasionally require 
players to roleplay the invocation of these rites, to empha- 
size that a character is performing them regularly. 


Bone Rhythms 


This rite is performed in homage to the Garou’s totem 
spirit. Each spirit has a different rhythm connected to it, 
and the Garou taps out this rhythm with special drumsticks 
to honor her totem. Such “sticks” are traditionally made of 
bone, but can be fashioned from any material. 

System: Any Garou who performs this rite three times 
per day for at least three consecutive days gains an addi- 


LITE 
AN 
= 
= 
L—] 


A 


p 


"ll I" 


N L 


“a m 


tional die to any one roll while in the spirit Realms. Once 
this die is used, the Garou must rebuild the energies for an 
additional three days before regaining the extra die. 


Greath of Gaia 


During this rite the Garou breathes deeply of Gaia's 
breath (air) 13 times. While so breathing, the Garou clears 
her mind of all things save her love of Gaia. 

System: The Garou must perform this rite at least once 
per day for one full cycle of the moon. So doing enables the 
Garou to lower by two the difficulty level of any one healing 
or detection roll. 


Greet the Moon 


This rite is an exuberant paean to Luna. During this rite 
the Garou howls an elaborate greeting to the moon. This 
greeting varies with the phase of the moon. 

System: Performing this rite each night at moonrise for 
a full phase of the moon enables the Garou to add one die 
to all social interactions with Garou of that phase's auspice 
the next time the moon reaches the phase in question. 


Greet the Sun 


This rite is actually a common rite of the Gurahl 
(werebears). Certain Children of Gaia and a few Uktena 
and Wendigo practice this rite. It is similar to Greet the 
Moon, but is performed at sunrise. 


152 Werewolf: The Apocalypse 


System: The Garou must sing Helios' praises for nine 
consecutive days. If this is done, Helios grants his devotee 
anadditionaldie when attempting to sense Wyrm creatures 
or Wyrm-taint, provided the Garou continues to sing his 
praises daily. If the Garou misses even one day, he must 
begin this rite anew to reap its benefits. 


Hunting Prayer 


This common rite takes many forms, but it always in- 
volves pausing before the start of a hunt to praise Gaia and 
all her creatures. 

In addition, the Garou must choose some item to hold 
her prayers. This can range from an old belt to a tooth, but 
the Garou must have it with her when she hunts. If she loses 
the item, she must choose another item and start her 
prayers anew. 

System: If a Garou performs this rite before every hunt 
for three turnings of the moon, she receives an additional 
die to all tracking rolls so long as she continues her prehunt 
prayers. If she hunts even once without praying, she must 
renew her prayers for another three months before again 
receiving the bonus. 


Prayer for the Prey 


A specific form of the Rite of Contrition, this rite 
involves the Garou stepping sideways into the Umbra just 
after making a kill, subsequently thanking the spirit of the 
prey for giving its own life that the Garou might survive. 
Performing this rite isa sign of respect to Gaia, her children, 
and life itself. 

System: A Garou must perform this rite upon every 
beast of Gaia (not including Wyrm-spawn) he slays for one 
full turning of the moon. Should this be done, the Garou's 
difficulties when dealing with Nature-spirits are reduced by 
one. This bonus lasts until the Garou kills without taking 
time to thank the creature's spirit. 


Renown 


A Garou's Renown is measured in terms of three specific 
areas: Glory (which refers to physical prowess, dangerous 
risk-taking, and combat victories), Honor (a Garou’s sense 
of duty, her ethics and morals, and her personal honor), and 
Wisdom (erudition, patience, cunning, insight and spiri- 
tual connection). 

Renown is not an experience point system, but a 
roleplaying system. It is a marker of cultural esteem, mea- 
suring how well a character lives up to what is expected of 
her in Garou culture. For this reason, auspice heavily colors 
acharacter’s Renown; a character's auspice is her expected 
role in society. While a character can gain experience from 
her actions even though she may not play within her 
auspice role, she probably will not receive much Renown in 
this case. 

Characters with substantially lower Renown than an- 
other Garou are expected to treat that other with respect 


Chapter Six: Traits 


f ERR UR, SS OB PU. -————— //, 


anda certain degree of reverence. Those Garou who do not 
pay attention to such niceties will find themselves losing 
Honor and even Wisdom on a regular basis. 

Renown comes in two forms: the Renown rating (the dots), 
which indicates the character's permanent Renown, and the 
Renown Pool (the squares), which indicates how many tem- 
porary points have been gained. Unlike Rage, Gnosis or 
Willpower (see below), a Renown Pool can exceed the Re- 
nown rating. Each character has three Renown ratings and 
accompanying Pools, representing Glory, Honor and Wis- 
dom. Permanent Renown is a very stable thing and fluctuates 
only in dramatic circumstances. Temporary Renown is much 
more fluid and fluctuates quite a bit. 

Gaining Renown eventually allows a Garou to increase 
in Rank. For more information on this process, see Chapter 
Eight: Systems. 


Beginning Renown 


Garou characters begin with three permanent dots in 
Renown, distributed as their auspice demands (see the 
Rank Chart on pg. 195). This Renown is a result of the 
events that occur during the Rite of Passage; if the Story- 
teller is running a prelude, players should not assign this 
starting Renown until after their Rite of Passage. 

The characters thus begin the game at Rank One. 


Glory 


To gain distinction among one's people by achieving 
mighty triumphs and accomplishing great quests is an 
aspect of Glory. Garou with high Glory ratings pos: 
splendor and illustriousness that causes other Garou to 
revere them. Glory is the respect an individual is given for 
martial prowess and brute ability to get things done. 
Werewolves gain Glory by accomplishing great deeds, and 
by that alone. 


Glory Cree? 


I shall be valorous 

I shall be dependable 

I shall be generous 

I shall protect the weak 
I shall slay the Wyrm 


Honor 


Honor is one of the few means by which the laws of 
Garou society are enforced. It is a combination of pride, 
dignity, and personal integrity. To gain Honor among the 
Garou is an acknowledgment of one's integrity, honesty, 
and faithfulness. Moreover, it is a sign of respect. Honor is 
a source of great pride for those who possess it, and one's 
Honor is guarded most carefully. 

A person of Honor adheres to the highest moral stan- 
dards and principles, remaining resolute in the face of 


153 


adversity or danger. The most honorable actions are those 
taken despite all penalties. Honor denotes a fine sense of, 
and a strict conformity to, a code of conduct — the Litany. 
Deceit and fraud are not acceptable practices among those 
who seek Honor; there is a certain dignity required, a 
particular appreciation of the responsibilities of true moral- 
ity. 

Honor is easily lost when one falls intoa frenzy, for nearly 
any sort of evil action is possible in such a state. 


Code of Honor 


I shall be respectful 

I shall be loyal 

1 shall be just 

I shall live by my word 

I shall accept all fair challenges 


Wisdom 


Particular reverence, veneration and deferenceare given 
to Garou who are considered wise. In many ways, a reputa- 
tion of Wisdom is incompatible with a reputation of Glory, 
but not always. A person with high Wisdom is thought to 
possess keen senses of judgment and discretion, as well as 
erudition and the ability to discern between truth and 
falsehood. 

Wisdom is gained only by proving one's judgment and 
knowledge in the face of crisis. 


Creed of Wisdom 


I shall be calm 

I shall be prudent 

I shall be temperate 

I shall be merciful 

I shall think before I act and listen before I think 

Gaining and losing Renown are discussed in Chapter 
Eight: Systems. 


Renown Rolls (Optional) 


Renown rolls can be used to simulate Garou society's 
reaction to the character. Such rolls can be useful tools 
during social situations. The Storyteller can have a player 
make a roll based on a Renown rating or use a character's 
rating as a difficulty number when rolling for others' reac- 
tions to the character. Some options are described below by 
category. 


Glory Rolls 


A Glory roll may be used to determine whether or nota 
character (and/or her pack) is allowed to accompany a war 
party or requisition combat equipment. It is also a measure 
ofhow “famous” the Garou is, for those with high Glory are 
often talked about in stories around the fire. A Glory roll 
may also influence Garou in leadership positions and in 


154 Werewolf: The Apocalypse 


prem am, mrt mr a: ————— /, 


situations when the character is leading other Garou. 
Characters with low Glory are little known, and those with. 
no Glory at all are often assumed to be timid and weak. 


Honor Rolls 


An Honor roll may be used to determine whether a 
character is viewed as trustworthy and honest, as well as 
how closely a character follows the laws of the Garou, 
particularly the Litany. It is of great importance when the 
character is presented to elders, for it is Honor, not Glory, 
that impresses these old ones. Honor rolls may also deter- 
mine how honorably the character is treated in certain 
circumstances, and the Storyteller may even allow an 
Honor roll for a character who might need a "sense of 
Honor" about something. Those with low Honor scores are 
viewed with suspicion; those with no Honor at all are 
usually treated little better than outlaws, and their words to 
elders are often subject to the Truth of Gaia Gift. 


Wisdom Rolls 


A Wisdom roll may be used to determine whether Garou 
society considers a character wise or spiritually attuned. It 
isofgreat importance when a character seeks to gain secrets 
about the Garou. It can also be used as a roll to see whether 
a Garou is trusted with a sacred fetish or allowed to attend 
a special moot. Those with low Wisdom scores often have 
their questions met with stony silence; those with no 
Wisdom at all are viewed as buffoons who might be danger- 
ous to themselves or to others. 


Rank 


Among the Garou, Rank is everything. Rank, more than 
anyother Trait, measures the status and respect accorded to 
Garou by their peers. The greatest secrets of the tribe are 
taught only to those Garou who have proved themselves, 
and the best way to do this is by gaining Rank. 

All characters begin at Rank One and increase thereaf- 
ter by earning Renown. Gaining Rank is fully discussed in 
Chapter Eight: Systems. 


Benefits of Rank 


There are a number of benefits imbued by Rank. 

* Gifts: Each time a Garou attains a new Rank, he has 
the opportunity to learn new Gifts. To learn a Gift, the 
character must not only possess the requisite experience, 
but must have attained a Rank equal to the level of the Gift. 
Mere experience is not enough to buy the trust of the spirits 
and one's peers; the greatest secrets are reserved for the 
greatest and most trustworthy Garou. 

* Rights: Garou of lower Rank are expected to defer to 
those of higher Rank, particularly within the tribe, though 
Garou of high enough Rank (3*) are known throughout 
Garou society. 


| 


— n LR 


* Challenges: Rank also has an effect on who can 
lawfully challenge a Garou. A Garou can only challenge 
another Garou if there is not more than one Rank’s differ- 
ence between them. Any deviation from this causes the 
challenger to lose temporary Honor. 

* Responsibilities: Garou of high Rank are expected to 
lead and protect lesser Garou, guard the caern from intrud- 
ers, and go on great quests to further the sept and tribe. 

* Self-Control: Rank, as the sum of a Garou's Renown, 
also quantifies the "virtue" of that Garou. The higher a 
werewolf's Rank, the greater a paragon of the Garou he is, 
and the less likely he is to succumb to base impulses. Thus, 
characters of higher Rank have, by their deeds and experi- 
ence, tempered themselves to the point that they are less 
likely to frenzy. The chart below gives the frenzy bonus a 
Garou gains with Rank. 


Rank Frenzy Bonus 
0 = 
1 - 
2 = 
3 +1 to frenzy difficulties 
4 +2 to frenzy difficulties 
5 *2 to frenzy difficulties; 5* successes 


needed to frenzy 
6 +2 to frenzy difficulties; 6+ successes 


needed to frenzy 
Rage 


My mind hates my body 

My body hates my soul 

I close my eyes and fight 

Inside my own black hole. 

— Black Flag, “The Bars” 

The Garou are creatures of instinct and passion, not 
simply because a Beast resides within their breasts, but 
because they have never abandoned the soul of nature in 
reckless pursuit of civilization. 

Rage is a measure of the character's capacity for all- 
consuming madness as well as determination. It is animal 
magnetism and the lust that arises out of instinct; it is the 
fear that stems from ignorance and the hate that is spawned 
by unreason. 

Rage is important to the Garou because they can use it 
to perform extraordinary feats, and because it so often 
moves them to deeds they later regret. Moreover, Rage is 
what allows them to shapeshift between wolf and human. 

Whatever itsorigin and nature, Rage consumes a Garou's 
energy and attention. Much of a Garou's existence goes 
into directing her Rage to good purpose, and even more 
into harnessing its dark impulses. 

Rage comes in two forms: the Rage rating (the dots), 
which indicates your character's permanent Rage, and the 
Rage Pool (the squares), which indicates how many Rage 
points your character has left to spend. The Rage Pool can 


Chapter Six: Traits 


p mem mr AA —— ///, 


neverbe greaterthan the Rage rating. When you usea point 
of Rage, you remove it from yourcharacter's Rage Pool (the 
squares), not from the Rage rating (the circles). The rating 
stays constant, while the Pool gets depleted during the 
story. 


Using Rage 

I could say... "You can't turn me on and off like a tap, man." 
But what's the point? Just got to hit them, that's all. Smack them 
in the mouth. 

— Suicida Gangreen, Marshal Law: Fear and Loathing 

Rage points must be expended during the Decision Stage 
of a turn (see Chapter Nine), and only during times of 
stress. For a listing of such times, see Stress, pg. 211. Rage 
has a variety of effects and uses in Werewolf: 

* Frenzy: Frenzy is the primary danger of Rage. It is the 
mad bloodlust that overwhelms Garou in times of great 
passion, hunger or conflicting emotions. Whenever a char- 
acter makesa Rage roll and scores four or more successes, he 
enters a frenzy. See Frenzy, pp. 200-201, for more details 
about the causes and resolution of frenzies. 

* Extra Actions: A Rage point can be spent to take an 
extra action. A Garou cannot use more Rage points in a 


single turn than her Dexterity score. See Multiple Actions, 
pg. 206. 


155 


e ————^—————————— ÓUWBÓ NN 


* Changing Forms: A Rage point can be spent to assume 
any desired form instantly, without requiring a Stamina + 
Primal-Urge roll. See The Many Forms, pp. 216-218. 

* Recovering from Stun: When a Garou loses more 
Health Levels in one turn than his Stamina rating, he is 
stunned and cannot act for another turn. However, spend- 
ing a Rage point allows a character to ignore this effect. 

* Remaining Active: When a Garou falls below the 
Incapacitated Health Level, he may elect to make a Rage 
rollin an attempt to remain active. The difficulty of the roll 
is 8. Each success instantly heals one Health Level — even 
if the wounds were aggravated! However, a Garou may 
attempt this roll only once, and if it fails, he does not 
recover. Also, as with any Rage roll, the risk of frenzy is run 
(see Frenzy, pp. 200-201). 

There is a penalty for drawing on one's anger in such a 
way. If the roll succeeds, the Garou must roll an extra die on 
his Battle Scars roll, adding the results of the two rolls (see 
Battle Scars Chart, pg. 199). 

* Beast Within: For every point of Rage above her 
Willpower rating, a character loses one die on all rolls 
involving social interaction. The Beast is simply too close 
to the surface, and the Garou's presence makes all around 
her uncomfortable. 

* Losing the Wolf: If at any time a Garou has neither 
Rage nor Willpower points, he has “lost the wolf" and can 
no longer gain Rage. He cannot transform into anything 
except his breed form until he once again possesses Rage. 
He must first regain at least one Willpower point before he 
can regain Rage. See Willpower, pg. 158. 


Gaining and Regaining Rage 

Rage points constantly fluctuate during a Werewolf 
game. Players spend them to gain extra actions, change 
forms, etc. Rage points are regained in any of the following 
ways: 

* The Moon: When the character first sees the moon at 
night, something deep in his soul surges. The character 
gains one Rage point under a new moon, two points under 
a waning moon, three points under a half or waxing moon, 
and four points if the moon is full. If the moon corresponds 
to the player's auspice, she regains all of her Rage. This 
occurs only upon first sighting of the moon. For this reason, 
Garou with high Rage ratings are best left alone or treated 
cautiously during their auspice moon. 

* Botch: At the Storyteller's discretion, a character 
who botches a roll should receive a Rage point to represent 
the frustration, provided the situation is stressful. Remem- 
ber that social situations can be just as stressful as combat, 
and a botched roll is even more frustrating during some 
social circumstances. See Humiliation, below. 

* Humiliation: The character may gain a Rage point 
during a particularly humiliating situation. The Story- 
teller, not the player, judges whether or not the humiliation 
was enough to award a point. Remember — werewolves do 


156 


Werewolf: The Apocalypse 


Gn —— ————— 


not like being laughed at. This can be combined with the 
above rules for botching — a werewolf who screws up in 
public is likely to become quite irate. 

* Confrontation: At theStoryteller's discretion, a char- 
acter may receive a Rage point after the first turn of a 
confrontational situation, just before combat really begins 
inearnest, or in any really tense roleplaying situations. This 
represents the anticipation of danger, the raising of hackles 
as anger rises to the surface. 

* New Stories: At the beginning of each new story, each 
player should roll one die to determine how many Rage points 
the character has (up to the Rage rating). The points could be 
more or fewer than those she had at the end of the previous 
story. This represents the fickleness of Rage, how it can 
fluctuate wildly over a number of days or as the moon turns. 

The character is free to explain the Rage loss or gain, 
fleshing out the life of his character between stories. If the 
stories are creative or excuses inventive enough, the Story- 
teller might be more liberal with Rage points in the future, 
oreven add points to the roll. If a player complains that her 
character doesn't have enough Rage, she shouldn't worry 
— her character will get it all back when her auspice moon 
is in the night sky. 


Gnosis 


Gnosis embodies the link between the Garou and the 
Sacred Mother. It is the little piece of Gaia deep within the 
breast of all werewolves. Gnosis ties the Garou to Her and 
allows them to understand the natural balance. 

Gnosis also ties the Garou to the spirit world, allowing 
them to interact with the creatures and objects therein, for 
Gnosis is the stuff of spirit. Without Gnosis, the spirit world 
cannot be contacted at all. Low Gnosis scores make it 
difficult to achieve such contact, while those with very 
high Gnosis scores may find that the boundary between the 
worlds of spirit and matter blurs, making it difficult to tell 
what is of the spirit world and what is not. 

Gnosis, like Rage and Willpower, comes in two forms: 
the Gnosis rating (the dots), which indicates your character's 
permanent Gnosis, and the Gnosis Pool (the squares), 
which indicates how many Gnosis points the character has 
left to spend. The Gnosis Pool can never be greater than the 
Gnosis rating. When you use a point of Gnosis, you remove 
it from your character’s Gnosis Pool (the squares), not from 
the Gnosis rating (the circles). The rating stays constant, 
while the Pool is expended during the story. 


Using Gnosis 


Gnosis can do a variety of things, all having to do with 
nature or the spirit world in some way. 

* Rage and Gnosis: You cannot spend Gnosis points or 
make a Gnosis roll in the same turn you use a Rage point or 
make a Rage roll (certain Gifts are an exception to this 
tule). The Beast is too close to the surface, making it 
difficult for the character to think on an abstract level. 


y —— 

* Carrying Silver: For each silver object carried, your 
character loses one effective point from his Gnosis rating 
(some objects cause him to lose more). This is only tempo- 
rary, lasting about a day after the silver is discarded. A 
character can also be penalized for the silver objects carried 
by his packmates. For more information, see Silver, pg. 198. 

e Using Gifts: Many Gifts require either a Gnosis roll or 
anexpenditure of Gnosis points. See Gifts, pp. 114-137, for 
details on particular Gifts. 

* Fetishes: Gnosis is used to attune or activate a fetish. 
See Fetishes, pp. 184-185, for details. 


Gaining and Regaining Gnosis 


There are a number of different ways in which characters 
can regain spent Gnosis points: 

Sacred Hunt: Garou moots often involve a sacred hunt 
for the good of the People and the caern. This is a ritual and 
asacred activity. The prey, an Engling spirit, issummoned and 
then hunted down, either in the Umbra or on Earth. After it 
is “slain,” all Garou thank it for giving of itself and thereby 
allowing the Garou more power in their battle against the 
Wyrm. All participants in the hunt completely replenish their 
Gnosis Pools. Because of the rites performed during the hunt, 
the Engling is not actually destroyed, instead Reforming 
elsewhere in the Umbra. See the Appendix for details on 
Englings. 


RA 


Chapter Six: Traits 


VI 


* Bargaining with Spirits: Characters can attempt to 
find a spirit, such as an Engling, on their own and convince 
it to give them some of its Gnosis. The characters must be 
able tocommunicate with the spirit (the Gift: Spirit Speech 
is required), and the spirit will ask something in return, 
such as a small quest or other favor. 


* Meditation: A character can regain Gnosis by spending 
time in meditation. She must spend at least an hour so doing, 
staying in one place and concentrating on spiritual matters; 
she can do nothing else during this time. The character then 
rolls Wits + Enigmas (difficulty 8). One Gnosis point is 
regained per success. However, a maximum of one Gnosis 
point can be regained per hour the character spends in 
meditation; thus, ifa character only spent one hour, but scored 
enough successes to regain three points, she still only gains one 
point. This form of meditation may only be done once per day, 
but the difficulty is increased by one for each extra day this is 
done within a week (maximum difficulty of 10). 

* Between Stories: Between stories, characters are al- 
lowed to make a Charisma + Enigmas roll (difficulty 6). 
Each success indicates one Gnosis point regained. 


Willpower 


Willpower measures the capability of a character to 
overcome the urges and desires that tempt him. 


Willpower, like Rage and Gnosis, comes in two forms: 
the Willpower rating (the dots), which indicates your 


157 


character's permanent Willpower, and the Willpower Pool 
(the squares), which indicates how many Willpower points 
your character has left to spend. The character's Willpower 
Pool can never be greater than his Willpower rating. When 
you use a point of Willpower, you remove it from your 
character's Willpower Pool (the squares), not from the 
Willpower rating (the circles). The rating stays constant, 
while the Pool is depleted during the story. 

Willpower from the Willpower Pool fluctuates a great 
deal duringa story. It decreases by one each time the player 
uses a Willpower point to have his character do something 
extraordinary, such as retain self-control or gain an auto- 
matic success. Eventually, the character will have no 
Willpower left and will no longer be able to exert himself 
the way he once did. The character is mentally exhausted 
and can't rouse himself enough to give a damn — he's 
expended all his Willpower. 

. Weak 

.. Timid 
Unassertive 
Diffident 
Certain 
Confident 
Strong 
Controlled 
Iron-willed 
Unshakable 


Using Willpower 

Willpower is one of the most active Traits in Werewolf, 
simply because there are so many different ways to employ, 
regain and change it. Willpower is such a focus of the game 
that you will be paying a lot of attention to it, so you had 
better understand the following rules. 

* Automatic Success: A Willpower point can be used to 
obtain one automatic success in an action. Only one point 
of Willpower can be thus used per turn, but it gives a single 
guaranteed success. In this fashion it is possible to succeed 
automatically in any simple action simply by concentrat- 
ing. For extended rolls, the extra success can make the 
critical difference between success and failure. There are 
some situations in which the Storyteller may not allow such 
a use of Willpower. 

* Uncontrollable Urges: On some occasions, the Sto- 
ryteller may tell you that your character does something 
because of instinct, primal urge or gut reaction (“You 
unthinkingly attack the Bane."). You can use a point of 
Willpower to avoid this and do as you please. The feeling 
might return, however, and another Willpower point might 
be required. Sometimes it will return more times than you 
have Willpower, while other times you may completely 
overcome the urge. 

* Halting Frenzies: A character who rolls four or more 
successes on a Rage roll flies into a frenzy — unless he 
spends a Willpower roll to halt it and rein in his anger. For 
more information, see Frenzies, pp. 200-201. 

Willpower can only be permanently increased by the 
expenditure of experience points, but the Willpower Pool 
can fluctuate tremendously duringa story. Discussed below 
are all the different ways Willpower can change. 


Recovering Willpower 


Characters recover their Willpower Pool whenever they 
are able to rest or get a chance to restore their self- 
confidence. The Storyteller must decide when and how a 
character recovers Willpower. 

Listed below are three different ways in which a charac- 
tercanregain Willpower points. This does not have anything 
to do with the Willpower rating (which can be changed 
only with experience). 

* At the end of a story (not a game session), characters 
regain their Willpower — all of it is recovered, up to the 
amount of the Willpower rating. The Storyteller may wish 
torestrict them somewhat by insisting the characters attain 
some modicum of self-pride or achieve moderate success in 
the story. e.g.: The story ends with a partial stalemate. You 
didn't get everything you were after, but didn't embarrass 
yourself either. Recover all your Willpower. 

* (Optional) You achieve some special success during 
the story, which the Storyteller judges would cause the 
character to recover her self-confidence (and thus all or 
some ofher Willpower). e.g.: You rescue your human father 


— BÓ 


from the Sabbat just before he was to receive the Embrace. 
Regain three Willpower points. 

+ (Optional) You fulfill some criterion of the character's 
auspice, thus regaining from one to three Willpower points, 
subject to Storyteller judgment. This must be achieved 
through roleplaying and approved by the Storyteller. e.g.: 
Asa Ragabash, you manage to trick the elder Glass Walker into 
giving you the key to his car. Regain two Willpower for that 
scam. 

If none of the above options suits your style of play, 
consider allowing the characters to regain one point of 
Willpower after they wake up each day. It's simple, and it 
guarantees a steady recovery of Willpower. 


Health 


“Pain,” she sniffed. “A human can override any nerve in the 
body." 

— Frank Herbert, Dune 

The Health Trait measures how hale and hearty a 
character is. There are various levels of injury, and each 
applies a different penalty to the person so injured. A 
character who is Hurt, -1, hasone fewer die to roll on all her 
rolls, while a character who is Crippled, -5, has five fewer 
dice to roll. If this leaves the player with no dice to roll, then 
the character cannot attempt the action. 

A werewolf who is Incapacitated with aggravated wounds 
is very close to death; if she loses one more Health Level, 
she dies. 

Garou are creatures of great vitality because they are so 
much a part of Gaia. They understand the flow of nature 
and know their true place among the spirits. They are 
Gaia’s Defenders, Her immune system against the ravages 
of the Wyrm. Thus they are not so affected by the ravages 
of disease and wounds as other creatures are. 


Health Levels 


Bruised: 


Character is only bruise and 
has no action penalties. 


Hurt: Character is only mildly 
hurt; movement isn’t hin- 
dered. 

Minor injuries; little hin- 
drance to movement. 


Injured: 
Wounded Character cannot run, but 
can still walk. 

Mauled: Character is badly injured 
and can only hobble about. 
Character is severely in- 
jured and can only crawl. 


Crippled: 


Incapacitated: Character is completely 


incapable of movement. 


Chapter Six: Traits 


—G— O————— 


Though werewolvesare thought to be immune to wounds, 
in truth they "merely" heal back from them with ease. In 
fact, a werewolf can automatically regenerate one Health 
Level each turn. However, if she is involved in strenuous 
and stressful activity, like combat, she must roll to do so 
(Stamina roll; difficulty 8). See Healing, pg. 196, for more 
details. 


Garou do have their weakness, their Achilles’ Heel — 
silver. Silver causes werewolves severe wounds against 
which they have no defense. In addition, fire and the 
attacks of supernatural creatures (vampires, fomori, and 
otherGarou) can harm them badly. Such wounds are called 
aggravated wounds. 

More details on taking damage and healing wounds are 
given in Chapter Eight: Systems. 


159 


¿hiheayy, 


Behold, a sacred voice is calling you; 
All over the sky a sacred voice is calling. 


— John G. Neihardt, Black Elk Speaks 


The Garou are a hybrid breed, an amalgamation of two 
utterly different creatures. Born of wolf and man, they live 
in two cultures — a part of both, but belonging to neither. 
Likewise, the Garou are children of two worlds. Born to the 
Realm of matter and the Realm of spirit, they live in both 
worlds, but have a home in neither. Instead, they shuttle, 
like restless ghosts, from the forests of wolves to the cities 
of men, and from the canyons of the material world to the 
open vistas of the mysterious Umbra. 


The Umbra 


The physical world is a place of wonder and mystery and 
sudden terror. The spirit world is that and more. All peoples in 
all timeshave shared acommon belief that life encompasses far 
more than the reality known by the waking mind. And they 
are right, for lying just beyond the material Realm is another 
place — a world of living shadows and undying light. The 
Garou know this eerie landscape. It is the habitat of their 
totem spirits and the haven of unspeakable monsters. It is the 
soul of Gaia and the source of great evil. It is the Umbra. This 
spirit world is not the Garou’s home, but it will do. 


The Umbra is a mysterious dimension that lies next to 
the world of matter, but not anywhere within it. It isa world 
made entirely of spiritual energy, and is separated from the 
mundane world by a vast barrier called the Gauntlet. The 
twin worlds of matter and soul were once one. They still 
yearn to reconnect, but harsh reality holds them apart. The 
spirit Realm pierces the Gauntlet at many points to reach 
into the physical, but the two cannot shatter the Gauntlet 
and unite. Only Gaia’s chosen can break through the 
Gauntlet and journey from Earth to Umbra. Unfortu- 
nately, many wicked beings from the spirit world can travel 
in the other direction. 

Anything the mind can conceive can happen in the 
Umbra; so can many things beyond conception. Within 
the Umbra are many pocket dimensions, called Realms, 
and each is governed by different laws of reality. A Realm 
can look and behave like anything at any time. Certain 
Realms utterly defy all of Earth’s physical laws. However, 
most of the Realms visited by the Garou look and feel like 
the physical world. They have ground, sky, foreground and 
horizon. Umbral travelers see, hear, smell, touch, and taste 


Chapter Seven: The Spirit World 163 


LS A AI TE y; 


the spirit world in much the same way they sense the 
physical world. 

The Native American Garou tribes have a simple view 
of the spirit world. They have only glimpsed it from afar, 
and believe it to be as it appears in their visions. The other 
Garou have more complex views. The Stargazers, for ex- 
ample, speculate that the spirit world is radically and 
unknowably different from what it appears to be. They 
believe that this is because it is a world not of form and 
substance, but of fleeting impressions and potent symbols 
that are translated into sensory information by the Garou. 
The life experiences of the Umbral traveler literally shape 
her moment-to-moment awareness of the Umbra. 

Despite the great divide between the Realms of matter 
and spirit, the two resemble one another. One portion of 
the spirit world, called the Penumbra, reflects the material 
world. Powerful actions on the physical plane send emana- 
tions into the spirit world that pattern the Penumbra in 
distinctive ways. The most powerful of these psychic ema- 
nations ripple past the Penumbra into the Near Umbra, 
where they create whole Realms based around a single idea 
or mythological construct. These emanations are too weak 
to affect the Deep Umbra, which houses the pure, abstract 
forms known as the Wyld, the Weaver, and the Wyrm. 

The Umbra is filled with spirits, which are both helpful 
and hostile to the Garou. The Garou see them as natural 
phenomena (animals, trees, wind, etc.) or supernatural 
forces (hideous monsters and living dumps of pollution). 
Thesespiritsare without physical substance and can usually 
enter the physical world only by being bound into a fetish, 
person, or creature. Certain spirits, the more powerful ones, 
can will themselves into the physical Realm, albeit at a 
great cost of energy. To the probing intellects of the 
Stargazers, these spirits are symbolic forms that have gained 
a measure of self-awareness. 

The Garou are not born into the spirit Realm, and they 
often experience formless, quaking terror in the instant 
before they journey there. Yet they also feel a strange sense 
of belonging in the Umbra. Despite its overwhelming 
dangers, the Umbra is the place that refreshes them, heals 
their broken bodies, and restores their souls. For when they 
feel forsaken by humans, wolves and other Garou, they can 
return to the source of their life and drink from a spring that 
never runs dry. The source of that spring lies deep within 
the endless spirit worlds of the Umbra. 


The Tellurian 


Itis not HOW things are in the world that is mystical, but THAT 
it exists. 

— Wittgenstein, "Proposition 6.44" 

The Garou refer to all of reality as Gaia, especially when 
they wish to describe the living parts of creation that must 
be protected from the ravages of marauders. But they also 
call all of reality the Tellurian. They use this term when 
they wish to refer to the parts of the universe from which 


164 


monsters issue — the parts of creation that are dark and 
evil. Thisisan apparent contradiction. But then, the Garou 
do not have the pervasive fear of paradox so common 
among humans. 

The Garou differ on many points about the Tellurian. 
The only thing on which they seem to agree is that a 
Garou's being can never encompass and understand the 
whole of reality. Disagreements are expected, and only 
through direct unity with Gaia can a Garou hope to know 
truth. And the only sure way to Gaia is through the spirit 
world. 


The Mature of the World 


The Tellurian comprises innumerable locales: vast, natu- 
ral vistas; choking cityscapes; deep, infernal pits; 
indescribably chaotic Realms. The Garou see Caia as the 
center of the universe, anchoring creation and emanating 
through the myriad Realms of the Tellurian. 

The spirit world, called the Umbra, envelops the mate- 
rial Realm in something akin to Earth's atmosphere. The 
Garou believe that three levels compose the Umbra. There 
is the middle world, which lies on the back of the great 
World Turtle. The Heavens lie above the Turtle, and the 
Underworlds lie in his guts. The place of Garou (and 
humans and animals) is in the middle world on the Turtle's 
back. Garou shamans say that the Heavens are an unknow- 
able world visited by human wizards and inhabited by 
frightening astral beings. They say the worlds below are 
unfathomable crypts populated by specters and demons. 
These are not the lands of the Garou. Just as wolves do not 
live high in the clouds or deep in the mud, werewolves 
belong to the middle world. 

The Umbra is not an unknowable cipher, but a real place 
to be explored and understood. The Truth lies there, the 
shamans say. Heal the problem in the spirit world, and it is 
healed in the physical. This is the essential guiding prin- 
ciple behind all Garou actions: find the true, spiritual 
source of a physical manifestation, understand it, and 
change it in spirit. This transforms Garou adventures into 
something far more meaningful than Bane slaughter-fests. 
The Garou can spiritually explore matters and principles 
that are important to the characters (and the players). 


The Shape of the World 


At the heart of Gaia lies the Earth, with the Heavens 
above, the Underworlds below, and the Umbra surround- 
ing it on its sides. The World Tree grows from the center of 
the Earth (the Native American Garou tribes believe it 
sprouts from the back of the World Turtle). Its branches 
soar into the canopy of the Heavens; its roots dig deep into 
the soil of the Underworld. The Stargazers sometimes call 
the World Tree the Axis Mundi. 

The rest of reality is created and supported by three 
primal forces: the Wyld, the Weaver, and the Wyrm. These 
forces, collectively called the Triat, are the three pillars 


Werewolf: The Apocalypse 


POL PLT TR eee esse // 


| 


SA == 


A FA 


$ =| 


upon which all that exists is built. In the simplest terms, the 
Wyld is a body of vast, undifferentiated potential — con- 
stantly unrealized and constantly in flux. The Weaveristhe 
force of creation that takes the unformed potential of the 
Wyld and spins it into stable forms of matter and energy. 
The Wyrm is the force of destructive entropy that culls the 
myriad creations of the Weaver, thus creating sense from 
the senseless spasm of raw creation. The Triat's interrela- 
tions gave birth to the universe, and their continuing 
conflict ravages it. 


The Creation Myth 


This we know: the earth does not belong to man. Man belongs 
to the earth. All things are connected like the blood that unites us 
all. Man did not weave the web of life, he is merely a strand in 
it. Whatever he does to the web he does to himself. One thing we 
know: our god is also your god. The earth is precious to him, and 
to harm the earth is to heap contempt on its creator. 

— Chief Seattle, on selling land to the U.S. Government 

This is the history of the Garou as it is told by the wisest 
Garou shamans. They do not express it in the terms used 
below (and some cannot express it in language at all). The 
Garou versions are couched in symbolic poetry and meta- 
phoric imagery. This is an explanation couched in modern 
terms for modern audiences with modern sensibilities. 


The One World 


The Garou believe that once, eons ago, the world was 
whole and unified. Matter and spirit did not merely coexist. 
They were one and the same: the stuff of pure power. The 
tripartite forces of the Wyld, the Weaver, and the Wyrm 
intertwined foran eternity, and from their dance was reality 
born. 

Paradoxically, even though the universe of the Triat was 
an integral, undivided whole, it was populated by indi- 
vidual, self-aware beings. These creatures gained sentience 
when the rich material-spiritual energy of the universe 
coalesced into unique forms. Even though these entities 
had identities separate from the substance of the universe, 
they understood themselves to be a part of the universal 
whole. They knew that their joy was the joy of the universe, 
and their pain was the pain of the universe. Likewise, the 
pain of the universe was their pain, and the joy of the 
universe was their joy. These individualized spirit-matter 
beings understood that joy and pain were essential and 
meaningful parts of their lives. 

Life was eternal and ever-changing, for the unique forms 
assumed by these entities lasted as long as they chose them 
to last. These creatures could merge with other creatures, 
subdivide into smaller identities, or dissolve themselves 
utterly into the undifferentiated void. Death was nonexist- 
ent, because, so say the Garou, these spiritual-material 
creatures could recollect their self-aware identity after 


Chapter Seven: The Spirit World 165 


AED 
Sy 


(ff RAARATTATISITOD EA a ai 


dissolution. This act of will by a nonexistent intelligence is 
one of the many contradictory images in the spiritual 
history of the Garou that prevent modern audiences from 
understanding the ways of the werewolves. 

The Garou call this universe the “true Gaia.” They 
believed that nothing existed outside of Her. Her children 
lived on Her and were Her. She was a greater whole that was 
somehow more than the sum of Her parts. This time was a 
Golden Age of existence — a dreamtime which, while 
completely gone, is not completely forgotten. Garou sha- 
mans believe that all creatures, humans and wolves alike, 
have a secret memory of this time stored deep within the 
recesses of their souls. 


The Severing 


Into this peaceful, whole, unified world of self-aware 
connection came division and death. The very fabric of the 
integrated universe was torn asunder by a cataclysmic force. 
Thesubstance of the universe was severed in two. Spirit and 
matter were wrenched apart, separated from one another by 
a massive, calcified barrier called the Gauntlet. The twin 
sides screamed for one another and continue screaming to 
this day. The Garou point to this division as the beginning 
of all evil in the world. Before this catastrophic event, all 
pain was accidental, the unintended result of hasty actions. 
After the Severing, there emerged a new form of pain in the 
universe: deliberate, intentional pain caused for pleasure. 


The Two Worlds 


The source of the Severing is still a mystery. Many Garou 
reflexively blame the Wyrm. Some say the Severing marked 
the birth of the Wyrm. Others say it marked the day the 
Wyrm went mad. Still others believe that the Wyrm simply 
chose to be evil, just as humans can choose to be evil, and 
deliberately inflicted pain on the universe in a desperate 
attempt to free itself from entanglements to anyone and 
anything. 

The wisest Garou shamans have a more complicated 
explanation. They maintain that the Weaver went mad and 
began to spin frantically. The Wyrm was hard pressed to 
keep up, and the universe began to metastasize out of 
control. As the Wyrm struggled to destroy the Weaver's 
teeming creations, it became engulfed in the Pattern Web. 
The more it fought to escape, the more it became en- 
meshed. Soon the Weaver had engulfed the Wyrm. Trapped 
in Weaver hell, the Wyrm also went mad. The twin dance 
of reckless creation and heedless destruction tore apart the 
natural cycle of Gaia’s world. The world was spun, de- 
stroyed, and spun again in the model of the mad forces. The 
Triat was now separated from itself, and all creation re- 
flected that division. The universe polarized into twin 
worlds — similar, but utterly different. On one world the 
essential matter collected — the basic patterns that gener- 
ate existence. In the other world the dense matter collected 
— the solid material from which the patterns generate 


Home of the Soul 


What isthisstrange place of terror and fear? What is this nightmare world where the ground shifts and the skies crack 
like the end of the world? What is this monstrous land? And why does it feel so much like...home? 

All creatures long for a home. Animals range over the land looking for enough space to find food, find shelter, find 
amate. Humans build larger and larger houses and offices and temples, clear more of the forests, clog more of the land, 
allin their desperate efforts to make a home. Spirits fit into the hollows of their patron's soul, from Gafflings to Jagglings 
to Incarna to Celestines to the Triat. Like hollow dolls within hollow dolls, each has a home and is home for the next. 

But where is OUR home? Where do the Garousleep at night? The cities that gobble more of the land like fat, bloated 
mealworms are not our home. Most of us venture there. Some of us live there. But the cities are not our home. The 
forestsare the lands of our four-foot brothers and our wing brothers and our water brothers. These share the forests with 
us, and yet the forests are not truly our home. The Umbra is home to spirits, who live there gladly. But we cannot live 
there forever — even in our sacred Homelands. If that is our home, it is a monstrously dangerous home, one that we 
are better off without. 

Why have we no home? And why are we the only ones? 

All manner of creatures who hear but a few notes of Gaia's song have a home, as do those despised creatures that 
close their ears to that sweetest of songs. What anguish it is to us, then, that we, the most ardent of Gaia's babes, are 
so bitterly adrift upon Her bosom. 

Where is my home? Where do I belong? In a land of alienation, isolation, and Wyrm-wracked misery, we strive for 
a place to call our own. A place where we are not only welcome, but an essential ingredient. For us, this longing for 
home is bittersweet at best, and has driven even the strongest Red Talon Ahroun into deep pits of Harano. 

Why? 

I climbed to the top of the Most Sacred Place. I cried and rent my flesh, and I howled to my Mother everywhere, 


"Why, Blessed Mother, why? We, the most faithful of Your children, implore You! Tell us why!" 
And the answer came. 


A voice like the stillness of the forest at dusk washed over me. And the voice said, “All My blessings unto you, My 
child. You have asked, and I shall answer. Harken unto Me and know all. Lo, it is because you are faithful to Me that 
you suffer the pangs of homesickness within your soul. To feel them no more, you have but to forsake Me — the anguish 
shall yet abide within you, but all sense of it shall flee you. 

"But so long as you love Me, you shall know the joys that are Mine and feel the pain that is Mine. The alienation 
you feel is My alienation — a deep part of Myself is rent from another. The isolation you feel is My isolation — the 
walls built within Me to keep one part from the other. The misery you feel is My misery — My sorrow over the 
generations. 

"You may turn from Me, and I will love you no less than I do now. You may join with those who despoil Me, and 
you will have all the love I am. What I offer thee for thy steadfast honor is heartbreak and pain to reflect My own." 

With that She faded from me. My pain was still upon me. But a new song was born in my heart that day. A song 
of devotion. Let all the vassals of the Wyrm and Weaver lay me low with pain. I will rise again! Let all the animals 
shrink from me; let all the humans run from me; let all the spirits challenge me! I will live in all their worlds! I have 
no home within this side of the Gauntlet or that. But I will tell you this: any space that surrounds my body shall BE 
my home. My home is all of creation, for I am of Gaia! I am of no totem of Gaia, like the animals. I am no soul-shard, 
as are the humans. I am no Triat-fragment, as are all spirits. | am Garou! And I am home! For 1 AM my home! 

I! 

AM! 

HOME! 

— Luna's Voice, Shadow Lord Ragabash 


forms. They still reflected one another and continued their 
dance, but now there was a wall between them. Spirit 
created patterns on one side of the Gauntlet, and matter 
fleshed them out on the other. But the two worlds cannot 
cross the Gauntlet to unite once more. 

All creatures are separated from the land of their spirits. 
Their bodies have animating spirits that keep them alive 


and functioning, but their real spirits lie dormant — un- 
aware of their celestial origin and their connection to the 
cosmos around them. Physical bodies can see and sense and 
communicate with other physical bodies, but souls can 
rarely see, find, or communicate with other souls. Though 
most sentient beings have distant, dreamlike memories of 


Chapter Seven: The Spirit World 167 


PL EN EEE TR -——————— 


a time when they were spiritual entities in a spiritual 
universe, they cannot journey to the spirit world. 


The Traveler between the 
Worlds 


A few creatures, however, can still cross the void of the 
Gauntlet. The Garou retain that great power and have 
access to spiritual Realms that lie close to the physical 
Earth. (There are Realms farther from Earth, but the Garou 
face difficulties functioning in, and even reaching, these 
Realms.) Unfortunately, though the Garou have learned 
how to cross the Gauntlet, they are unable to destroy it and 
thereby allow the divided worlds to reunite. 

By transforming their physical bodies into forms of pure 
spirit, Garoucan step into the Umbra. Crossing the Gaunt- 
let is perilous, but with courage and training the Garou can 
become quite proficient in spirit travel. The Garou call this 
feat "stepping sideways," for they physically feel like they 
cease walking forward in one reality and move laterally into 
another. 

The Garou who venture into the Umbra are spiritual 
warriors. Their sojourns are visionquests in which they seek 
deeper answers to problems that surface in physical reality. 
Some go to the Umbra for power and glory, but others go to 
heal the wounded world, often at great cost to themselves. 
These agents of cosmic mercy are the greatest of Garou, and 
are forever remembered in the hearts of their people. 


The Garou in the Modern 
World 


Garou are anachronisms in the modern world — almost 
quaint, were it not for their outbursts of lethal violence. 
They are creatures from an older time when enchantment 
still lingered in the world and many things were possible. 
But though the werewolves' numbers dwindle and their 
enemies mount, their courage and determination only 
increase. They possess an ancestral memory of the original 
cosmological cataclysm that sundered matter from spirit, 
and echoes of that suffering reverberate in their bones. This 
faraway but compelling memory impels them to action, for 
they dread another cataclysm. 

Fear, however, is only one motivation for the Garou. 
Many Garou respond deeply and passionately to other 
emotions: kinship, loyalty to tribe, pride of parenthood, 
adoration of children, devotion to home, passion for lovers, 
respect for elders and reverence for life. The Children of 
Gaia believe that all these things are manifestations of the 
most potent force in the universe: Gaia’s love. Such pas- 
sions, say the Children, evoke a connection (albeit a faint 
one) to a dimly remembered ancestral memory of the long- 
lost Golden Age, during which all life was a single being. As 
creatures connect with other parts of the living world, they 
strengthen their ties to the very fabric of existence and 


——— //, 


return energy to Gaia. The stirrings of this ancient knowl- 
edge may be faint, but the accompanying feeling is always 
breathtakingly potent. 

Other Garou, like many Shadow Lords, believe that the 
power of love is foolishness, and only cold hate for enemies 
can strengthen Gaia. Love is nice if one has time for it, but 
otherwise it constitutes fiddling while the world burns. 


Perspectives on the 
Umbra 


Though all Garou agree on the basic precepts behind the 
Umbra, each tribe has a different perspective on the Triat 
and its members’ purpose. The three dominant perspectives 
are set forth by the Stargazers, Silver Fangs, and Glass 
Walkers. Other tribes believe bits and pieces of each, but 
only these three tribes care enough about cosmology to 
argue it at their moots. 

Stargazers: The force that creates and unifies the physi- 
cal Realm is the Weaver. The force that permeates and 
perpetuates the Umbra is the Wyld. These two, the original 
members of the Triat, are limitless forces of reality. Gaia is 
the place where these two forces — chaos and order — meet 
and conjoin. In areas of pure Weaver dominance, there is 
no life, no spark of possibility — everything is known and 
rationalized. In places of pure Wyld dominance, there can 
be no true reality, for no one thing remains distinct from 
any other thing for more than a moment, and nothing 
remains constant. The Wyld and Weaver join and separate 
in a constant pattern of creation. 

The Wyrm exists to maintain a balance between the 
two. Unfortunately, the dark one has turned from its true 
path and exists in opposition to Gaia. It represents unrea- 
soning death, just as Gaia represents unconditional life. It 
seeks to rend the Weaver from the Wyld, so that no more 
reality will be spun. 

Glass Walkers: The Weaver is neither evil nor insane. 
The Weaver is an unchanging force, like gravity. How can 
gravity be deemed insane? Only small minds that like being 
held to the ground could conceive of such Dark Ages 
foolishness. 

Now think of the Weaver as gravity, drawing things in. 
The more Weaver-essence a thing has, the more reality it 
has— just like the more massa planet has, the more gravity. 
Extending the analogy further, Gaia represents the Sun, 
and the other Realms become the planets. They revolve 
around Her because they have less Weaver-essence. But 
just as planets affect the orbit of the Sun, so too do the other 
Realms affect the Gaia Realm. 

No, the Weaver is not the enemy. The real enemy is the 
Wyrm, the corrupter, who seeks to destroy the beautiful 
creation of the Weaver. 

Silver Fangs: The Wyld is our true patron, just as the 
Silver Fangs are the true leaders of all the Garou. The Wyld 
contains within it all the possibilities of existence. The 


Wyld exists more strongly where the Weaver does not. The 
Weaver restricts the Wyld, just as some tribes would restrict 
the power of the Silver Fangs. Yet the Wyld endures and 
remains above the fray. 

The Weaver represents the defining of all existence. If 
left unchecked, it could calcify and stagnate all of creation. 
Gaia is a Weaver pattern that kept enough Wyld energy to 
have life. She has just enough Weaver to gain definition, 
and needs no more. We must resist all attempts, even those 
within Garou society, to aid and abet the Weaver. 


The Umbral 


Environment 


Garou can travel from one location in the Realm to 
another by traveling through the Umbra on Moon Bridges. 
They can also travel directly from the Realm into the 
Umbra. 

Garou, while the most adept at Umbral travel, are not 
the only earthly beings to enter the Umbra. Human mages 
are fascinated by the Umbra and arrive to steal spirit 
energies. These nonshamanic humans view the Umbra in 
a very different manner than do the Garou. 


The Earth 


Gaia, the Earth, is the center of the Realm System of the 
Near Umbra. The Garou see the spiritual universe as 
emanating from the physical core of Earth’s reality. The 
Realms of the Umbra orbit the physical universe just as 
planets orbit the Sun. Surrounding Earth’s physical reality 
is the Gauntlet. The Gauntlet exists throughout physical 
reality, separating the mundane from the spirit. All so- 
journers who would leave the Earth for the Umbra must 
find a way to pierce this veil. Garou do so by using their 
caerns — sacred places where the spiritual and physical 
worlds meet — or by stepping sideways into the Umbra. 
The Earth is such an important place that the Garou often 
refer to it as “the Realm.” 


«Che Gauntlet 


The world of physical matter is separated from the world 
of the Umbra by a powerful boundary called the Gauntlet. 
Matter and spirit, craving unity, pull toward one another 
with a palpable force. The Gauntlet strains to confine them 
both and keep them isolated. In some areas the Gauntlet is 
so strong that the physical world is virtually spirit-dead. In 
other areas spiritual energy courses through and flourishes 
on Earth. As humankind encroaches on more and more 
territory and brings more Weaver energy to Wyld areas, the 
Gauntlet grows stronger and pushes the spirit world farther 
away. 

The Garou protect areas of weak Gauntlet by forming 
caerns. They also know how to enter the Gauntlet and 
emerge in the spirit world. Furthermore, they know how to 


Chapter Seven: The Spirit World 169 


p/m. am, EN amar ri -—————— //, 


| 


Caerns Chart 


Caern Level Gauntlet Moon Bridge 
Distances* 
1,000 miles 
2,000 miles 
3,000 miles 
6,000 miles 
5 2 10,000 miles 

* The distance a Moon Bridge can traverse depends 
onthe rating of the caern where the gate is opened (not 
that of the destination). If the Moon Bridge is not 
opened at a caern (for example, a Bridge created by a 
Lune or other spirit), the distance traversible is 1000 
miles. 


Caern Types 


Type Power** Spirits 


Encountered*** 
All Open 
Moon Bridget 
Enigmas Ability Illusion, Shadow, 
Chameleon-spirit 
Engling, Ghost 
Peace, Calm, 
Water elemental 
Leadership Leadership, War, 
Intimidation Bird-spirit 
Rage Rage points War, Pain 
Stamina Soak Dice Protection, 
Guardian, 
Turtle-spirit 
Strength Attribute War 
Urban Streetwise City elemental 
Visions Oracular visions — Bird-spirit 
Will Willpower points War, Ancestor- 
spirit 
Rituals, Expression Owl-spirit, 
Ancestor-spirit 

Wyld Anything Wyldling 

** One point/level/die is gained per success (see Rite 
of the Open Caern, pp. 140-141). 

*** These are the spirits most often encountered 
near caerns of that type. However, there is no guaran- 
tee that they are always to be found. Other spirits may 
also be encountered (Storyteller's discretion). 

t Only if the two caerns in question have success- 


fully completed a Rite of the Opened Bridge (pg. 141). 


Enigmas 


Gnosis 
Healing 


Gnosis points 
Health Levels 


Strength 


Wisdom 


circumvent the Gauntlet utterly by traveling to the spirit 
world in dreams. 


Every place on Earth has a Gauntlet rating from 2 to 9. 
Travel through areas of high Gauntlet is virtually impos- 
sible. Areas of low Gauntlet allow almost unhindered 
access for those who know how to step sideways. 

Area Typical Gauntlet 

Science lab 9 

Inner city 

Most places 

Rural countryside 

Deep wilderness 

Typical active caern 

Powerful caern 


NwRUDA~ © 


The greatest caerns 


Caerns 


The Gauntlet fluctuates from place to place. It is stron- 
ger in places of civilization and science, weaker in wild, 
primitive areas. In the areas where it is weakest, spiritual 
energy freely enters the mundane world. Wondrous and 
mystic phenomena are common in these places. The Garou 
revere such sites as holy and call them caerns. They vigor- 
ously guard the few remaining caerns, protecting them from 
mages and marauding spirits that try to feast on the spirit 
magic contained within them. Unfortunately, the Garou 
are slowly losing the fight, and precious few caerns remain. 


Some caerns are dedicated to a specific purpose, such as 
healing or war. These caerns are inhabited by spirits at- 
tuned to the caern’s purpose, and all powers invoked there 
are aligned to it. 

Caerns are rated from 1 to 5. This rating measures the 
potency ofthe powersand effects that can be invoked there. 
Thus, a Level 1 caern of healing might refresh and heal 
minor wounds, while a Level 5 caern could miraculously 
heal the most grievous wounds. 

The Gauntlet is lower at higher-powered caerns. Caerns 
of Levels 1 and 2 have Gauntlet ratings of 4, those of Levels 
3 and 4 have Gauntlet ratings of 3, and those rarest of 
caerns, the Level 5 sites, have Gauntlet ratings of only 2. 

See the Caerns Chart for more detail on caerns and their 
types. 


The Periphery 


Though the Gauntlet is tremendously strong, the spiri- 
tual forces it tries to contain are also strong. The Gauntlet 
wall bulges like a distended balloon, and trickles of spirit 
energy bleed through it in many places. Though this lim- 
ited spiritual connection is too weak to benefit powerful 
spirit warriors like the Garou, it is very important to 
humankind. Humans have used rituals, drugs, religion, art, 
physical exercise, and meditation to access this strange 
state, called the Periphery. 


Werewolf: The Apocalypse 


^ 
li, —————— 


— OA” 


When a sentient creature like a human being becomes 
aware of the spiritual side of herself, her consciousness slips 
gently into the Periphery. Colors brighten, senses sharpen, 
intuition and insight heighten, and a general sense of 
connection to all things is felt. This altered state of con- 
sciousness has been described by people in all places in all 
times, and is available to anyone. It is familiar territory to 
many artists and to Garou Kinfolk who attune themselves 
with the Periphery in order to understand the spirits. 
Kinfolk have sometimes been able to send their spiritual 
presences through the Periphery to carry messages to Garou, 
but this is rare. 

Toslip into the Periphery is to enter an ecstatic state in 
which seemingly magical things happen. This “magic” is 
not always peaceful; indeed, it depends on the mental state 
of the person experiencing the Periphery. Artists like 
Wordsworth, whose minds are focused on rapture and 
exaltation, receive splendid visions of transcendental joy. 
Artists like Poe, whose minds are focused on pain and loss, 
receive visions of horror and suffering. Artists like Blake, 
who focus on the whole of the human condition, can 
experience and integrate both. Benign spirits can contact 
humans on the Periphery — though Banes and other 
malevolent spirits can also reach Peripheral travelers. 

Humans contacted by helpful spirits can prosper greatly 
from the contact. Those contacted by Banes must leave 
quickly to avoid psychic contamination. Unfortunately, 
those who enter the Periphery through drugs are often 
unable to leave at will. They risk being unable to return to 
the physical world when their systems can no longer handle 
the experience. Such Peripheral "imprisonment" can cause 
hideous psychic disfigurement and spiritual shock. Charis- 
matic spiritual leaders capable of bringing an entire 
congregation into the Periphery can likewise cause psychic 
damage to their parishioners, who usually cannot leave at 
will. The only people who do not risk psychic shock from 
travel to the Periphery are those who learn to enter by force 
of personal will. These fortunate souls are reasonably safe 
because they can leave at any time. 


The Penumbra 


Just beyond the Gauntlet lies the unfettered splendor of 
the spirit world. The area of the Umbra closest to the Earth 
Realm is called the Penumbra. The Penumbra is the most 
common Umbral destination of the Garou, who travel here 
to fight evil spirits bent on corrupting creatures in the 
physical world. The Penumbra, or Earth's Shadow, isa gray, 
hazy, phantasmal world lit only by the radiance of the great 
Celestine, Luna. Luna's Umbral phase directly corresponds 
to the phase of the moon in the physical Realm. 

Likewise, the Penumbra contains the spirit material that 
corresponds to the physical matter of Earth. The only 
material objects that appear on the spirit world are those 
with large amounts of spiritual energy. Matter that endures 
the passage of time on Earth gainsa spiritual representation 


Chapter Seven: The Spirit World 


in the Penumbra. Old trees and old buildings have counter- 
parts on the Penumbra; recently built structures and newer 
vegetation do not. Wyld, Weaver and Wyrm energies 
become tangible in this Realm. Wyld spirits move through 
natural areas, Weaver webs emerge from technological 
equipment, and Wyrmlings scuttle through graveyards and 
polluted areas. 

Interestingly enough, spirit is more "real" than matter. 
The spirit of an object can endure the loss of its physical 
body, but the physical body cannot withstand the loss of its 
spirit essence. If an old oak tree is chopped down on Earth, 
it may linger for a long time in the Umbra. But if a living 
tree is destroyed in the Umbra, its earthly counterpart will 
sicken and die. 

Penumbral streets and forests seem eerily deserted, for 
most sentient creatures do not manifest on the Penumbra. 
Only spiritually advanced people appear here. Spiritually 
advanced creatures like mages appear as sharply defined 
astral forms. Mages have highly developed spiritual selves, 
called Awakened Avatars; such Avatars are visible on the 
Penumbra. Some science-oriented mages, like the ones 
called Technomancers, do not appear on the Umbra. 
Technomancers’ training precludes their Avatars from 
being seen in the Umbra. This puts them at a decided 
disadvantage in the Realms of spirit; accordingly, the 
Technomancers fear the Umbra and seldom venture there. 
Sometimes Garou travelers see the spirits of humans who 
are deeply ensconced in the Periphery. 


171 


—————— S 


— LR 


The Penumbra is filled with Domains — small zones that 
correspond to areas in both the physical Realm and the 
Near Umbra. These areas borrow energy and definition 
from their Near Umbral counterparts, allowing them to 
manifest in the Penumbra and the Gaia Realm. 

* Blights: Blight Domains are mixed Weaver/Wyrm 
areas that appear as polluted, web-ridden cityscapes. 

* Chimares: Individualized dream Domains that are 
open to every being that dreams. Some are nightmarish; 
some are paradise incarnate. 

* Epiphs: These odd Domains represent abstract ideas 
or concepts, such as “square” or “four.” Most Garou cannot 
comprehend Epiphs, although the Stargazers claim to have 
gained great insight by meditating in such places. 

* Glens: These are Domains under the influence of the 
Wyld. They appear as beautiful manifestations of the natu- 
ral world and are often inhabited by sentient trees and 
talking animals. 

* Hellholes: These Wyrm-ridden Domains correspond 
to toxic waste dump sites and other polluted areas. Even 
areas of heavy air pollution can become Hellholes. Hellholes 
are inhabited by Banes, and Wyrm creatures scuttle through 
these Domains en route from the Near Umbra to the Gaia 
Realm. 

* Trods: These Domains of faerie energy appear as faerie 
rings and monoliths. These areas mark the spots that were 
sacred to faeries in the days before the Weaver's encroach- 
ment drove them from Earth. Sometimes faeries can still be 
found at these sites. 

* Webs: Areas where the Weaver encroaches on the 
Penumbra are called Web Domains. Webs correspond to 
large areas of technologically advanced cities, and are 
inhabited by Pattern Spiders and Net-Spiders. 

* Wyldings: Areas where the Wyld still reaches Earth 
are fewer than Web areas. There are some Wylding Do- 
mains in the Penumbra, though most are in the faraway 
Deep Umbra. Nothing is stable or permanent in these 
constantly shifting zones, and magic permeates the air. 
Appropriately enough, Wyldling spirits congregate here. 


The Near Umbra 


When the Umbral traveler follows a Moon Bridge past 
the Penumbra, she arrives in the Near Umbra. This area is 
a swirling haze dotted with many Realms, great and small. 
These Realms orbit the Gaia Realm just as Luna orbits 
Earth. The Garou travel to these other realities to interact 
with their totems or beseech aid from their ruling powers. 
Many of these rulers are capricious and dangerous, but 
possess great wisdom. 

There are 13 major Near Realms. Near Realms are 
pockets of immense spiritual power bordered by a mem- 
brane that contains their energies. These Realms feel as real 
andsubstantial to the Umbral traveler as the material world 
feels to the physical traveler. All the Garou's senses and 
powers work, though with some slight modifications in 


172 


p mem m, 


some Realms. Each Realm is governed by its own world 
laws, which determine the local reality. There may be other 
major Near Realms, but they have not been explored by the 
Garou. 


In addition to these 13 major Near Realms, there are 
myriad Domains, sub-Realms, and Zones, including the 
eerie Dream Zone (see below). All of the Domains listed in 
the Penumbra have larger Domains in the Near Umbra. 
The Tribal Homelands, representations of each tribe's 
ideal home, are among the strongest of these Near Umbral 
Domains. At the outskirts of the Near Umbra, just before 
the beginning of the Deep Umbra, lie several Vistas. These 
are not really Realms, for they can only be viewed, not 
entered. Vistas are portals allowing observers to view em- 
bodiments of abstract concepts like death, chaos, and stasis. 
They are said to be glimpses of the Heavens. 

Near Realms were formed when powerful, monolithic 
energies from the Triat collided with the weak but highly 
diversified spiritual emanations from the Gaia Realm. Some 
Near Realms are similar to the Triat energies that formed 
them, while some are similar to the earthly energies that 
breathed spiritual life into them. 


The 13 Near Realms 


Abyss: Great acts of destruction in the Umbra cause 
cracks in the very fabric of the spirit world. Garou who 
follow these cracks in any Near Realm are led out of that 
Realm and, eventually, to the lip of a gargantuan pit so wide 
and deep that it appears to be an infinite void. Anything 
that falls in and cannot fly out is forever lost. Hideous 
creatures cavort within chasms that lead down the inner 
walls of the Abyss. Even the most powerful Incarna avoid 
the Realm at all costs. Some Garou say the Abyss is an 
Umbral cancer, and the first sign of the impending Apoca- 
lypse. Some say that when the Weaver trapped the Wyrm 
in the Pattern Web, the Wyrm's home became the Abyss. 
Others say the void hole of the Abyss is the Wyrm. 

Aetherial Realm: The cosmological apex of the Umbra 
isan infinite vaulted ceiling of heavenly light that stretches 
from the Gauntlet to the Deep Umbra. Garou can easily 
reach the Aetherial Realm by traveling toward the Umbral 
“sky.” The Incarna of Luna, named Phoebe, and the Incarna 
of Helios, named Hyperion, both dwell here, as do powerful 
spirits of the air and stars. All Moon Bridges travel through 
the Aetherial Realm, and the Umbral aspects of Sol’s 
planets appear in its skies. Here, the Celestines hang 
constellations of the greatest heroes. 

Arcadia Gateway: Long ago, when the faeries aban- 
doned the Gaia Realm for their mysterious new dimension, 
they left behind a doorway in the Near Umbra. The Realm 
surrounding it assumed the properties of the original land of 
the faeries, Arcadia. This Realm is still populated by the few 
faeries who did not join the others in their exodus from 
Earth. They protect the Gateway and treat all visitors to a 
taste of Faerieland. Here are noble High Faeries and mis- 
chievous Low Faeries. Some Garou claim that beyond the 


Werewolf: The Apocalypse 


—————— 


mysterious Gateway, the rest of the faerie population has 
evolved — or devolved — into something transcending the 
faeries who stayed behind. 

Atrocity Realm: Life on the Gaia Realm is often subject 
to hideous shocks and brutality. The psychic backlash from 
these assaults has inflicted massive spiritual damage on the 
Umbra, resulting in the creation ofthe Atrocity Realm. All 
Wyrm atrocities on Earth — from child abuse to serial 
killing to swordpoint religious conversions to genocide — 
have reflections here. Banes are spawned here in larval pits 
guarded by Scrags. One can escape from this Realm only via 
empathic suffering with the victims. 

The Battleground: Mankind's glorification of war has 
created a Battleground Realm. Here, spirit warriors fight 
grisly recreations of every battle from the Impergium to the 
Siege of Sarajevo. Signposts point the way to each battle. 
Shades of all the world's wars appear in concentric rings 
that lead toward the Plain of the Apocalypse — a vast, 
empty field that waits for the final battle. Difficulties for all 
frenzy rolls are reduced by two here, and Garou who enter 
the fray gain a point of Rage per turn of combat. Garou who 
seek to learn the secrets of their foes visit this Realm to 
observe or fight their enemies’ Umbral doppelgangers. 
Garou also come here for a chance to unleash their Rage. 

CyberRealm: Humanity's technological advances have 
created this Weaver Realm. Here, technology has over- 
whelmed the inhabitants, who must meld with machines to 
survive. Half of this mechanistic land is a glass, concrete, 


plastic and steel monstrosity called the Sprawl; the other is 
asubterranean world called the Pit. Glass Walkers love the 
CyberRealm and use its Computer Web to make war on the 
Wyrm. Weaver spirits are strong here, and Wyld spirits are 
weak. 

Erebus: Asthe Aetherial Realm lies in the cosmological 
heights of the Umbrascape, the depths of the Umbra 
contain an infernal underworld. Erebus is a place of endless 
torment, where Garou are immersed in a lake of living 
silver. They take aggravated wounds, healing just in time to 
suffer further. A great, three-headed wolf-creatures pre- 
vents Garou from leaving. The few who have returned from 
Erebus rarely speak of it. Some believe that this Realm is a 
crucible that purifies Garou of Wyrm corruption and Harano. 

Flux: A pocket of pure Wyld energy has extruded 
through the powerful Weaver barricades of the Tellurian to 
createa massive Flux Realm in the Near Umbra. This is the 
very heart of the Wyld, given to Gaia to sustain Her and 
keep Her from total Weaver suffocation. Anything is pos- 
sible within the constantly shifting Flux Realm; indeed, 
madness is likely. Time shifts unpredictably, and the Garou 
themselves transform uncontrollably, shifting among their 
various forms. Garou can learn to manipulate the very 
fabric of the Flux Realm, literally controlling the changing, 
unbridled reality like gods. No entity may be bound or 
controlled here. 

Legendary Realm: The legends of the Garou are so 
powerful that they have sprung into existence as living 


Chapter Seven: The Spirit World 173 


p mmm cr A — — Ur P; 


shadows. The Legendary Realm is a composite mythic- 
fantasy Realm that incorporates all legends of all tribes into 
one impossible world. Each tribe hasa territory that roughly 
corresponds to its ancestral homeland on Earth, and Garou 
travel to these lands to experience the lives of their ances- 
tors. Ancient legends can be changed by the actions of a 
modern Garou reliving them. 

Pangea: Earth spent vast amounts of time in a primordial 
state. The spiritual energies of this age have left an endur- 
ingmark on the Umbra. The eons have etched Pangea into 
the fabric of the Umbra with a strength and solidity un- 
known to any other Realm. It is filled with massive woods, 
virgin jungle, and pristine rainforest. All species that ever 
lived flourish here, even titanic dinosaurs, and a great 
Incarna dragon called the Elder Serpent makes its lair here. 
Forces of the Wyrm have been trying to seal Pangea away 
from the rest of the Umbra, and many Garou feel this Realm 
holds a secret to preserving the world beyond the Apoca- 
lypse. All Garou receive one Gnosis point at dawn, and all 
Primal-Urge rolls made in Pangea receive one automatic 
success. 

Scar: The Weaver's frantic spinning culminated in the 
Industrial Revolution, which had powerful repercussions in 
the Umbra. A wasted city called the Scar arose in the 
Umbra. Here, the work that makes humans’ lives meaning- 
ful is corrupted into soul-destroying oppression. This is a 
gloomy, gritty Realm of ashen slums, befouled shantytowns, 
deafening factories and endless pollution. The Scar’s facto- 
ries produce many of the fetishes used by Wyrm minions in 
the Gaia Realm. Escape is difficult, for the Gauntlet around 
the Scar has a rating of 9. Some Garou say that escape is 
possible through the Dream Realm. 

Summer Country: Gaia spent an eternity in a state of 
pure, uncorrupted love, before the first cataclysm. This 
time created an enduring reflection in the Umbra — a 
world where all is peace, grace and pleasure. In this Realm, 
a blissful, crescent-shaped island in a beautiful blue sea, all 
creatures have an abundance of Gaia’s Gifts. Garou cannot 
typically arrive by choice in this bounteous and achingly 
beautiful land; rather, they may emerge here when they 
have had a transcendental experience in which they come 
to accept the full and unconditional love of the Goddess. 
All wounds, diseases and curses are cured here, though 
some Children of Gaia insist the wounds were cured by the 
inner healing process that resulted in the Garou arriving in 
the first place. Some Garou insist that the Summer Country 
does not exist. 

Wolfhome: Though it looks almost identical to the 
physical world, Wolfhome is actually among the strangest 
of the Umbral Realms. It is the only Realm in which the 
Garou are radically transformed. They are trapped in Lupus 
form, without their Gifts and fetishes, in a world where 
wolves are hated and hunted predators. Only their regen- 
eration and Rage remain. Humans hunt them with guns, 
helicopters, and high-tech equipment. Escape is possible 
only by understanding the wolfs place in the world. 


174 


Sense the Spirits 


By what monumental hubris do humans assume that 
reality conforms only to the patterns of their senses? 
That anything beyond the scope of their senses and 
their waking consciousness is unreal? What foolish- 
ness! What arrogance! 

How much more sensible to believe that the 
undergirding substance of the universe cannot be 
grasped by our conscious, limited, logical, Weaver 
minds. Limited mind perceives limited substance. Eye- 
sight isa limited sense. It causes the world to distort, to 
shrink, to become more and more limited until the 
distance is an indistinct haze. My ears hear, but how 
much quieter are the faraway sounds than the near! 
Odors fade with distance, their perfumes scattered on 
the wind. Flavors and sensations not in direct contact 
with me might as well not exist. 

But my Unlimited senses tell me of another world. I 
“see” it when I am not looking. I hear it when I fade 
away the roar of the workaday world. And I smell the 
shades that pass from the other side. A portal opens to 
a different Realm, and I smell the eternal spoor of the 
other world. And in my heart I know the other world 
— the world of no limit — of infinite self. I can step 
into it and be everywhere at once. 


— Quincy Iredown, Glass Walker Galliard 


(Dream Zone 


The Dream Zone is another Umbral area that seems to 
transcend the "normal" limits of the Umbra and extend 
into other parts of the Tellurian. This area is mysterious 
even to the denizens of the Umbra. It isa world of immense 
power, frightening unpredictability, and potent symbol- 
ism. Even the hardiest Umbral travelers face the Dream 
Zone with uncharacteristic trepidation. 

The Dream Zone appears as a multifaceted gem of 
extraordinary beauty. It encloses the Near Umbra and 
borders the Deep Umbra. It is very useful to the Garou, for 
it offers a special way of entering the Umbra. This method 
is more direct (albeit more dangerous) than using Moon 
Bridges or stepping sideways. Garou can enter the Dream 
Zone through their own dreams. The Dream Zone is an 
access point directly to the Deep Umbra. Instead of travel- 
ing OUTWARD — past the Gauntlet, into the Near 
Umbra and through to the Deep Umbra — the voyager goes 
INWARD, into his dream, and emerges at the border 
between the Near and Deep Umbra. This is a potent, but 
perilous form of Umbral travel. Garou can also enter the 
Dream Zone by stepping into Chimares, small dream Do- 
mains found in the Penumbra. 


Werewolf: The Apocalypse 


prem am, mri mr GE TA —————— MÀ 


The Membrane 


Between the (relatively) comprehensible world of the 
Near Umbra and the mysterious world of the Deep Umbra 
lies a barrier called the Membrane. This is like the Gaunt- 
let, but even less porous. To bypass the Membrane, Garou 
must reach an Anchorhead Realm. 

Some Stargazers assert that the Gauntlet and the Mem- 
brane are but two layers in a sevenfold Weaver container 
that encases the spirit world. They believe that the Dream. 
Zone extends to each of the seven layers, and that with 
practice they can breach the remaining barriers — just as 
they can enter Dream from Earth and in so doing reach the 
Deep Umbra. 


(Deep Umbra 


Past the walls of sleep lies the Deep Umbra, an area 
where Gaia's presence is less and less perceptible to Garou 
travelers. Reality breaks down here, and navigation be- 
comes difficult. The Deep Umbra is the home of the Wyld, 
the Weaver and the Wyrm, and is only for the most 
experienced Umbral travelers. Luna traversesa path through. 
the Deep Umbra, and is one of the few comforting beacons 
to wandering Garou. 


Might 


Night time is the Garou's friend in the Umbra. When it 
is night in the physical world, the Umbra becomes the 
hunting ground of the wolves, who roam the eerie land- 


scape beneath Luna's light. Though more spirits are active, 
there are fewer malevolent ones. Most Wyrm spirits are in 
their Blights, whispering dark urges to their sleeping hu- 
man hosts. Weaver spirits such as Pattern Spiders, exhausted 
from their daily chores, are easier prey. Conversely, the 
Garou are sharp from a day's rest. With the aid of even a 
little moonlight, they take the fight to their foes’ doorsteps. 


Reaching (Steppin 
Sideways) vee 


Garou have an innate ability to “reach” or “step side- 
ways” into the spirit world. It is their birthright, and they 
come into intuitive possession of it immediately after their 
First Change. Garou step sideways by attuning themselves 
to the Gauntlet around them, passing through its calcified 
spiritual structure, and emerging into the spirit world. 

To determine the outcome of an attempt to enter the 
Umbra, the player rolls the character's Gnosis rating (dif- 
ficulty of the area's Gauntlet). The number of successes 
determines how soon the Garou enters the Umbra (see 
below). 

Pack members can choose one among them to lead them 
into the Umbra; this leader makes the roll for all of them 
(thus, it is usually the pack member with the highest 
Gnosis). Pack members may choose to enter individually, 
but they risk entering at different times or even losing one 
another. If the leader's roll succeeds, all the pack members 
arrive at the same time. If the roll botches, the entire pack 
becomes "caught" together (see below). All the members of 
the pack must be able to step sideways, and they all must be 
willing to follow the pack member leading them. Garou 
who are not part of the pack may not be brought in with the 
pack, and must enteron theirown. Garou with the Theurge 
Gift: Grasp the Beyond can take non-Garou with them into 
the Umbra. (See Grasp the Beyond, pg. 120.) 

To step sideways, a Garou needs to gaze into any highly 
reflective or shiny surface, such as a clear pool or a mirror. 
Garou who have learned the Theurge Gift: Pulse of the 
Invisible do not need to do this; they can enter at will. Even 
blind Garou can enter so long as they know Pulse of the 
Invisible. 


Shift Time 

"Caught" 

Failure; may not try again for 
another hour 


Successes 
Botch 


5 minutes 
30 seconds 
Three + Instant 
"Caught" means that the Garou is temporarily sus- 
pended between the Realm and the Umbra. He is held fast 
in the Weaver's Gauntlet webs and cannot move until 
assisted by another Garou. Half of him is spiritual, half 


i 
ML 
"uj 


N 


i, 
4 il! 
^j 
i no 


(f 


physical. While trapped in this state, he is subject to soul- 
wracking visions. This is more than dishonorable — it is 
dangerous. Although the Garou can neither be seen nor be 
attacked by physical denizens, evil spirits wander the Gaunt- 
let looking for such trapped spirit travelers. After an hour 
has passed, the Garou can again try to complete the travel. 
If that fails, he cannot leave on his own. If he is not found 
and pulled through by another Garou, he will be caught 
forever. 


(Disconnection 


Garou are meant to migrate between the Umbra and the 
physical world. If they stay in one, they begin to disconnect 
from the other. 

For each full year a Garou spends in the Umbra, add one 
to the difficulty of returning to the physical Realm. A 
similar penalty is levied for each full year spent in the 
physical world; the longer a Garou stays in physical reality, 
the harder it will be for her to return to the Umbra. A quest 
in the other Realm can undo this disconnection. 

For non-Garou who find themselves in the Umbra, such 
as those taken there via Grasp the Beyond, the risk of 
disconnection is greater. After a few months, they will 
gradually forget their life on Earth. Over the years, they 
become more and more ephemeral, eventually losing all 
physical form and becoming spirits. 


Umbral Travel 


Once a Garou has successfully stepped sideways, he 
arrives in the Penumbra. The Penumbra is the spiritual 
representation of the physical place in which he was stand- 
ing when he stepped sideways. He can physically walk 
though the Penumbra to other areas that correspond to 
otherpartsof Earth, orhecan travel deeper into the Umbra. 
If he walks through the Penumbra to a new area and then 
travels back to Earth, he will emerge on the physical world 
in the place that corresponds to the new area. 

When traveling in the Umbra, Garou move as they 
normally do — usually by walking, although some Gifts 
may allow them to fly. Once out of the Penumbra and into 
the Near Umbra, distances are no longer set. There are no 
maps, milestones or directions. A Garou simply decides 
where she wants to go — a Near Realm, for example — 
steps onto a Moon Path, and begins walking. The time it 
takes to travel to certain locations varies — seemingly 
without rhyme or reason, although some Theurges say this 
fluctuation involves moon phase, season and environment. 
Travel times are entirely up to the Storyteller. 


Moon Paths 


To go deeper into the Umbra, the Garou must find a 
Moon Path to his destination. Moon Paths are easier and 
safer to use during a full moon, because Lunes guard them. 
However, Lunesare at their most fickle and wrathful during 


——— 


the full moon. If the traveling Garou dares to step off the 
Moon Path, his fate israndom and unpredictable; the Lunes 
may ignore him or play pranks on him. Lunes are tricksters, 
and their pranks range from the annoying to the deadly, at 
the Storyteller's option. 

During the crescent moon, Garou must roll Perception 
+ Enigmas (difficulty 6) to be certain of their route. During 
the new moon, Moon Paths are all but unwalkable, and 
utterly deadly. 


Spirit Tracks 


Garou can also travel the Umbra by walking the Spirit 
Tracks made by spirits using Airt Sense. Lunes do not 
protect these paths, which are difficult to find without a 
spirit guide. These paths are also temporary and may disap- 
pear while a Garou is walking them, leaving him lost in the 
trackless Umbra. Should this occur, a spirit with the Airt 
Sense Charm must be bargained with to lead the Garou 
back to a Moon Path or another Spirit Track. 


Spirit Gates 


Many Umbral Realms are connected by Spirit Gates. 
Garou who find such a portal can instantly appear in the 
Realm to which it connects. Many Spirit Gates are guarded, 
appropriately enough, by spirits. Anchorheads are a form of 
Spirit Gate. 


Other Forms of Umbral Travel 


Rumors abound of other forms of Umbral travel avail- 
able to brave or foolhardy travelers. Glass Walkers are 
rumored to know how to traverse the Webs ofthe Weaver, 
which connect all of reality. The Wyrm is rumored to have 
bored tunnels throughout the Umbra. Wyldlings seem to 
have a talent for simply ceasing to be in one area and 
appearing in another. 


Peeking 


Dwellers in the Umbra cannot automatically see the 
physical world on the other side of the Gauntlet, just as 
dwellers in the Realm cannot automatically see the Umbra. 
Even though humans have spirits, their un-Awakened 
spirits have no counterparts on the Penumbra. 

To see into the physical world from the Umbra, the 
Garou must make a Gnosis roll (difficulty of the area’s 
Gauntlet). If she succeeds, her vision of the Umbral land- 
scape is replaced by a shadowy version of the corresponding 
physical site, including the people, buildings and objects 
occupying the space. The Garou cannot discern fine de- 
tails, like newsprint, unless she scores four or more successes. 
Garou do have nearly full access to smells and sounds from 
the Realm. 

Peeking is considered dangerous, for the Garou is un- 
aware of the Umbral environment while peeking. Peeking 
does not reveal spirits in the Umbra, but it does reveal 


Chapter Seven: The Spirit World 


POL EN LT TR -————— 


spirits in the physical world — even those locked into 
objects such as fetishes. 

Note that many spirits can Peek at will, and often switch 
back and forth between the two forms of sight. 


The Nature of Spirits 


The Umbra houses a staggering variety of spirits. They 
are creatures of raw soul force and are not intertwined with 
flesh and blood. Some are closely related to beings in the 
Realm, but many are unique to the Umbra and are difficult 
to describe in physical terms. 

The denizens of the spirit world have a clear hierarchy. 
The very greatest spirits exude/create lesser spirits, which 
in turn devolve into still lesser spirits. These greater spirits 
are called patrons of the lesser. Though most spirits appear 
to have patrons, the Garou suspect that certain rogue spirits 
exist outside the chain of spirit patronage. 

The greatest spirit is Gaia. Below Her is the Triat: the 
Wyld, the Weaver and the Wyrm. Below the Triat are the 
Celestines, who are akin to gods. Below the Celestines are 
the Incarna: the lords and kings of the spirit world. Their 
servants, the Jagglings and Gafflings, are like knights and 
vassals. 

Examples of individual spirits can be found in the Ap- 
pendix (pp. 259-273). 

Gaia 

The Realm-system begins with Gaia and is bounded by 
Gaia. All things that exist within the Tellurian are consid- 
ered to be of Gaia, though some Garou would refute the 
notion that evil beings are truly a part of Gaia. Gaia’s 
growth and development are inextricably linked to the 
growth and development of the living beings within Her. 
Gaia loves all of Her creations, and extends to them a pure, 
unconditional acceptance and respect. Life is both a mani- 
festation of Gaia anda celebration of her glory. Death is but 
a transfiguration of Gaian energy, as the dying being as- 
cends to a new state in the cosmological cycle. This natural 
cycle of death and life has been altered by powerful intelli- 
gences, and this in turn weakens Gaia. She is also greatly 
weakened and degraded by the ongoing clash of the Triat. 
The Garou rage at the violence that the Weaver and the 
Wyrm inflict on Gaia, and have pledged their lives and 
souls to defending, upholding and restoring Her. They fear 
that the impending Apocalypse may signal her ultimate 
destruction. 


The Triat 


Below Gaia in cosmic power are the mysterious, personi- 
fied forces called the Wyld, the Weaver, and the Wyrm. 
According to the Garou, these entities, collectively called 
the Triat, shape and control eternity. The interplay of these 
impersonal, spiritual forces makes up the Tellurian and 
comprises all within it. 


177 


At a base level, the members of the Triat represent the 
forces of creation, growth, and destruction, but they are far 
more than that. They represent potential, materialization, 
and unraveling. They also embody chaos, order, and bal- 
ance. 


The Wyld 


Creation begins with the Wyld. The Wyld is pure change. 
It is not so much undifferentiated chaos as it is elemental 
transmutation. It constantly swirls with change, adapta- 
tion, and change again. The Wyld is alive with possibility: 
the Wyld IS possibility itself. Every ant and tree contains 
within its spirit a particle of this chaos of possibility. No 
Garou Theurge or human mage or caretaker spirit has ever 
been able to quantify that tiny drop of eternity. Gaia comes 
first and foremost from the Wyld; indeed, She could not 
exist without it. 

The Wyld is a complete entity, but without the Weaver, 
the Wyld loses all the forms it spawns. They return to the 
primal forge at the very moment of birth. To be all forms at 
all times is to be no form at all. Life without bounds cannot 
know itself inall parts. This means that the Wyld is the least 
personified of the three. Its constant mutability precludes 
true form or nature. The Wyrm is also essential to the Wyld, 
because the Wyrm destroys select aspects of the Weaver's 
Web and returns the uncreated matter to the Wyld. 

In the Deep Umbra, the Wyld has the potential to be the 
most powerful member of the Triat — almost as powerful as 
Gaia. In the physical Realm, however, the Wyld is the least 
powerful of the Triat. Its very essence, limitless possibility, 
is daily forced from the physical world by humanity's focus 
upon "logic" and "reason." As logic is forced upon an 
illogical world, there is less and less room for the magic of 
uncaused change. Only a few scattered sites of pure Wyld 
energy still exist; these the Garou guard with their blood 
and the blood of their offspring. Though the Wyld steadily 
loses sway in the physical world, it is unassailable in its 
home in the Deep Umbra. No danger can threaten it there, 
forany enemy is dissolved into primordial protoplasm upon 
coming into contact with the Wyld. 

The Garou venerate the Wyld, seeing it as a symbol of 
their struggle against the Apocalypse and a promise of a 
brighter day. Its Realms teem with countless forms of life. 
In the world that grows from the Wyld, anything can 
happen. Outnumbered, outfought, outmaneuvered Garou 
may even be able to prevail against the forces that threaten 
to devour Gaia. The Wyld is a bright hope, a promise of 
change from a wicked world of evil matter and entropic 
destruction. 

Though the Garou can expect no direct aid from this 
unfathomable force, the Wyld may prove the greatest ally 
to the Garou and Gaia. 


The Weaver 


From the heedless change of the Wyld came ordered 
growth. The Weaver selected sections of the turbulent 


178 


Werewolf: The Apocalypse 


OS GE BEUTE, SS MÀ 


creation and kept them from dissolving into the boisterous 
whole at the instant of their birth. Undifferentiated cre- 
ation was thereby structured and locked into form. Thus did 
the Weaver spin the first strands of that structure which 
would become the fabric of the universe — the Pattern 
Web. 

This changed everything. Where there was form, there 
could be growth and progress. Meaning was now imposed 
on meaningless potential. Inconstant infinity had yielded 
to enduring eternity. Then the Wyrm arrived and pruned 
away sections of the Weaver's creation. The Weaver's 
perfect patterns were now imperfect, but balanced. Ac- 
cording to the Garou, this is the true cosmological cycle of 
chaos, creation, and destruction. It lasted an eternity, but 
was ultimately shattered when the Weaver gained con- 
sciousness. 

The Garou disagree on exactly what happened. Some 
say that only the Triat can completely comprehend it. 
Nonetheless, there are theories. Some say the Weaver tried 
to spin the entire Wyld into full, patterned existence. This 
created an explosion of creation, which drove the Weaver 
insane. She looked into the Web and saw only madness. 
The Wyrm, exhausted from trying to maintain the balance, 
became ensnared in creation. The Wyrm is still there, these 
theorists say, struggling to free itself and destroying all 
creation from the inside. 

Otherssay the Weaver was far more calculating, and that 
her only madness is power-lust. The Weaver, say these 
Garou, attempted to make logical advancement and per- 
manence the cornerstones of the Tellurian. Once she 
established causality, she set out to impose causality on 
everything. The Wyrm was an obstacle to this process, 
because it destroyed by its own rules rather than the rules of 
the Weaver. So the Weaver ensnared the Wyrm in the 
Pattern Web and directed its destruction along the lines of 
causality. But her control over it is not absolute, and it still 
manages to destroy blindly, along pattern other than hers. 
This limits her power, which is cosmologically helpful, but 
injures Gaia, which is not. 

Still other Garou, like the Glass Walkers, claim that the 
Wyrm is the source of trouble, because the Wyrm at- 
tempted to destroy the Wyld altogether. If the Wyld were 
gone, nothing more could be created, and the Wyrm would 
emerge victorious. The Wyrm tried to use the Weaver to 
weaken the Wyld by ensnaring it, but the Weaver could not 
bind all of infinity. Instead, she spun herself into madness. 
The Wyrm was caught in a trap of its own devising, and 
remains there to this day. Meanwhile, the eternal Wyld 
endures. The Glass Walkers insist that the Weaver is 
simply trying to defend herself, and that she holds the key 
to stopping the Wyrm. 

Most Garou agree that the Weaver was the first of the 
Triat to gain intelligence. Whether this drove her mad or 
is a product of her madness is unknown. 

The Weaver is now powerful beyond her station. The 
ancient balance of pattern and chaos has been replaced by 


NS 


stagnation and decay. When her Webs are finished, all the 
Tellurian will be bound in rigid, motionless, changeless 
strands. 


The Wyrm 


The Wyrm is the third and last in the Triat. It was once 
the restorer of balance, bringing harmony where there was 
none and ensuring that neither the order of the Weaver nor 
the chaos of the Wyld prevailed throughout reality. Sus- 
pended between Chaos below and the Pattern Web above, 
the Wyrm removed all that was not harmonious. 

Then the Wyrm became ensnared in the Pattern Web. 
By looking into the madness of the Weaver's Web, it gained 
sentience and became trapped in the Weaver’s deadly 
Apocalyptic game. The Wyrm fractured into three person- 
alities and as a result is not always able to coordinate its 
actions. 

Where the Wyrm was once the bringer of harmony, it is 
now the harbinger of the Apocalypse, spawning entropy, 
decay and corruption. Unable to destroy overtly and hon- 
orably, it destroys from within. It destroys all those weak 
enough in spirit to succumb to the temptations of hatred 
and envy. 

Some say the Wyrm began the great imbalance by 
seeking to use the Weaver to calcify the Wyld into nothing, 
thereby freeing the Wyrm to destroy all of creation. Now 
the Wyrm is caught ina trap of its own devising —a tribute 
to the perils of greed. 

The Wyrm found many sentients weak enough to sur- 
render to its corruption; it now has many servants. Because 
its decay is in all things, it is able to whisper to the dark 
places inside all intelligent creatures. Thus its disease 
spreads in the physical and spirit worlds, where it has won 
many battles and conquered many Realms. 

Garou and spirit pathfinders have traveled to the Realms 
of the Wyrm — places that blind destruction has left utterly 
devoid of Gaia. Those who dwell there are enslaved or 
destroyed by the most wicked of Banes and Incarna. If the 
Wyrm has its way, all the world will be thus remade — until 
all is destroyed. 


Celestines 


Below the Triat in the cosmological totem pole lie the 
Celestines. The greatest of the Celestines are Luna, the 
spirit of the Moon, and Helios, the spirit of the Sun. Gaia’s 
most directly comprehensible manifestation is a Celestine 
form. The true form of Gaia is so much larger than the Triat 
as to be completely unknowable by any means other than 
the transcendent bliss of mystical union. Other Celestines 
are powerful servitors of the Triat, but their forms are all but 
unknown to the Garou. They are sentient and highly 
intelligent. Most Celestines abide in Realms of their own 
design; here they are omnipotent and omniscient. They are 
usually visited only by Incarna. 


Chapter Seven: The Spirit World 


A 


NL 


5A 93 


Celestines sometimes send avatars to communicate with 
Garou. These avatars are aspects of themselves that are 
approachable and understandable by Garou. The true form 
ofa Celestine is unimaginable; it is only through an avatar 
that communication between them and lesser beings can 
take place. 

Tocreate an avatar, the Celestine wills itself to appear in 
a finite, limited form. Because of its near-infinite nature, a 
Celestine may have many avatars active at one time. 
Celestine avatars cannot be destroyed or adversely affected 
in any way by beings of lesser potency than Celestines. 


Jncarna 


One step below the Celestines are the Incarna. Incarna 
are minions, consorts, advisors and warriors who serve the 
Celestines and derive power from their patrons. Some of 
them have Domains of their own, but most of the Domains 
they inhabit were created by Celestines. When Celestines 
die, their Incarna often survive. These powerful spirits seek 
both Gnosis and a purpose. Many of them seek to become 
Celestines. 

Totem spirits are the Incarna most familiar to Garou. 
These beings, most often servants of Gaia, can create many 
avatars to communicate and interact with the Garou. Pack 
totems are totem avatars. (See Totem, pp. 259-264). Totem 
avatars resemble Jagglings (see below) in form and powers. 

While Incarna are less powerful than Celestines, they 
are still immensely potent and vast, existing on many 


179 


levels. Usually, only their avatars can be interacted with, 
although Theurges tell legends of great seers who encoun- 
tered Incarna in the Umbra and came away with a truer 
understanding of power. 


Jagglings 

Jagglingsaresimplerspirits that serve the Incarna, though 
some Jagglings serve a Celestine directly. They are formed 
from a part of the spiritual essence of their patron, and are 
usually quite loyal. Some develop (or are given) free will by 
their patron. The more advanced Jagglings can duplicate 
this process and thereby create Gafflings to serve them- 
selves. Garou can, and often do, interact with Jagglings. 
Some Jagglings teach Gifts to Garou, while others, such as 
Englings, can provide an entire sept with Gnosis. 


Gafflings 


The lowest spirits are Gafflings — semi-sentient or 
insentient servants of the Jagglings. They are used as tools 
by their masters and by the Incarna, who don't regard them 
as intelligent beings. Gafflings are used to power Garou 
fetishes and to send messages through the Umbra. They are 
in constant communication with their patron and often 
allow their patron to assume complete control over them. 
Many of them feel most "whole" when they allow their 
patron to dominate them. Some Gafflings are fully intelli- 
gent, but these are the exceptions, and are often the work 
of mysterious higher forces. Garou interact with Gafflings 
more than any other spirit type. Gafflings can teach Gifts 
to Garou and be bound into fetishes. 


Spirit Traits 


Spirits differ from physical beings in many ways. They do 
notshare the same Traits; spirits do not have Attributes and 
Abilities. Instead, spirits have the following Traits: Will- 
power, Rage, Gnosis, Power, and Charms. How they use 
these Traits is detailed below. 


Willpower 
Willpower allows a spirit to take “physical” actions: 
attacking an enemy, racing after another spirit, or even 
flying through the Umbra. Contests of this nature between 
spirits are resolved by opposed Willpower rolls. 
Difficulty Action 
easy action 
fairly simple action 
normal action 
difficult action 
virtually impossible action 


| 


————— r— € 


un SAL 


Rage 

Rage is a spirit's anger and anguish. Spirits can destroy 
and harm other spirits or Garou with their Rage. For each 
success on a Rage roll, one Health Level of damage is 


inflicted, orone point of Power is lost if the target is a spirit. 
(See Combat in the Umbra, pp. 238-239.) 


Gnosis 


Gnosis is what a spirit uses for any sort of Social or 
Mental roll, or any roll to transform the parameters of a 
situation. For instance, a riddle contest with a spirit could 
be resolved using the questioner's Wits * Enigmas resisted 
by the spirit's Gnosis; whoever scores the most successes 
wins. Likewise, a spirit would roll its Gnosis when trying to 
intimidate, scare or fool a target. 


Difficulty Action 


3 huge target 

5 sitting target 

6 normal target 

8 moving target 

10 tiny target 
Power 


Unlike Garou, spirits rarely use their own Gnosis in 
attacks; instead, they use “batteries” of mystical energy, 
which they harness from the Umbra to sustain themselves. 
A spirit's "battery" is known as its Power, and it is depleted 
through the use of special abilities and through taking 
damage. When a spirit's Power reaches zero, the spirit 
dissipates into the Umbra for a number of hours equal to 20 
minus its Gnosis, after which it Reforms with one Power 
point. Optionally, a Garou who knows the proper rite can 
bind the spirit into a fetish; however, the fetish will not be 
usable until the spirit's Power is recharged (see Recharging 
Power, below). A Garou who reduces aspirit’s Power to zero 
may also elect to siphon up to five points of Gnosis from the 
spirit in order to recharge his own Gnosis. This kills the 
spirit if it has fewer than six Gnosis points. Needless to say, 
this is a good way to make lots of spirits very angry. 


Charms 


Each spirit possesses special powers, known as Charms. 
Charms generally require a certain amount of Power to 
employ. Unless otherwise stated, a Charm lasts for one 
scene. Combat-oriented Charms, however, last one turn 
per use. 


Charms 


Common Charms 


* Airt Sense: Most spirits have a natural sense of the airts 
(directions) of the spirit world and are able to travel about without 
much difficulty. It costs one Power to find any particular thing. 

* Armor: This Charm providesa spirit one soak die per Power 
pointspent. Thisistheonly way aspiritcansoak damage. Thespirit 
mayusethis Charm atany time in the combat turn before damage 
is rolled. (See Combat in the Umbra, pp. 238-239.) 

*Healing: Thisallowsa spirit to heal physical beings (such 
as Garou). The spirit spends one Power point per Health 
Level, or three per Health Level if the damage is aggravated. 

* Materialize: A spirit with this Charm may materialize 
and affect the physical world. To do so, the spirit's Gnosis 
must equal or exceed the Gauntlet for that area. When a 
spirit Materializes, it must spend Power to create a physical 
shape and give itself bodily Traits. However, a spirit still 
rolls its Gnosis for Social or Mental activities. The Power 
point costs are as follows: 

Power Cost Trait 
Per one Physical Attribute level 
Per two Ability levels 
7 Health Levels (as a mortal) 


Per additional Health Level (each extra 
Health Level also increases size) 

1 Per one Health Level healed (regenerate 
damage to the physical form) 

1 Weaponry: Per die ofaggravated damage 
done in addition to Strength (Bite is one 
die, Claws are two, etc.) 

Spirits have no limits on their Attribute and Ability 
levels; itis possible for them to form extremely strong or fast 
bodies if they spend enough Power. 

For example: a Bane spirit wants to Materialize into the 
physical world, the better to terrorize mortals. It wants the 
following characteristics: Str 3, Dex 4, Sta 3, Brawl 4, 
Dodge 3, Stealth 3, and seven Health Levels. This costs it 
16 Power points. 

A spirit may stay Materialized as long as it desires, but it 
cannot enter an area with a higher Gauntlet than its 
Gnosis. While Materialized, the spirit may not recharge its 
Power unless it has a Charm that allows it to do so. When 
a Materialized spirit is attacked, damage is applied to its 
Health Levels. If a spirit is reduced to zero Health Levels, it 
dissipates into the Umbra and may not reuse this Charm for 
(20 hours minus its Gnosis). 

Note that aggravated damage suffered by a spirit is 
applied to Health Levels and Power. Thus, a spirit cannot 
always escape its sojourn on Earth unscathed. 

* Reform: This Charm allows a spirit to dissipate and 
Reform somewhere else in the Umbra, usually faraway from 
its enemies; this costs 20 Power. 


182 


Specialty Charms 


* Blast Flame: The spirit can blast a gout of flame at 
opponents. The Power cost is two per die of damage. 

* Break Reality: The spirit can disrupt the reality of a 
substance, and thereby modify its Umbral form, by making 
a Gnosis roll. For example, the spirit could, with a success- 
ful enough roll, create a door in a wall, enabling the spirit 
to pass through. The difficulty is determined by the extent 
of the attempted change and how interesting, sensible and 
clever the action is. The number of successes obtained 
determines how much change is actually accomplished. A. 
botch on this rolls is extremely harmful and causes the spirit 
to lose a Gnosis point. The Power cost ranges from two to 
10 points (again, depending on the extent of the change). 

* Calcify: This Charm is possessed only by Weaver spirits. 
It allows the spirit to bind a target into the Pattern Web. A 
Willpower roll is made against the target's Rage; each success 
subtracts one from the victim's Physical Attributes (or Will- 
power, in the case of spirits). When Attributes or Willpower 
is reduced to zero, the victim is bound fast into the Pattern 
Web until freed (rescuers must score a number of damage 
successes with attack or Rage rolls equal to the successes of the 
Weaver spirit). The Power cost is two. 

* Cleanse the Blight: This Charm is similar to the Rite 
of Cleansing. It purges spiritual corruption in the vicinity. 
Power cost is 10. 

* Control Electrical Systems: The spirit can exert 
control overan electrical system. The spirit rolls its Gnosis 
(difficulty from 3 to 9 depending on the system's complex- 
ity). Power cost is from one to five points. 


* Create Fires: By succeeding with a Gnosis roll, the 
spirit can create small fires. The difficulty varies (from 3 for 
small fires to 9 for conflagrations). The Power cost varies 
from one to five points. 

* Create Wind: The spirit can create wind effects. Power 
cost varies — from one for a breeze to 20 for a tornado. 

* Disorient: Possessed only by Wyldings (usually Vorti- 
ces). Thespirit may completely alter landmarks and directions 
with a successful Gnosis roll (difficulty 6 or the Gauntlet 
rating, whichever is higher). The Power cost is two. 

* Flood: The spirit can cause all the waters in a given 
area to rise rapidly, causing flooding. The Power cost is five 
per one-mile radius. 

* Forest Sense: The spirit can sense all that transpires 
in its earthly, wooded domain. Power cost is 10. 

* Freeze: The spirit can drastically lower the temperature 
in the immediate area. The cost is three Power points for every 
10-yard radius, and three additional Power points per die of 
damage; anyone in the area suffers this damage. The first three 
points spent reduce the temperature in the area to freezing; 
each additional three-point increment reduces the tempera- 
ture by an additional 10 degrees Fahrenheit. 

* Frozen Breath: The spirit exhales a breath of bitter 
cold air. The cost is one Power point per die of damage. 


Werewolf: The Apocalypse 


POL PST TR ————— MÀ 


* Ice Shards: The spirit can fling sharp shards of ice at a 
target. The cost is five Power points per three dice damage. 

* Lightning Bolts: The spirit can generate lightning 
bolts and target them at opponents. The Power cost is two 
per die of damage inflicted. 

* Open Moon Bridge: Creates a Moon Bridge to a 
desired location; there does not have to be a caern present. 
The total distance is 1000 miles. Power cost is five. 

* Shapeshift: The spirit may take the form of anything 
it desires. It does not gain the powers or abilities of its new 
shape, only the form and visage. The Power cost is five. 

+ Shatter Glass: The spirit can cause all glass in the vicinity 
to break (Gnosis; difficulty 6). The Power cost is three. 

* Short Out: The spirit can cause electrical systems to 
short out (Gnosis; difficulty 6). The Power cost is three. 

* Solidify Reality: This charm is possessed only by Weaver 
spirits. Itenables the Weaver spirit to spin the Pattern Web, thus 
reinforcing the laws and rules of the Weaver upon aspects of the 
Umbra. Thepowerrequiresonlya Willpowerroll. Thespiritcould, 
with a successful enough roll, make a spiritual wall so solid that it 
could not be bypassed. The difficulty is determined by the extent 
of the solidification and how interesting, sensible and clever the 
description of the action is. The number of successes obtained 
determines how much solidifying is allowed. Power cost ranges 
from one to 20, depending on the magnitude of the feat. 

Success makes the object or spirit more solid. An object's 
effective "Health Levels" are increased by one per success. 
The effect lasts for about a day. Each spirit can make only 
one roll for each object. 

* Spirit Static: This charm is possessed only by Weaver 
spirits. The spirit may raise the Gauntlet in a given area by 
one. The Power cost is 10. 

* Throw Glass: The spirit can direct shards of glass at 
intruders. Three dice of damage can be inflicted. The 
Power cost is five. 

* Tracking: The spirit can unerringly track its prey. 
Power cost is five. 

* Umbraquake: The Garou can cause the Umbra to 
shake with such force that all those standing are thrown to 
the ground. Everyone within the radius suffers damage from 
the spiritual concussion. The cost is five Power per 10-foot 
radius, and two Power per die of aggravated damage. 

* Updraft: The spirit can lift a human-sized creature 
into the air. Power cost is three. 


Gane Charms 


+ Blighted Touch: The spirit can deliver the Blight onto 
a target. If the spirit successfully attacks, the target must 
immediately make a Willpower roll. If she fails, her nega- 
tive characteristics dominate her personality for the next 
few hours. A botch on the Willpower roll causes this Blight 
of personality to become permanent. The Power cost is two. 

* Corruption: The spirit can whisper an evil suggestion 
in a target's ear; the target is inclined to act upon that 
thought. The Power cost is one. 


Chapter Seven: The Spirit World 


* Incite Frenzy: The spirit can cause a Garou to enter 
frenzy. Roll the spirit's Rage (difficulty of the target's 
Willpower). The Power cost is three. 

* Possession: The spirit (usually a Bane) may possess a 
living being or inanimate object. Possession requires a 
successful Gnosis roll (difficulty ofthe victim's Willpower). 
The number of successes equals the speed with which 
possession occurs; refer to the chart below: 


Successes Time Taken 
1 six hours 
2 three hours 
3 one hour 
4 15 minutes 
5 five minutes 
6+ instantaneous 


During the time it takes to possess its victim, the spirit will 
find a dark, isolated part of the Umbra (usually a Blight) and 
remain there, concentrating on the possession. During this 
time a spirit can take no other action. If it engages in spirit 
combat, the possessive link is broken. Possessing spirits are 
often guarded by others of their kind, to ensure that the 
possession process remains undisturbed. 

A spirit that has possessed a victim is able to manifest certain 
characteristicsandabilities through the vessel of the victim'sbody. 
Such hapless humans are known as fomori (see the Appendix). 


183 


l 


= WA 
Recharging Power 

When a spirit is low on Power, it begins to look translu- 
cent, as if it is not fully there. If the spirit has lost its Power 
because of combat damage, it will look ragged, with jagged 
slashes riddling it. 

Spirits can replenish their Power by entering a com- 
pletely inactive state called Slumber. During this time the 
spirit finds a secluded spot in the Umbra and floats there, 
entering a deep sleep. For each hour that the spirit does 
nothing whatsoever, it regains one Power point. Many 
Theurges argue about whether or not spirits dream during 
this time. 

When a spirit is in Slumber, it may easily be bound 
through the use ofa rite, regardless of its current Power level 
or willingness. When a spirit is bound into a fetish, it 
automatically enters Slumber and stays in that state until 
released; the fetish's powers are activated by the user, not 
the spirit. A newly created fetish will not work until the 
spirit has regained its full Power (which can take along time 
for the more powerful spirits). 


Movement 


All spirits can fly (and float) in the Umbra. The maxi- 
mum distance (in yards) they can move in a turn is 20 + 
Willpower. 

The Umbra does not always have a strict geographical 
equivalent to the physical world; sometimes yards and feet 


184 


just don't add up in the spirit world. The Storyteller is free 
to warp distances as she pleases when running stories in the 
Umbra. However, the Penumbra (the zone directly sur- 
roundingphysical reality) does maintain distances analogous 
to the physical world (one yard always equals one yard). 


Communication 


Spirits speak a different tongue from physical beings. 
Spirit communication is not so much a language as a form 
oftelepathy, a comprehension by both parties of the other's 
voiced intent. Not everyone can understand spirits; the 
Gift: Spirit Speech is required to speak with and understand 
spirits. 

Spirits allied to the Garou (such as Falcon's Jagglings or 
Gafflings) may speak the tongue of the Garou if they 
choose. Likewise, many other spirits also know human or 
Garou tongues. Unless these spirits choose to speak so to a 
Garou, she must have the proper Gift to speak to them. 
Gifts that allow control over or interaction with spirits do 
not require the user to understand spirit speech or that the 
spirits understand the user. For example, the Gift: Com- 
mand Spirit works magically, regardless of what the 
commander actually says. 


Fetishes 


A fetish is an object containing the essence of a spirit. 
The spirit is bound into an object and can subsequently be 


Werewolf: The Apocalypse 


called upon to perform tasks for the wielder of the fetish. 
What special tasks a fetish can perform depend on the type 
of spirit bound into it. 

A fetish is almost always a natural object made from 
wood, clay, etc. (although the fetishes of the Glass Walkers 
are often made from technological objects), and can often 
be held in the hand. Many fetishes are adorned with 
feathers, beads, braids and carvings depicting the spirit 
contained within. Some are actually weapons, such as 
spears and knives. 

Fetish powers are legion, for there are countless spirits 
within the Tellurian. All fetishes are sacred to the Garou, 
containing as they do the essences of spirits. Thus, fetishes 
are held in high regard and treated with respect. Agents of 
the Wyrm constantly seek to steal or destroy these fetishes, 
and they have some particularly vile items of their own as 
well. 

A fetish is created through the Rite of the Fetish (see 
Rites, pg. 146). Such creation almost always involves a 
willing spirit. However, certain mystics bind spirits into 
fetishes permanently, against the will of the spirit. These 
fetishes are almost always rebellious and are viewed by the 
Garou as “cursed.” 

To use a fetish, a character must first attune herself to it 
by making a Gnosis roll. Attunement effectively binds the 
fetish to the wielder, for it creates a spiritual bond enabling 
the wielder to take the fetish anywhere in the Tellurian and 
providing empathic knowledge of the fetish's powers. The 
difficulty for this roll is the fetish’s Gnosis rating; so long as 
a single success is scored, the wielder may use the fetish. If 
no successes are rolled, that character may not use that 
fetish, or even attempt to attune it again, until she has 
somehow made accord with the resident spirit. How this is 
done is up to the Storyteller. 

Each time the wielder wishes to use one of her fetish's 
powers, she must make a Gnosis roll (difficulty of the 
fetish's Gnosis rating) to "activate" the power. Alterna- 
tively, she may just spend a Gnosis point to activate the 
power automatically. 


Chapter Seven: The Spirit World 


In order for a Garou to create a specific kind of fetish or 
talen, he must first procure a spirit affiliated with the item's 
intent. For example, a spirit of Healing would not enter a 
fetish like a Fang Dagger or a talen like a Bane Arrow. A 
spirit of War, Pain or Death might. Fetish spirits are almost 
always Gafflings. 

A list of sample fetishes can be found in the Appendix 
(pp. 273-275). 


Talens 


Talens are far easier to create than fetishes; some are 
fashioned by non-Theurges. Talens are similar to fetishes in 
many ways — they are bound into objects, require a Gnosis 
roll to activate (but not to attune), and contain the living 
essence of a spirit. The real difference between talens and 
fetishes is that talens may be used only once. After one use, 
the talen's spirit is released into the Umbra, and the object 
becomes mundane once again. Unlike fetishes, which are 
usable only by those who are attuned to them, talens may 
be used by anyone (including non-Garou). The Rite of 
Binding is used to create a talen (see Rites, pg. 144). Garou 
with this rite may force spirits into objects through success- 
ful use of spirit combat, wherein the spirit is bound rather 
than destroyed. Most talens come into being this way. It is 
not considered immoral to force a spirit into a talen, 
because the use is only temporary. 


A talen receives Gnosis equal to the bound spirit's 
Gnosis. One extra talen of the same type can be made for 
each success received on the Rite of Binding roll. For 
example, three successes allow the creation of four Bane 
Arrows. Talens are almost always created with Gafflings, 
but more powerful spirits can make the creation of multiple 
talens easier. Use of these spirits adds an automatic two or 
three extra talens to the total number. There is no binding 
time limit, but the talen may be used only once. 

A listofsample talens can be found in the Appendix (pp. 
215-216). 


185 


| 


This chapter discusses the different ways a character can 
change during the course of the chronicle. It describes 
many different systems for resolving changes to characters, 
whether the change in question is the accumulation of 
experience or the accumulation of wounds. 

This chapter is subdivided into three sections, each of 
which discusses a number of different systems for imple- 
menting character changes. Character Development 
describes how Traits can increase (and decrease) and also 
includes Renown. Physical States includes systems for 
injuries and recovery from injuries. Mental States includes 
systems for frenzy and the Delirium. 

Oneofthe most exciting things about playing characters 
is seeing them change over time. Watching a character 
develop and grow is like watching a child grow up before 
your eyes. In Werewolf, however, development doesn't 
always mean the character gets better. It often means the 
character slowly and steadily sinks into the abyss. Such is 
the nature of this game. Focus on getting better and surviv- 
ing the rough periods, and try to appreciate the artistic 
impact of losing your humanity or your mind. 

This is a chapter of permutations, not rules. There is 
nothing contained in the next several pages that you need to 
know, but a few things about which you might want to 
know more. Only use the systems that make sense to you; 
ignore all the rest. 


Chapter Eight: Systems 


yrm€——má————À 


Character (Development 


This section discusses the ways a character can increase 
(or decrease) in power and abilities or in the esteem of 
Garou society (Renown). 


Experience Points 


We humans are learning machines, and we learn con- 
stantly — almost despite ourselves. By acquiring not only 
facts and figures, but new ways of being, we can make 
ourselves into what we want to be. Change occurs in 
werewolves as well. 

During a story, characters learn many things. Much of 
what they learn is not the type of thing that can be recorded 
on character sheets, but rather something the players sim- 
ply keep in mind. They may have learned never to leave a 
car door unlocked or never to walk into a dark alley with a 
light behind them. Sometimes, however, what they learn 
can be recorded. 

At the end of each story, the Storyteller awards experi- 
ence points to each character, normally giving the same 
amount to each one. The players then simply record how 
many experience points they gained. Experience points 
can be used to increase Traits. The cost for raising Traits 
varies widely; see the chart below for specifics. The cost is 


187 


La. 


almost always based on the present rating times a certain 
number (yes, you have to do multiplication). Thus, if the 
character has an Alertness rating of 2 and the player wants 
to raise it to 3, it costs four experience points to do so. If the 
character does not have the Trait at all, the cost is listed as 
a"new" Ability. A Trait can only be raised one dot per story 
— never more. 


Experience Chart 
Trait 
Attribute 
Ability 


Cost 
current rating x 4 
current rating x 2 


New Ability 3 


Gift Level of Gift x 3 
Gift from other Level of Gift x 5 
breed/auspice/tribe 
Rage 

Gnosis 

Willpower 


current rating 
current rating x 2 
current rating 


Roleplay Jt 


As the Storyteller, you should not let a player spend her 
experience points to raise any Trait she wishes— it'sa little 
more involved than that. The increased Trait must be 
somethingthe character had a chance to learn or use during 
the st achieved great success 
through use of the Trait, or made a big mistake from which 
she can learn. In the case of Willpower, something must 
have actually occurred to bolster the character's self-confi- 
dence. 

You should only allow Trait increases if they have been 
or can be woven into the story. At the very least, the 
changes need to make sense in terms of the story and not 
simply be changes the player makes because she wants her 
character to be a certain way. This experience system can 
beas realistic as you make it. The more you force the players 
to make sense of their experiences, the more it will add to 
character development as a whole. 


Awarding Experience Points 


Assigning experience points requires a careful balance 
between rewarding the players and maintaining game bal- 
ance. If you follow the guidelines below, you probably 
won't get into too much trouble, but feel free to experiment 
as you see fit. 


End of Each Chapter 


Give each character one to five experience pointsat the 
end of each chapter (game session). One point is given 
whether or not the pack succeeds or fails, as a function of 
simply participating (remember, sometimes we learn de- 
spite ourselves). 


* One point — Automatic: Each player gets one point 
after every game session. 

* One point — Learning Curve: The character learned 
something from his experiences during the chapter. Ask 
the player to describe what his character learned before you 
award the point. 

* One point — Acting: The player roleplayed well — 
not only entertainingly but appropriately. Award for ex- 
ceptional roleplaying only; your standards should get 
increasingly higher. In most cases, only award this to the 
person who did the best roleplaying in the troupe. 

* One point — Concept: The player acted out her 
character's concept very well. 

* One point — Heroism: When a character risks herself 
for others, such as when she suffers multiple aggravated 
wounds fighting the Bane while the rest of the pack escapes, 
give her an experience point. Don’t let characters take 
advantage of this; there is a fine line between heroism and 
stupidity. 


End of Each Story 


At the end of each story, you can assign each player one 
to three additional experience points over and above the 
one to five points earned for completing the chapter. 

* One point — Success: The pack succeeded in its 
mission or goal. Perhaps it was not a complete success, but 
at least a marginal victory was achieved. 

* One point — Danger: The character experienced 
great danger during the story and survived. 

* One point — Wisdom: The player (and thus the 
character) exhibited great wits or resourcefulness, or came 
up with an idea that enabled the pack to succeed. 

If you want to award even more points, thus allowing the 
characters to develop even more quickly, simply invent 
new categories in which to award experience. These can 
even vary from story to story, and can be based on the 
specific circumstances of that story. 


Spending Experience Points 


The costs for raising the Traits listed below are listed on 
the Experience Chart. 


Backgrounds 


Background Traits never change through the use of expe- 
rience points (except for Totem; see below). Changes to 
Background Traits happen during the normal course ofevents 
in the chronicle. For example, a character loses big on Wall 
Street, depleting his assets. His Resources Trait decreases in 
this case. Likewise, he may win big in Vegas, raising his 
Resources. Eventually, the Storyteller will note the changes, 
and the character's Traits will increase (or decrease) appropri- 
ately. A player may wish to ask the Storyteller if one of her 
Background Traits should be changed, but this should not be 
done too often. 


Werewolf: The Apocalypse 


— ————À 


TheStoryteller may design a list of things characters must 
accomplish in order to increase each Background Trait, and 
the players may or may not be shown the list. To gain a new 
Contact, for example, a Garou has to find the right subject and 
befriend him. 

For the most part, Background-raising decisions take place 
over the course of a story. Backgrounds generally increase one 
dot at a time, but major victories or upsets in a story can lead 
to the gain or loss of more than one Background dot at a time. 

The one exception to these rules is the Totem Background; 
itcan be raised through experience points, though roleplaying 
is encouraged as a requirement before experience can be spent. 
Just as every member of a pack can share in the Background 
Cost ofthe Totem, every membercan likewise choose tospend 
her experience on the Totem. 


Gaining Rage 

Characters can buy permanent Rage with experience points. 
Although this raises a character's rating, allowing him more 
potential Rage points to spend, it also raises his chance of 
frenzy, for Rage is the Trait rolled when checking for frenzy. 


Gaining Gnosis 


Characters can buy permanent Gnosis with experience 
points. This improves their ability to step sideways and 
allows them more potential Gnosis points. 


Gaining Willpower 

Characters can buy permanent Willpower with experience 
points; sometimes the Storyteller may give a player a specific 
chance to raise his Willpower. The opportunity to gain 
Willpower isa great motivation for stories, especially the more 
bizarre ones. 

Characters can lose permanent Willpower as well. This 
occurs whenever a player botches a Willpower roll. Luckily, 
this does not occur often, for Willpower is rarely rolled. Gifts 
are exceptions to this rule; a character cannot lose Willpower 
when a Gift requires a Willpower roll to activate. 


Awarding Renown 


Besides experience points, characters will also accumulate 
Renown, both temporary and permanent. Renown is very 
important to Garou. Without it, they are unable to move 
upward in their society; indeed, they will find it difficult to 
establish a place within it. Renown is gained simply through 
the normal course of events, for it reflects others' attitudes 
about a character. However, Renown can actively be sought 
as well. Garou sometimes seek out circumstances and events 
that lead to increased Renown. 

The Storyteller awards Renown in one of three specific 
categories: Glory, Honor or Wisdom. The character must 
accept the award in the category it is given. Glory awards 
cannot be changed to Wisdom simply because the player feels 
he needs more Wisdom to reach the next Rank; Renown is 


Chapter Eight: Systems 


p/m. am, um s A no ——————— // 


awarded based on his actions. If he slew a Wyrm beast, he gains 
Glory. If he upheld the Litany against violations, he gains 
Honor. If he outsmarted a spirit, he gains Wisdom. Thus, 
characters must make sure that they roleplay within their 
character concepts if they want to rise in Rank quickly; 
Ahroun will always strive for Glory over Wisdom, while 
Theurgesare much moreconcerned with Wisdom than Honor. 

Whenever two characters work together to accomplish a 
feat, they share the Renown. If two werewolves cooperate to 
destroy a Bane, each receives Glory for the act. 


Rewarding Renown 


Renown is awarded at the end ofa game session, or, optionally, 
at the end of astory, when the characters are at a moot and can be 
recognized for their actions. Another option, for Storytellers 
comfortable with the rest of the Storyteller System, is to hand out 
temporary Renown awards or punishments during play. In this 
way, aplayercan mark a Renownawardonhissheet when he gains 
it. It is easier on bookkeeping, but the Storyteller must be facile 
enough with the system to award Renown without stopping the 
game to look up a proper reward. 


Gaining Temporary Renown 


Temporary Renown is gained only through roleplaying. 
Temporary Renown is represented by marking the squares 
below each Renown rating, one square for each point 
gained (see the character sheet). It can (and usually does) 
grow larger than the permanent Pool. This is an easy way for 
Storytellers to reward players who roleplay their characters’ 
auspices, breeds, and tribes well. Temporary Renown has 
no game effect except to indicate when a permanent score 
may increase. 

When a character has acquired 10 temporary Renown in 
a category, he may attempt to gain a point of permanent 
Renown (see below). If he succeeds, he gains the perma- 
nent point and loses all his temporary points, starting over 
with zero. When he once again gains 10 temporary points, 
he can try again to gain a permanent point. In this manner, 
characters eventually rise in Rank. 

Refer to the Renown Awards Chart for sample Glory, 
Honor and Wisdom awards. This list is in no way exhaus- 
tive and should be used as a guideline; circumstances can 
greatly change the rewards. Storytellers should not worry 
about memorizing this list or awarding Renown every time 
a character performs some activity from the list; these are 
recommendations only. 


Gaining Permanent Renown 


In order for a character to gain one dot in a particular 
permanent Renown rating, she must first accumulate 10 
points of temporary Renown in that category. She must then 
convince another Garou of equal or higher Rank to perform 
aRite of Accomplishment for her (see Rite of Accomplishment, 
pp. 148-149). This Garoucannotbeamemberofthe character's 
pack. 


189 


I 


Renown Awards Chart 


Activity Glory Honor Wisdom 
Combat and 


Encounters 


Showing restraint in the 
face of certain death 


Surviving an Incapacitat- 
ing wound 


Attacking a much more 
powerful force without aid 


Defeating a minor minion 
of the Wyrm (a Kalus, a 
Bane-infested animal, a 
neonate vampire) 


Defeatingastrongminionof 
the Wyrm (a Psycho- 
machiae, a Black Spiral 


Dancer, an ancilla vampire) 


...destroying/killing the 
minion 


„withoutbeingdamagedor +1 


hurt in the process 


Detecting the 
Wyrm 
Revealing, with certain 


proof, that a human or 
Kinfolk is “of the Wyrm” 


Activity Glory Honor Wisdom 


Revealing, with certain 
proof, that an area or ob- 
ject is “of the Wyrm" 


Falsely accusing a Garou 
of being "of the Wyrm" 


Summoning an Incarna 
avatar 


Successfully completinga 
spirit quest in the Umbra 


Having and properly fol- 
lowing a prophetic dream 


Ignoring omens, dreams, 
and the like for no good 
reason (i.e., they may be 
of the Wyrm) 


Spending a year in ritual- 
istic seclusion (fasting, 
meditation, etc.) 

After following mystic 


^ 


Activity 

Rites and Gifts: 
Performing a Moot Rite 
RefusingtoperformaMoot 
Rite when asked 

Missing a Moot Rite 
PerformingtheRite of Pas- 
sage 
Receiving a 
Wounding 
PerformingaRiteofCaern 
Buildi 


Participating in a Rite of 


Rite of 


Participating in a success- 
ful Great Hunt rite 
Participating in a failed 
Great Hunt rite 

Suffering the Rite of Os- 
tracism 

Suffering the Stone of 
Scorn 

Suffering the Rite of the 
Jackal 

Suffering a Satire Rite: 


Glory 


zm 


2 


Honor Wisdom 
2 
3 
-l 
2 1 
5 7 
3 
-1 -1 
-8 -2 
1 


rary Renown points 


Performing a Punishment 
Rite 

Performing a Punishment 
Riteunjustly (botchingthe 
rite roll) 
Refusing to participate ina 
rite 

Ciggling, joking, or other- 
wise being disrespectful 
during a rite (depends on 
the severity) 

Learning a new rite 
Discovering/creatinganew 
rite 
Discovering/creatinganew 
Gift 

Fetishes: 

Creating a talen 
Usingafetishfor the good 
of the sept or tribe 

Using a fetish for selfish 
reasons only 

Creating a fetish 
Owningaklaive (awarded 
once; only after three 
moons of use) 


A u y; 


2 


2 


-5 


lose one Rank level and all tempo- 


A 


-lto-5 


Activity 

Owning a Grand Klaive 
(awarded once; only after 
three moons of use) 
Sacrificinga fetish for the 
good of the sept or tribe 
Accidentally breaking a 
fetish or talen 
Accidentally breaking or 
losing a klaive 


Caern Activities 
Helping guard a caern 


Staying at your post when 
oncaernwatch, e 
tempted not to 
Not staying at your post 
when on caern watch 
Not helping guard a caern, 
even when asked 
Keeping a caern safe from 
humans through trickery 
or negotiation 
Helpingtopreventacaern 
from being overrun by the 
Wyrm 
Notpreventingacaern from 
being overrun by the Wyrm 


Died while defending a 


enwhen 


caern (posthumous) 
Single-handedly prevent- 
ing a caern from being 
taken by the Wyrm 


Garou (Relations 
and Society 


TeachingotherGarou (de- 
pends on the depth of 
study) 
LearningtheSilverRecord, 
completely (a lifetime's 
work) 
Forahomid Garou, surviv- 
ing to age 75 

For a lupus Garou, surviv- 
ing to age 65 

Breed: 

Forahomid, ignoringone's 
wolf nature for too long 
For a metis, attempting to 
hide one's deformity 

Fora lupus, using too many 
human tools and other 
Weaver things 


Chapter Eight: Systems 


Glory Honor 


3 


3 


2 


3 


7 


Wisdom 


4 


L4 
-1to-5 
1 
4 


$ 


3-5 


191 


un SL 


Activity Glory Honor Wisdom 
Pack: 


i 
EN 
3 


Glory Honor Wisdom 


Being deceptive 3 


Livingalone, withoutone's 
pack, except for ritual rea- 


Failing to perform regular 
duties and chores for the 


sept (subtractedat monthly Telling an epic that is en- 3 4 6 
Moot Rite) teredintotheSilverRecord 
Refusing any sept position Speaking without permis- -l 


(i.e., Caern Warder, Mas- 
ter of the Rite, Master of 
the Challenge, etc.) 


sion at a moot 


> 


Speaking poorly of one's 


Loyal service to a tribe l/year — 3/year — l/year auspice 
Litany: 


a 


Speaking poorly of one’s 
pack 


Breaking the Litany (de- -5to-8 -2t0-4 


pends on the severity of 
the transgression) 
Challenges: 


"Crying Wolf" (i.e., sum- -5 
Participating in an unjust moning the Ahroun of a 

challenge sept when there is no real 

and present danger) 

Protection and Defense: 


H 
i 


Gehavior 

Giving good advice 2 Showing mercy to a way 3 
A velas 

Mediating a dispute fairly 3 


and impartially 
Not protecting a helpless 5 
Garou 
Not protecting a helpless -1 
human 
192 Werewolf: The Apocalypse 


————— 


^ 


Activity 
Protecting a helpless wolf 
Not protecting a helpless 
wolf 

Supporting an innocent 
being accused of a crime 
(who is later proven in- 
nocent) 

Supporting an innocent 
being accused of a crime 
(who is 
guilty) 
Death while defending 
your pack 


Death in sacrifice to Gaia 


er proven 


Frenzy: 
Character suffered a Ber- 
serk frenzy 


Character suffered a Fox 


The character was in the 
thrall of the Wyrm 

The character performed 
aheinousactoracts while 
in the thrall of the Wyrm 
(cannibalism, perversion, 
attackingown packmates, 


Human anà 
Kinfolk Relations 


Maintaining good rela- 
tions with nearby Kinfolk 
Having poor relations 
with nearby Kinfolk 
Choosing a mate and 
breeding 

Choosing a mate, but not 
breeding 

Honorably mated 
Protecting the Veil 
Harming/rendingthe Veil 
Repairing the Veil (cov- 
ering up an instance that 
could reveal the Garou to 
humans) 


Honor Wisdom 

5 

6 

5 

4 

6 

7 
aA 
1 

-l -2 
-3 
E 

6 
2 
3 
3 
4 

2/year 

4 

5 

3 1 


Chapter Eight: Systems 


A um s mar TR = | 


Another option is to challenge an elder. This can only be 
done when the character has the requisite amount of tempo- 
rary Renown. If she wins, 

all temporary Renown in th: 
If she loses the challenge, s 


ie adds one to her rating; she loses 
category and starts over at zero. 
e does not gain any dots in her 
permanent rating; moreover, she loses all temporary Renown 


and must start over. She can challenge again when she 
reacquires 10 temporary Renown. This option is obviously not 
the desirable one for most characters. However, it is available 
to those who cannot convince another to perform the Rite of 
Accomplishment for them. Shadow Lords often choose this 
option... 

The Storyteller can simply decide to award the character 
the extra dot of permanent Renown without the Rite of 
Accomplishment. This should only be done in the most 
extreme circumstances, such as when a character performs a 
particularly valiant or wise deed — one that is unquestionably 
worthy of reward. 


Losing Renown 


Losing Temporary Renown 


Itisespecially easy foraGaroutolose temporary Renown. Inthis 
way may the Storyteller simulate the “pack mentality” of the 
Garouand cause players to realize that their actions have repercus- 
sions in Garou society. 


193 


Storytellers should consider the character's breed, auspice and 
tribe when deducting temporary Renown from a character. 
Ragabash can get away with more extreme trespasses against 


Honor than can most characters, for they are expected to behave 

badly in this respect. Likewise, however, it should be harder for 

them to gain Honor, for even if they perform an honorable act, I 
others will suspect ulterior motives. 

Losing Permanent Renown 

A much more serious penalty occurs when a Garou loses 
permanent Renown. This happens only when a character 
heinously violates some basic dictum of Garou society. For 
example, a Garou frenzies and eats his human prey alive. This is 
a horrible breach of the Litany, but even this may be forgiven 
depending on the circumstances of the frenzy (the presence of 
a Nexus Crawler at the time may cause the elders to excuse the 
incidentas an “unavoidable circumstance of our war against the 
Wyrm”). Nonetheless, the Garou will lose temporary Honor 
Renown. However, should the Garou acquire a taste for human 
flesh and subsequently be caught with anew snack, he will surely 
lose permanent Honor Renown. 

To maintain one’s Renown in the face of extreme societal 
censure, thecharacter must undergoa test of some sortorotherwise 
prove to the elders that the loss of face was undeserved. The 
Storyteller should devise a story in which the character undergoes 
an ordeal to reacquire her lost Renown. He then decides whether 
ornot the character has "learned her lesson” and rules whether or 
not the character has "passed the test.” His decision in this is final. 

Ifa character receives a permanent Renown loss that drops her 
permanent score below that required for the Rank she currently 
holds, she loses all benefits and privileges of that Rank, although 
she does retain any Gifts she leamed at that Rank. | 


Advancing in Rank 


To gain Rank one needs: 
* Renown: A character needs to have attained the number of 


> permanent Renown points listed next to the Rank (see Renoun 
- (fl [ 4 Chart) even to be considered for that Rank. The primary category 
N 4 TIBIAE \ | AUS of Renown vades by auspice. 
AWRY * Challenge: A Garou's Renown is what qualifies her for higher 
Yi Rank, but advancement is not an automatic process. Just because a 
Philodox Garou has achieved Glory 1, Honor 5 and Wisdom 1 
doesn't mean that she automatically progresses to Rank Two. The 
assistance of another Garou who is already of the Rank you wish to 
attain (orhigher) isessential. You mustfirst challenge and then best 
this elder in a contest of some sort. Though you issue the challenge, 
theeldergetstochoose the type ofcontestandcan make itasdifficult 
oras easy as she pleases. If you win the contest, she is honor-bound 
to accept you and recognize you as a Garou of that Rank. There are 
different standard contests for each Rank, but the eldercan make up 
anything she desires. The challenge can even be one of the 
dominance contests: facedown, gamecraft or combat challenge. 
You can challenge a single elder only once. An elder will 
not accept pupils whom she has already beaten (at least not at 
this same Rank). 


Example of Gaining Renown 
and Rank 


Winter’s Heart is a Garou Ahroun of Rank Two. He 
currently has 6 Glory, 4 Honor and 1 Wisdom. If he gains one 
more temporary point in both Glory and Honor, he may 
challenge an elder to attain Rank Three. 


Renown Chart 
Ragabash 


Rank Any Combination 
1 (Cliath) 3 
2 (Fostern) F 
3 (Adren) 
4 (Athro) 
5 (Elder) 


Theurge 


Rank 
1 (Cliath) 
2 (Fostern) 
3 (Adren) 
4 (Athro) 
5 (Elder) 


Philodox 


Rank 
1 (Cliath) 
2 (Fostern) 
3 (Adren) 
4 (Athro) 
5 (Elder) 


Galliard 


Rank 
1 (Cliath) 
2 (Fostern) 
3 (Adren) 
4 (Athro) 
5 (Elder) 


Ahroun 


Rank 
1 (Cliath) 
2 (Fostern) 
3 (Adren) 
4 (Athro) 
5 (Elder) 


Wisdom 


Honor 


Chapter Eight: Systems 


Winter’s Heart, upon gaining 10 temporary Glory points, 
wishes to be recognized for them. He asks an elder to perform 
a Rite of Accomplishment for him. Because Winter’s Heart 
hasprovedhimselfa valiant warriorand islikedbyall, theelder 
agrees. At the next moot, the rite is performed. Winter's Heart 
gains a permanent Glory point, giving him a total Glory of 7. 
He loses all his temporary Glory and must collect 10 more 
before he can again try to gain a permanent Glory point. 

Throughout the next few months, Winter's Heart collects 
10 temporary Honor points and wishes to gain a permanent 
point. He again asks for the Rite of Accomplishment. The 
elders readily agree, and at the end of the next moot, Winter's 
Heart has 5 Honor. 

He can now challenge for Rank Three. He seeks out an old 
elder who he believes likes him, and challenges the old wolf to 
recognize him. The old one smiles — he has seen many young 
ones come before him like this throughout his years — and 
nods. "But first," the elder says, "you must prove your worth. It 
is my right to choose the task, and I choose it so: a riddle." The 
elder has chosen to challenge the young Garou with a bout of 
gamecraft. The Storyteller can either devise an actual riddle 
and challenge the player to guess it, or he can use the gamecraft 
tules given on pg. 223. 

Winter's Heart, surprised by this tactic, is worried. He is a 
warrior, not one to unravel enigmas. The elder is trying to 
teach hima lesson by challenging him with such a test — even 
Ahroun need wisdom. Luckily, Winter's Heart answers the 
riddle successfully. The elder nods, smiling at the Garou, and 
says, "Then goforward, Winter's Heart, and know that youare 
recognized by your People and are now a Garou of high rank.” 

s into the air, whooping with joy. He 
has done it— he is now Rank Three! He rushes off to the sept’s 
ritemaster, hoping to learn a new Gift. 


Renunciation 


A Garou who wishes to renounce her current position and 
take a different auspice may do so. However, she must first 
adopt a new name and lose all but three of her permanent 
Renown points. She then performs (or has another perform) 
the Rite of Renunciation (see pg. 140). 

Afterward, the Garou starts over as a new werewolf, with 
new possibilities and a new auspice. She still possesses any 
Gifts previously learned, but she may not learn new Gifts 
except those available to her new Rank, nor may she ever 
again learn Gifts of her old auspice. Some elders might require 
her to undergo a Rite of Passage, usually one much more 
difficult than her original. At the end of this rite, she may ask 
a spirit to teach her one Level One Gift of her new auspice. 

It is considered disrespectful for others who once knew the 
Garou to speak to her with familiarity (except for her 
packmates). Only when a Garou once again attains her 
previous Rank may she reestablish old friendships and the like. 

Renunciation is performed for a variety of reasons: 

* Sometimes criminals are offered the option of renuncia- 
tion or exile. 


+ Self-loathing can sometimes be so intense that the char- 
acter finds renunciation to be the only solution other than 
suicide. 


* Lack of a sense of purpose and meaning can also lead one 
to such a fundamental step. 

* [n the ballads, it is lost love that always drives someone 
into renunciation. 

+ Sometimesa Garou will dedicate himselfto a purpose and 
renounce his name in order to focus upon his purpose more 
intently. This tradition has long been honored by the Garou. 
A renunciate who manages to accomplish his task usually 
regains his old Rank and perhaps even a Rank above this 
(Storyteller's discretion). 


Physical States 


This section discusses the parameters of health. Injuries 
and healing are discussed, and aging is mentioned. 


Jnjury 

Wounds are all I'm made of. 

— Blue Oyster Cult, “Veteran of the Psychic Wars" 

There are as many different ways a character can sustain an 
injury as there are injuries, but in Werewolf injuries are 
described in one way: the Health Trait. A player records 
injuries in terms of Health Levels; each wound causes the loss 
of one Health Level. Simply check off Health Levels as the 
character loses them, so the last box checked delineates the 
character's current Health Level. 


196 


Werewolf: The Apocalypse 


pamm am, mrt m R, -———— // 


Think of Health asa spectrum with Bruised at one end and 
Incapacitated atthe other. Asa charactersuffers more wounds, 
hetravels down the spectrum until he finally reaches Incapaci- 
tated. When he heals, he simply removes these checks one by 
one, until he is again in perfect health. 

Each success on an opponent's damage roll indicates a loss 
of one Health Level. Thus, if a foe scored two damage 
successes, the player would check off two Health Levels, 
starting with Bruised and going down to Hurt. If a werewolf 
suffers damage beyond the Incapacitated Health Level, she is 
critically wounded (though not dead) and is out of action for 
at leastan hour. A critically wounded werewolf does not regain 
a Health Level each turn, but only one per hour until she 
surpasses Incapacitated. Furthermore, she must make a roll on 
the Battle Scars Chart (pg. 199). 

However, a critically wounded werewolf may try tochannel 
her Rage and remain active. The player can make a Rage roll 
(difficulty 8); the character heals one Health Level per success 
— even those lost to aggravated wounds. This may be tried 
only once, however, and if it fails, she does not recover. Even 
success has its penalties: the character runs the risk of frenzy 
(see Frenzy, pp. 200-201), and the player must still roll on the 
Battle Scars chart, adding one die to the roll. 


Healing 


Werewolves recover from wounds at a very rapid pace, 
healing one Health Level per turn unless the damage is 
aggravated (see below). There are two exceptions: homid and 
lupus Garou in their natural breed forms heal no faster than 
normal humans (wolves). Thus, ifa homid was in human form, 
or a lupus in wolf form, he would heal damage at the normal 
human rate (see Human Death, below). Metis do retain their 
regenerative abilities in their natural Crinos form. Thus, while 
they have many disadvantages, they do heal well in all forms. 

Normally, a Garou must not exert himself when healing, 
but he can attempt to heal while performing stressful actions, 
such as combat. Ifa character chooses to attempt this feat, the 
player must make a Stamina roll (difficulty 8). Success indi- 
cates that the character is able to heal himself while engaged 
in other activities. 


Aggravated Wounds 


Werewolves occasionally suffer wounds so severe they 
cannot regenerate them quickly. These injuries, known as 
aggravated wounds, are commonly inflicted by silver, fire, 
radiation, or the claws and teeth of other supernatural crea- 
tures. Aggravated wounds require time to heal. Garou can soak 
aggravated damage, except for silver (see Silver, pg. 198). 


Aggravated damage can only be healed at the rate of one 
Health Level per day of rest. Aggravated wounds should be 
indicated on the character sheet with an X rather than a 
check. The Storyteller can also deem any particularly severe 
injury (such as falling out of an airplane at 10,000 feet) to be 
an aggravated injury. 


^ 


Human (Death 


When a human or animal reaches Incapacitated, she is one 
Health Level away from death. If she is injured one more time, 
orifitisimpossible to stem the flow of blood from her body, she 
will die. 

Of course, humans heal differently than werewolves do. 
With proper medical attention, humans recover based on the 
following chart. Note that the time given is how long it takes 
torecover that particular Health Level —other Health Levels 
must be healed as well. Thus, ifthe human takes three months 
to recover from being Mauled, he must still take the time to 
heal Wounded, Injured and so one. 


Health Level Time 

Bruised One Day 

Hurt Three Days 
Injured One Week 
Wounded One Month 
Mauled Three Months 
Crippled Three Months * 


*Not only do humans have to heal this Health Level, but 
they lose one point from one of their Physical Attributes as 
well. Humans who reach Incapacitated heal at the 
Storyteller's discretion; some enter comas for the rest of 
their lives. 


Sources of Jnjury 


Despite the Garou's innate toughness, there are many 
ways to inflict harm upon a werewolf. Some are common to 
humans, and thus readily understandable to us, while 
others are specific to werewolves. These sources of injury 
are described below. 


Combat 


Combat wounds are dealt with at length in the Melee 
and Firefight sections of the Drama chapter. Each success 
on an opponent’s damage roll causes the character to lose 
one Health Level. 


Falling 


Occasionally, characters will fall. Use the chart below to 
calculate damage. Characters, human or werewolf, can make 
Stamina rolls (difficulty 8) to "soak" damage. Each success 
indicates one fewer Health Level is lost. Each botch means an 
additional Health Level is lost. 


Distance (in feet) Injury 

5 One Health Level 
10 Two Health Levels 
20 Three Health Levels 
30 Four Health Levels 
40 Five Health Levels 
50 Six Health Levels 
60 Seven Health Levels 


-..and so on, to a maximum of 10 Health Levels. 


Chapter Eight: Systems 


p/m. am, EN mar ET ER -————— 


Fire 

Fire is hazardous to werewolves. Fire always causes aggra- 
vated damage and therefore can potentially kill werewolves. 
Fire, however, holds a deep fascination for the Garou. Any 
size flame can potentially harm Garou, but they can resist 
the effects with Stamina. Have players roll Stamina — the 
difficulty depends on the severity and size of the flames. 
The player must roll each turn her character is in the flames 
to see if the character can resist the damage. If the roll fails, 
the character suffers from one to three Health Levels of 
damage (see the second chart below). If the roll succeeds, 
the character suffers one fewer Health Level of damage per 
success than she normally would. If the roll botches, then 
the character is harmed in some special way — perhaps she 
loses her eyesight or her limbs are maimed. 


Difficulty Heat of Fire 
3 Heat of a candle (first-degree burns) 
5 Heat of a torch (second-degree burns) 
7 Heatofa Bunsen Burner (third-degree burns) 
9 Heat of a chemical fire 
10 Molten metal 
Wounds Size of Fire 
One Torch; part of body burned 
Two Bonfire; half of body burned 
Three Raging Inferno; all of body burned 


Extreme Heat 


Extreme heat (200 degrees +) can injure werewolves in 
much the same way fire can. Use the same system for 
sustaining and taking damage, but modify it according to 
the situation. Normally, heat is not nearly as deadly as fire 
unless it is terrifically intense. 


(Disease 


Werewolves can catch and even transmit human and 
canine diseases, but generally do not die from them; their 
healing abilities and high Stamina ratings protect them. 
Lost Health Levels from disease are assumed to be normal 
wounds; once they are healed, the Garou is cured. 


Poison 


In general, poison acts much like disease — while it 
affects Garou, werewolves’ regenerative abilities enable 
them to heal from it as though the effects were normal 
wounds. Certain poisons of the Wyrm might cause aggra- 
vated damage. 


Suffocation and Drowning 


Werewolves can die by drowning. The length of time a 
Garou can hold his breath is determined by his Stamina 
rating, per the following chart: 


197 


| 


— P SL 


Stamina Holding Breath 
1 30 seconds 
One minute 


Two minutes 
Four minutes 
Eight minutes 
15 minutes 


M 0 Uno Qs tS 


20 minutes 
8 30 minutes 

Garou may expend Willpower to continue to hold their 
breath; each point expended allows them another 30 sec- 
onds if their Stamina is 3 or lower, or fora full minute if their 
Stamina is 4 or higher. 

When a Garou can no longer hold her breath, she begins 
to suffocate or drown as appropriate. A drowning character 
suffers one Health Level of damage per turn; this is not 
aggravated, but may not be healed until the Garou is out of 
the hostile environment. When the Garou reaches Inca- 
pacitated, she will die in one minute per point of Stamina. 


Radiation and Toxic Waste 


Certain of the Wyrm’s caerns are built on sites contain- 
ing various foul substances, and Garou often battle unethical 
corporations and the like in their role as Gaia's protectors. 
Garou exposed to radioactive substances and biochemical 
weapons take aggravated damage roughly equivalent to a 
fire of equal size; because of the cellular mutation and 
destruction induced by these substances, however, such 
wounds take twice the normal time to heal, and +10 is 
added to any roll on the Battle Scars Chart (pg. 199). This 
damage cannot be soaked. 


Silver 


Silver causes Garou one level of aggravated damage per 
turn of contact. A successful attack roll with a silver 
weapon inflicts at least one Health Level of damage no 
matter what the result of the damage roll is. Damage caused 
by silver cannot be soaked. 

Homid or lupus Garou do not take special damage from 
silver when in their natural breed forms, nor does any 
Garou when in Homid form; it is treated as a normal 
weapon against them. 

Each item of silver carried by a Garou reduces her effective 
Gnosis rating by one. This is not permanent, though the effect 
lasts for about a day after the silver has been discarded. In 
addition, for every five silver objects carried by the members 
ofa pack, each member of that pack suffers the loss of one point 
of Gnosis (effectively). For this reason, Garou sometimes 
resent those pack members who use klaives. Use the chart 
below to calculate the penalties for some objects. 

Object Gnosis Loss 

Silver bullets 1 point each 

Klaive 1 point 

Grand Klaive 2 points 


198 


Critical Wounds and Battle Scars 


When a character is wounded to below the Incapaci- 
tated Health Level, she is considered critically wounded. A 
normal human dies if he drops this far, but a werewolf only 
dies if all her wounds are aggravated. When critically 
wounded, the Garou is either unconscious or nearly so (she 
cannot act, but may speak for a short time by spending a 
Willpower point). 

She no longer heals at her normal rate, instead regener- 
ating only one Health Level per hour. Once she has 
regenerated sufficiently to rise above Incapacitated, how- 
ever, she can act again and begins to heal one Health Level 
per turn. At this point, she must roll on the Battle Scars 
Chart below. 

A critically wounded werewolf can attempt to channel 
her Rage to resuscitate her and activate her regenerative 
powers. This recovery attempt may be made only once. The 
player must make a Rage roll (difficulty 8). Each success 
heals one Health Level, even a Health Level inflicted by 
aggravated wounds. If she rises above Incapacitated this 
way, she is back in action. If she fails the roll, she does not 
recover. If successful, however, she must not only check for 
frenzy (see Frenzy, pp. 200-201), but must roll on the Battle 
Scars Chart, adding one extra die to the roll. 

A. battle scar is a permanent injury or disfigurement 
received through grievous wounding. Normally, one die is 
used to make the roll, but certain actions can change this, 
such as when making a Rage roll to recover from critical 
wounds (roll two dice). For particularly severe injuries, the 
Storyteller can add even more dice to the roll. Also, certain 
events can modify the roll, adding to the result. Radiation, 
biotoxins, etc. add +10 on the chart. 

Each time a character gains a battle scar, he receives one 
temporary Glory point. Garou respect those who have 
proved their courage in battle. If the scar is ever healed in 
any way, the character automatically loses two temporary 
Glory points. 


Battle Scars Chart 


Result Effect 

1-3 Superficial Scars: Several large scars crisscross 
your body; these remain hairless when you are in wolf form. In 
some circumstances these scars cause you tosubtract one point 
from Appearance. 

45 Deep Scar: You suffer the effects of Superficial 
Scars, above; additionally, your muscles and joints are af- 
fected. Such a scar hurts when the weather is about to change 
or it is very humid. 

6-7 Improper Bone Setting: One of your limbs was 
broken, was not properly reset, and has healed off kilter. The 
nexttime youare Incapacitated, this limb will snap again; such 
a fracture is considered aggravated damage. 

8 Skull Head: The side of your head was bashed in; 
even after it heals, the skull can be seen. Reduce your Manipu- 


Chapter Eight: Systems 


p/m. am, EN EEE EEE ——————— MÀ 


lation by two when dealing with humans (unless you wear a 
hat). 

9 Broken Jaw: Your jaw and tongue were severely 
misaligned, to the point that it is hard to understand you. Your 
speech is slurred (roleplay this out); additionally, the difficul- 
ties of all rolls involving communication are increased by two. 

10 Missing Eye: One of your eyes was gouged out. 
The difficulties of all rolls involving missile weapons or depth 
perception are increased by three, and the difficulties of 
Perception rolls involving sight are increased by two. 

1 Ahem...: Because of...er, extensive injuries, you 
are, if male, unable to sire children, and both your Charisma 
and Manipulation are reduced by one when you speak aloud. 
You cannot seduce others but are hereafter immune to seduc- 
tion. 

12-14 Collapsed Lung: Your lung was punctured in 
battle, rendering it difficult for you to breathe. Subtract two 
dice from your effective Stamina Dice Pool forall rolls involv- 
ingendurance. Moreover, after more than five turnsofexertion, 
you automatically lose an additional die. 

15-17 Missing Fingers: One of your hands has lost 
several fingers; the difficulties of all Dexterity rolls involv- 
ing that hand are increased by three, and claw damage from 
that hand is reduced by half. 

18-20 Maimed Arm: One of your arms was severely 
wounded; you are no longer able to use it for any purpose 
whatsoever. You move at three-fourths normal speed in 
Hispo or Lupus form, and may not gain the bonus for 
quadrupedal movement in Crinos form. 

21-23 Damaged Legs: You walk with a limp and move 
at half normal speed regardless of form. 

24-27 Spinal Damage: Your spine was fractured, and 
you have lost a measure of motor control; reduce your 
Dexterity by one, and you must spend Willpower to per- 
form actions requiring balance, precision or stillness. 

28-30 Brain Damage: Youlose a point of Intelligence, 
Perception, or Wits (Storyteller's option), as well as one 
10-sided die’s worth of points from Gnosis, Willpower, and/ 
or Knowledges (player's choice of where the points are 
lost). You may well be partially amnesiac. 


Aging 

Garou, despite all their powers and regenerative abili- 
ties, are mortal; they age and die. While werewolves age 
moreslowly than humansor wolves do, age can nonetheless 
drain their powers. With old age (65+ for Garou) comes the 
possible loss of Physical Attributes. Senility is also a danger, 
reducing a character's Wits or Intelligence. An old Garou 
also finds it harder to Rage, and runs the risk of losing the 
wolf unless she chooses euthanasia before this time comes. 
The effects of age are up to the Storyteller to devise. Most 
Garoudie in battle, commit suicide or retire before time can 
appreciably erode their power. 


199 


Retirement 


Sometimes a character gets too old or weary to continue 
the pack life and the active fight against the Wyrm. These 
Garou, usually of high Rank, simply don’t have enough 
ambition to continue seeking more Renown. They return 
to their families and lives, whether they be among wolves 
or humans, and take part in tribal activities only during the 
yearly rituals and in time of need. This retirement is known 
among Garou as “The Homecoming” and is often marked 
by arite enacted by the Moon Dancers. Retiring Garou are 
usually old enough and of high enough Rank to contain the 
Rage in them, making it easier for them to live among 
humans or wolves (see The Curse, pg. 202). 


Mental States 


This section discusses the changes that can overcome a 
character’s psyche or the minds of those around him. Also 
discussed are problems Garou have when interacting with 
human or wolf society. 


Frenzy 


Violent, more violent, his hand cracks the chair 
Moves on reaction, and slumps in despair. 
— Joy Division, “I Remember Nothing” 
All Rage rolls should be considered attempts on the part 
of the Garou to “awaken the Beast.” Properly harnessed, 
this Beast enables the Garou to perform mighty deeds. 


Sometimes, however, too much of the Beast is awakened, 
and the character falls into a mad, berserk rage known as a 
frenzy. She becomes a creature of intense emotion, running 
on instinct alone with little cognitive control. Four or more 
successes on a Rage roll incite a frenzy. 

Frenzied Garou immediately change to Crinos or Hispo 
form and either blindly attack those around them or flee 
into the wild. A character who is about to enter frenzy may 
spend a Willpower point and halt it. If so, she does not 
frenzy, but loses any actions that turn. 

The instincts of “flight or fight” are very strong in a 
frenzied Garou; she is completely overcome with one (or 
even both) of these impulses. The player can decide which 
is prominent, but that decision will last the full duration of 
the frenzy — she cannot change her mind later. If she runs, 
she is said to be overcome by the “Fox”; if she stays and 
fights, she is called “Berserk.” 

A Berserk werewolf might actually turn on his own pack 
members, or anyone else (including helpless humans) in 
Berserking Garou 
sometimes lapse into unconsciousness immediately follow- 
ing the Berserk. Garou whose Rage scores exceed their 
Gnosis do not remember anything that happened to them 
during the Berserk. 


the vicinity, if no enemies are left. 


While in a frenzy, Garou may not employ special brawl- 
ing combat maneuvers, nor may they employ weapons or 
Gifts. Ripping and biting are the extent of their tactics; 
they may not use strategies like ambush or pack maneuvers. 


Bt fon roy 


(M 


While in a Berserk frenzy, the Garou must run up to a foe 
and attack; while in a Fox frenzy, the Garou must run 
directly away. In either case, frenzied Garou will fight 
anything in their way. 

The duration of a frenzy is highly variable and depends 
on how long the stressful situation lasts — so long as the 
character senses danger, he remains in a frenzy. If the Garou 
can escape from the scene and flee into hiding, he will 
recover from his frenzy as soon as he can catch his breath 
(an absolute minimum of three turns). Frenzies last twice as 
long if the Garou is hungry... 

It can be difficult to roleplay a frenzy, but if the Story- 
teller feels that the character is displaying too much 
self-control, he can remove a Willpower point from the 
player — after all, the character was obviously fighting to 
keep control. Just think of yourself as a panicked animal 
that has found itself in a terrifying situation from which it 
is trying to escape — either by killing the danger or running 
away from it. 

The primary advantage of frenzy is that the character 
does not need to apply wound penalties to his actions; his 
Rage is so great that he simply ignores pain. A frenzied 
Garou has his full Dice Pool whether he is at Injured or 
Crippled on the Health Level Chart. 


Rage Rolls 


When any of the following conditions occurs, the Story- 
teller may call for a Rage roll to see if a character goes into 
frenzy. 

* Embarrassment 

* Humiliation 

* Any strong emotion, even lust, passion and envy 

* Extreme hunger 

* Confinement; helplessness 

* Taunting of an enemy 

* You've been wronged 

* Silver is in the vicinity 

* (Optional) Thefirst wound taken in combat; difficulty 
decreased by one if it is from a silver weapon 

* (Optional) You botch an important roll 


Difficulty for Rage Rolls 


The difficulty for a Rage roll depends on the phase of the 
moon. The legends of werewolf attacks during a full moon 
are no mere coincidences. 


Difficulty Moon Phase 
8 New 
T Crescent 
6 Half 
5 Gibbous 
4 Full 


If the Garou is in Crinos form, the difficulty is decreased 
by one. 


Chapter Eight: Systems 


—— € ———— 


The Thrall of the Wyrm 


Sometimes a Garou’s Rage goes too far, nearly consum- 
ing him. The Beast takes over, and the Garou commits 
depravities unimaginable otherwise. The Beast is the taint 
ofthe Wyrm within the soul of every Garou, and the Wyrm 
sometimes demands its due. 

Whenever a Garou scores six or more successes on his Rage 
roll (two more than required, in the case of Garou with a frenzy 
bonus; see pg. 155), his frenzy is abnormal, and he is said to be 
in the “thrall of the Wyrm.” He goes into a Berserk frenzy, and 
even a Willpower point cannot halt it. These frenzies follow 
the normal frenzy rules with regard to effects, duration, etc., 
but also assume the darker aspects listed below. 

Depending on his breed, the Garou might react in 
certain ways during this time. The Triatic aspects of the 
Wyrm (see The Wyrm, pg. 179) have sown their seeds of 
corruption in the three breeds of Garou. 

* Homid: Eater-of-Souls has tainted humankind, and 
thus the homid breed is susceptible to its dark lure. Homids 
in the thrall of Eater-of-Souls are prone to acts of cannibal- 
ism, not only upon their own kind, but on wolves also. If the 
homid incapacitates or kills a foe, he must make a Wits roll. 
If this roll botches, he will stop fora turn, even in the middle 
of combat, and let his hunger take over. Horror stories of 
evil, man-eating werewolves are largely the results of such 
frenzies, mercifully veiled as they are by the Delirium. 

+ Metis: The Defiler Wyrm has sown its seeds of corruption 
upon the metis. Indeed, many Garou believe that the breach 
of the Litany that produces a metis is the result of temptation 
by the Defiler Wyrm. Metis in the thrall of the Defiler Wyrm 
will commit acts of hideous perversion (regardless of the 
gender of the victim). If the metis incapacitates or even kills 
afoe, he must make a Wits roll. If this roll botches, he will stop 
for a turn, even in the middle of combat, and let his perverse 
urges take over. It must be emphasized that this is not neces- 
sarily a character trait of metis characters; it is the curse they 
must endure, the taint from an outside entity. 

* Lupus: Beast-of-War has sunk its corrupt claws into 
the lupus, turning their frenzies into raw, animalistic rages 
and fomenting slight resentments into full-blown, unfor- 
giving anger. Lupus in the thrall of Beast-of-War lose all 
sense of mercy, even to their own packmates. They are as 
likely to attack their own kind as they are to attack a foe. If 
any combatant, even a packmate, is incapacitated, the 
frenzying lupus must make a Wits roll. If the roll botches, he 
will attack the fallen combatant, even pulling away from 
another foe to do so. 

When the frenzy ends, the taint of the Wyrm leaves the 
Garou (unless he again scores six Rage successes). Every 
Garou fears such a frenzy, for it strips away werewolves’ 
illusions about their own heroism and pure nature; they 
cannot escape the harsh truth that the Wyrm lies within as 
well as without. Some Garou go so far as to kill themselves 
after such a frenzy, believing themselves irredeemably “of 
the Wyrm.” 


201 


«Che Curse 


And love is sometimes violent 

And violence has no constraint. 

— Swans, “The Golden Boy That Was Swallowed 
by the Sea" 

Theanimal nature ofthe Garou remains very close to the 
surface; furthermore, despite the millennia that have passed 
since the Impergium, humans still subconsciously remem- 
ber the nightly terror of the Garou's predation. Thus, 
whenever a Garou's Rage exceeds a human's Willpower, 
the human instinctively feels uneasy and nervous around 
the Garou, regardless of the Garou's current form. Garou 
with high Rage tend to be avoided by humans, who mutter 
darkly as "that weird guy" passes. 

Garou call this effect the Curse — and Curse it is, for it 
forever separates werewolves from humans, preventing 
stable relationships, marriages and the like. A Garou can- 
not often maintain a family life with a human, for the Rage 
continually comes between them. Many homid Garou are 
raised in broken homes, with the Garou father or mother 
missing during the child's rearing (although the child's 
Garou tribe watches from afar through the Kin-Fetch; see 
Baptism of Fire, pg. 143). 

The Curse sometimes affects wolves also; they sense 
something unnatural about the stranger in their midst. 
Even among wolves, a Garou is often unwelcome. Only 
among themselves may they find true companionship — 
and even then, consummation of physical love is strictly 
forbidden by the Litany. The Garou's tragedy is their Rage, 
a wedge continually driven amidst humans, wolves and 
their own kind. 


Family Tragedy 


Few Garou are capable of establishing long-term rela- 
tionships with humans, for werewolves find it is nearly 
impossible to control their Rage indefinitely, and humans 
cannot endure the memory of what happens when control 
is lost. 

At the Storyteller’s option, every character who is at- 
tempting to live a human life can be required to make a 
Willpower roll between each story; the difficulty is the 
Rage score of that character. If the roll fails, something has 
happened to ruin or hinder the character's relationship 
with the people among whom he has been living. The Beast 
has emerged, the Delirium has engaged, and never again 
shall the character be trusted. This penalty may be lessened 
should the character be so fortunate as to have Kinfolk. 

A botch indicates that not only has the character lost 
control, but agents of the Wyrm have discovered her 
whereabouts and may be in the process of an attack. The 
playerand Storytellershould immediately go into roleplaying 
mode and deal with this issue. 


(Delirium 


The most merciful thing in the world, I think, is the inability 
of the human mind to correlate its contents. 

— H. P. Lovecraft, “The Call of Cthulhu" 

Whenever humans see a Garou in Crinos form, they 
"freak out" in some fashion. The precise reaction displayed 
varies widely, but 3000 years of being preyed upon cannot 
be forgotten. Humans’ fear of their ancient predators is 
inbred, instinctual and innate — similar to the fear trig- 
gered when a silhouette of a sparrowhawk is exposed over 
a nest of baby mice. This reaction, called the Delirium, is 
why werewolves have not been "discovered" and their 
existence is still disbelieved by so many. Permanent insan- 
ity is the typical result of repeated encounters with the 
Crinos "monster." 

An individual's reaction upon sighting a werewolf in 
half-wolf form varies according to the character's Will- 
power. Simply look on the Delirium Chart, below, to see 
how she reacts. 

If you wish to allow the character a roll to avoid the worst 
effects, have her roll Wits * Occult (difficulty 7) — each 
success allows her to travel “up” the chart one space. 

If you, theStoryteller, need a quick method of determin- 
ing how a normal person reacts, simply roll one die to 
determine the person's Willpower and consult the chart. 
Such a method isn't very exact, but you can assume that 
most people score at least a few successes on that Wits + 
Occult roll. 


Note: Certain human cultures are either immune to the 
Delirium or are less affected by it. A few indigenous peoples 
never suffered the ravages of Garou hunts. Examples are 
Australian aborigine me Amazonian tribes, and even 
some Native Americans. At the Storyteller's discretion, 
these people may receive a bonus on the Delirium Chart. 


The Ueil 


Oncethe Delirious human has lost sight of the Garou, he 
will generally forget or rationalize what has occurred. This 
mnemonic defense mechanism is known among the Garou 
as the Veil. Within a few days the memory of the encounter 
will be hazy at best: "Oh yeah — that guy who was dressed 
up as McGruff the Crime Dog or something. Must've been 
a promo campaign." 


Werewolf: The Apocalypse 


un SL 


illpower ^ 96 of Population Reaction 


Delirium Chart 


'anic: Just get away! The person moves as far away from the Garou as his feet can carry 
him — gibbering, screaming, and ignoring obstacles such as plate-glass windows and 
30-story drops. 


Berserk: In blind, frenzied fear, the human takes some sort of action — any sort of 
action. She might run down the street breaking windows, or might actually leap upon 
the Garou, tearing with her fingernails at “the monster.” 


Conciliatory: The person, though doing her best to remain calm and placate the beast, 


is on the verge of collapse: “Okay, okay, I — I'll do whatever you say, just don’t hurt 
me, please!” She will try to do anything she possibly can to avoid getting hurt. 


Curiosity: This individual might be the stereotypical absent-minded researcher, or 
just a loon who thinks the Garou is Bigfoot’s love child via Elvis's clone, but in any 
event he will be fascinated rather than frightened, even going so far as to study the 
Garou (at a safe distance). This sort is often the most likely to rationalize things later 
on. 


No Reaction/Blasé: This person either has nerves of steel or a brain of Jell-O. For 


i 


whatever bizarre reason, this individual displays no reaction to the Garou's appearance 
whatsoever. If spoken to, she responds, politely and casually. Why? 


Chapter Eight: Systems 203 


There are many actions a player might want her character 
to take during a turn — jumping a fence, seducing a new 
acquaintance or researching vampires in the library. As the 
Storyteller, you already know the rules (from reading Chapter 
Four) and can probably figure out how to adjudicate a player's 
roll, but there are a few techniques and extrapolations that you 
might find interesting. That's what this chapter is all about — 
it provides advice on rules systems for resolving dramatic 
actions. 

This chapter isnot meant to be all-inclusive. These systems 
are only examples of how to resolve the actions taken by 
characters. Use these as guidelines and invent your own 
systems for running things. Don’t stop the action in the middle 
ofadramatic scene to look up something in this chapter — just 
make something up, perhaps based on a rules system you first 
encountered here. 

Only if a roll is truly needed should you use one of the 
systems described in this chapter. If the roll in question is a 
simple roll, none of these systems is needed. If you're not 
interested in the drama created by putting the game into the 
story, use the automatic success rules. Go to the Traits Chapter 
and, by reading about the Trait in question, determine if the 
character succeeds or not, without rolling any dice. You may 
not want to roll dice if you don't have to — they can really get 
in the way. However, there are occasions when rolling dice 
adds tension and suspense, as Lady Luck makes her appear- 
ance. 


Chapter Nine: Drama 


gm— — —————, 


As a general rule, have the player make a roll only when 
there issubstantial doubt in your mind as to whether or not the 
character will succeed in her action. If you can reasonably 
assume she will succeed, then just let her do it. 

When you do start making rolls and have the players do the 
same, make the rolls special and make them different. Don't 
waste a lot of time on a dice roll that doesn't do anything 
special for the story or that is uninteresting for you or the 
players. Each roll of the dice should be a game in miniature, 
with strategy and tactics to master and luck to inject the 
unexpected. 


Scenes 


A scene is a moment in a story when the troupe focuses on 
the events at hand and roleplays through them as if they were 
actually occurring. A scene may only require roleplaying and 
alotofconversation between players and Storyteller, or it may 
involvea number of different actions, some requiring die rolls. 

A scene is like a series of shots taken in a movie, in the same 
location andat the same moment in the story. It is the essence 
of roleplaying, when players describe their characters' reac- 
tions to events rather than explain what they intend to do. 

You should do everything you can to make the scenes in 
your story as dramatic, complete and fulfilling as possible. The 
more you give each scene an exciting beginning, an action- 


205 


packed middle andafulfilling (orstrategically frustrating) end, 
the better your story becomes. 

Describe the scene not as a static picture, but as a place or 
time full of life and action. It should have its own existence 
apart from the characters. The gang leader does not simply sit 
at a table — while the characters are watching he calls over 
one of his henchmen and begins to berate him. Create an 
open-ended story in your descriptions and invite the players' 
characters to enter it. Don't force the players to animate your 
creation — breathe life into it from the very first. 

Time in the story not spent in a scene is called downtime. 
This can be when characters conduct extensive research, 
travel, or can simply be a period during which not every 
moment need be roleplayed. Downtime is a break from the 
intensity of the scene. Though downtime should not be 
overused (generally it's relatively boring), you shouldn't avoid 
it altogether. Use downtime to organize players, direct the 
story more precisely, and progress the plot more quickly. 

The story can turn into a scene at almost any time. Often 
it does so quite naturally, without anyone realizing it has 
happened. For instance, while you and the players discuss how 
the characters intend to make a journey to Chicago, you may 
begin to describe what they see along the way. You have gone 
from downtime toascene. When you begin roleplayingan old 
man who walks up to them and asks for change, you have 
completely immersed them in thescene. Bysimply roleplaying 
without warning, you jump-start the players into their roles, 
instantly beginning a scene. 


Turns 


A scene is divided into turns in order to organize and 
structure the arrangement of events. A turn isa variable period 
of time during which characters can do things. Such a unit 
helps the Storyteller keep track of what is going on and ensures 
that each player gets the same chance to do something. In one 
turn, each character should be able to do one thing. Addition- 
ally, each player should be given about the same amount of 
time to describe what she wants her character todo. Each turn, 
goaround the table in order of initiative (see below), give each 
player an opportunity to state an action, and then go to the 
next person. When you get to yourself, describe the actions of 
the non-player characters. 

Even ifdoing so might not make complete sense, youshould 
use the turn structure pretty loosely. You might, for example, 
let someone climb a tree while someone else fires a gun, even 
though in normal circumstances climbing a tree usually takes 
a minute, while shooting a gun takes only three seconds. 
Adrenaline makes people do amazing things, after all. 


Multiple Actions 


Acharacter can perform multiple actions in a turn (such as 
dodging and shooting a gun), but he has to divide his dice. To 
split a Dice Pool among different actions, the character takes 
the dice from the action at which the character is least skilled 
(the one with the smallest Dice Pool) and divides that Pool 
among all the actions he wishes to perform. 


Werewolves can also spend Rage points to receive extra 
actions. Each point spentenables the character to perform one 
extra action at his full Dice Pool. For example, if a character 
spends two Rage points, he receives three actions (one normal 
action plus two extra actions), each at full Dice Pool. He can 
also elect to perform multiple actions within those three 
actions by dividing his Dice Pool as mentioned above. The 
character must be in a stressful situation (see below) to spend 
Rage in this manner; however, combat is considered a stressful 
situation. A character cannot spend more Rage points per turn 
than his Dexterity rating. More information on Rage can be 
found in Chapter Six: Traits (see Rage, pp. 155-156). 

A character with multiple actions takes his first action 
during the normal order of initiative (unless he deliberately 
delays). He may take no more than one action at this time. 
Afterall characters have completed theirfirst (or only) action, 
characters with more actions may take their second action, 
again in order of initiative. After everyone has taken a second 
action, play proceeds with the third and subsequent actions in 
order of initiative, as above. While a character may delay his 
action, he must perform it before the rest of the charact 
move on to their next action, or it is lost. However, characters 
can always use dice to dodge, so long as there are any dice left 
in their Pools. 


Action Scenes 


Many scenes are so full of actions and dice rolls that they 
require special rules to ensure everything runs smoothly. 
These are times when adrenaline is racing and pacing is fast. 
Actionscenesare the fights, races and feats of dangercommon 
to adventure stories. Turns during an action scene are usually 
very short, lasting only three seconds or so. 


Many different types of actions can occur in an action 
scene, and correlating everything can seem a little tricky. Let 
a character do nearly anything she cares to try, 
even if you assign a difficulty 
of 10. 


— SA” 


re you carefully describe where everyone is in the 


was over there!" You may also want to describe the environmen- 
tal conditions and how they might affect the scene. Rain, wind 
and smoke can affect many rolls. 


Organizing an Action Turn 


turns organize ene, so there are different 


s, look over this list to get ide: 
when the action gets hot. 
you've organized a scene, the more smoothly it will go and MY 
the more fun everyone will have. 


» Describing the Scene 


At the beginning oi 
scene from the ict e. You may 
want to suggest what the characters’ opponents 
might be about to do, but do not actually 
describe wh appen. Sometimes this 
turn, making 
s what occurred. 
nt descrip- 
ential if you want 
to avoid confusion. 


Thiswourchance |_| 


to organize and ar- 


range things so 
that all goes 
smoothly 


ANH SSS 


WS 


SS 


SSY 
OS 


SANO y O 
N S EN 


Ne 


way ann 


N: 


DIS 


NIS 


STEINE 


a 


DN 


ISO 


Ln EOS SÓ RS 
n N “AW 


begin to interact with the environment you havecreated. You 
should make your description as interesting as possible, leav- 
ing open all sorts of possibilities for characters’ actions. 

The players need to roll for initiative (see Initiative, below) 
to determine the order in which their characters will act. In 
especially complicated situations, you can have the players 
describe to you what their characters intend to do that turn, 
starting with the player who rolled the lowest initiative. This 
statement of intent can help you clarify in your own mind 
whatisgoingon, butitslowsthingsdown, soavoiditifyoucan. 
If you wish to be particularly free-spirited, eliminate the 
initiative roll altogether and have the characters act in 
whatever order you wish — e.g., "In the distance you hear 
sirens and see that the street punk at the end of the alley seems 
to have noticed them as well. He wins the 
initiative and sprints toward 
the fence. What are you 
going to do?” 


208 


* (Decision Stage 


Going in reverse order of initiative (if the players made 
initiative rolls), have each player explain what her character 
intends to do and how she intends to go about it. If you did not 
call for initiative rolls, simply go around the table from left to 
right, or in order of character Wits, or using whatever consis- 
tent method you like. You then decide how you want to resolve 
the action — what kind of roll each player must make, the 
difficulty of the roll, and the number of successes needed. You 
can make the process as simple or as complicated as you like — 
e.g., "Ifyouwanttocatch him before he gets over the fence, you 
need to make a Dexterity + Athletics roll, difficulty 6. You 
need to score six successes to catch up with him, but he only 
needs three more to get over the fence." 

All Rage expenditures must be declared now. 


» Resolution Stage 


This is when the players roll to see whether their characters 
succeed orfail. The players roll dice toattempt the actions they 
described in the preceding stage. 

At the end of the turn, you need to summarize everything 
by describing what happened, translating all dice rolls into 
description, plot and story. Don't simply say, “You manage to 
hit the bad guy for three Health Levels of damage.” Get more 
graphic and say, “After ducking away to the left, you sweep 
across with your fist and strike him alongside the head. Your 
hand stings, but you've broken his nose and wounded him for 

three Health Levels.” Or, “With a great burst ofspeed and a 

daring leap overa garbage can, you race down the alley after 

him. Next turn you will be able to make a grab at him 

before he gets away completely. However, youseea police 
cruiser pull in around the corner of the alley.” 

Initiative 

At the beginning of most scenes, you need to 

figure out who goes first. Rolling for initiative is the 

best way to decide the order in which players will 

take their turns for the remainder of the fight. 

Sometimes it will be obvious who goes first, such 

as when an ambush was set or one person is 

clearly caught by surprise. In combat, however, 

if you intend to let the opponents have a free 

shot at the characters, you should not simply 

spring the foes on the players. Let them make 

Perception rolls (difficult ones) to see if 

characters notice something just before the 

bad guys open up. Otherwise, you'll have a 

pack of whining jackals on your hands. 

The difficulty depends on how well the 

ambush was set (usually 8 or so). The 

number of successes the players score 

indicates the number of dice they can 

roll on their first actions (usually 

dodges). 


In a normal 


situation, each player 

makes an initiative roll, and you 

do so for each of the opponents. Every- 

one involved makes a Wits + Alertness roll (or 

youcan have them roll Wits + Brawl, Melee, Firearms 

or any appropriate Ability). The difficulty is usually 4 — 
characters with the most successes act first. Ties act simulta- 
neously. Characters who fail act after those who succeeded 
last. A botchonan initiative roll means the character does not 


LS i 
M ^ 
y 


get to act that turn — his gun jams, or he stumbles and cannot 
punch or dodge. 


Taking Actions 


The four basic actions characters can take without making 
rolls are: 

* Yielding: The character allows the person with the next 
highest initiative to take his action, thereby yielding her turn. 
She can still take her action at the end of the turn. If everyone, 
including her opponents, yields as well, no one does anything 
that turn. 

* Healing: Werewolves are incredibly resilient creatures 
and can heal their injuries very quickly. Each turn, Garou can 
regenerate one Health Level, subject to three restrictions. 
First, they do not heal in this manner when in their natural 
breed form (except for metis). Werewolves cannot use the 
ravenous Beasttoitsfullest while in their natural state, and this 
impairs their healing abilities. Second, aggravated wounds 
cannot be healed in this fashion. Aggravated wounds include 


Movement Rates Chart 


Movement Distance (yards per turn) 

Homid Glabro 
Walk 7 7 
Jog 12 + Dex 12 + Dex 
Run 20 + Dexx 3 


20 + Dex x3 


those in- 

flicted by fire, silver, the claws of other 
Garou, and the attacks of supernatural creatures. Third, if the 
Garou takes any action such as moving, fighting, etc., in the 
turn that he is healing, he must make a Stamina roll (difficulty 
8) to heal. 

* Moving: Thecharacter may move by walking, joggingor 
running. Ifshe walks, she may move seven yards. Ifshe jogs, she 
may move 12 yards + Dexterity. If she runs, she may move 20 
yards + (3 x Dexterity). 

Garou are capable of faster movement in some forms, as 
they revert to the Beast and run on all fours. If currently in 
Crinos (wolf-man) form, characters may move an additional 
two yards each turn if they drop to all fours. Characters in 
Hispo (near-wolf) form may also travel quadrupedally at one 
and one-half times theirnormal human movement rate (round 
down). Fastest of all is the Lupus (wolf) form. This form moves 
at twice human movement rate. 


Remember that Crinos, Hispo and Lupus forms have a 
Dexterity increase; use this when figuring their multiplied 
movement rates. Example: Winter’s Heart has a Dexterity of 
3 in Homid form. She may thus jog 15 yards per turn in Homid 
or Glabro form. In Crinos, her movement rate increases to 16 
yards with her rise in Dexterity. In Hispo, her jog rate is 25 
yards because of another increase in Dexterity (12 + Dex 5 = 
17 x 1.5 = 25). She may jog at 34 yards in Lupus form. See the 
Movement Rates Chart for help in figuring movement. 

No roll is required to move, but movement is the only 
action allowed to the character in that turn. In some situa- 
tions, it can be hazardous to jog or run, and a roll might be 
required to maintain balance when there is glasson the ground 
or bullets are raining down. If a character wants to run away 


Crinos* 

7 (9) 
12 (14) + Dex 
20 (22) + Dex x 3 


* Number in parentheses applies when quadrupedal 


x = Multipliers are applied to Homid movement rates 


Chapter Nine: Drama 


from a conflict or encounter, she must dodge unless she is not 
in the field of fire or otherwise hindered. 

* Reversion to Breed Form: Each breed has a natural 
formto which it can revert without makinga roll. As an added 
bonus, this sort of transformation does not take any time; 
characters whorevert may act normally during their turn. The 
natural forms are as follows: 

Homid — Homid (human) 

Metis — Crinos (wolf-man) 

Lupus — Lupus (wolf) 

For complete rules on changing form, see The Many 
Forms, below. 

All sorts of other actions require rolls. Some are listed 
here: 

* Attack: A character may decide to fire his weapon or 
strike someone. The roll made depends on the attack; for 
instance, a Firearms attack requires a Dexterity + Firearms roll. 

* Change Form: A character may transform to a form not 
innate to her breed, but this requires a Stamina + Primal-Urge 
roll. See The Many Forms, below, for further details. 

* Climb: This action requires a Dexterity + 
Athletics roll. 

* Dodge: Dodging not only allows 
acharactertoavoidanattack, but 
altogetherremoveshim from 
the line of attack. A char- 
acter can make a 
Dodge roll right 
after some- 


one tries to hit him, thereby (hopefully) avoiding the blow. 

* Get to Feet: A human who takes a full turn to rise from 
the ground does not have to make a roll. Quadrupeds don’t 
suffer this penalty; if knocked down, they spring back to their 
feet (or paws) at the beginning of the next turn, without using 
an action or making a roll. 

If a bipedal character (including the Crinos form, which is 
naturally bipedal) wants to get to her feet and still take other 
actions, or ifa quadruped wants to hop up before the next turn, 
she has two choices. She can take dice from her announced 
action and attempt to score at least one success on a Dexterity 
+ Athletics roll (difficulty at least 4), or she can spend a point 
of Rage and get right up without having to make a roll. This 
is an exception to the prohibition against spending Rage 
except during the Decision Stage. 

* Leadership: A character may give commands to 
followers and have them obeyed with appropriate Cha- 
risma (or Manipulation) * Leadership rolls. 

* Reload Gun: This can be done in a single turn so long 


c as the character has a preloaded 
== 
= ^ * 


clip. 

* Research: A char- 
acter may try to look up 

vital information in a 
NN) book. Research gen- 

N erally employs the 
EN Investigation Abil- 
ity. Though this 
would likely 
D take longer 
than three 
seconds, you may 
wish to suspend reality a bit for 
dramatic purposes. 

* Start a Car: This ac- 
tion doesn't require a roll at 
all, unlessa characteris hot- 
wiring the car. 

* Sneak up on En- 
emy: This action 
usually requires a 

Dexterity + 


N Stealth roll. 


< 


* Unjam Gun: This action can normally be performed 
in a single turn by making a Wits * Firearms roll. 


Stress 


Stress isan important consideration for werewolves. Garou 
cannot use Rage to gain extra actions unless they are under 
stress. On the other hand, too much stress can push a Garou 
right over the edge, sending him into a frenzy. Any time a 
Garou rolls Rage and scores four or more successes, he enters 
a frenzy. (See Frenzy, pp. 200-201) 

So what is stress? Stress is any situation that causes tension 
in a character. Any time a character begins to feel edgy, 
threatened or confused may qualify asa stressful situation. The 
following are examples: 

* Combat: Having one's life in danger is definitely a 
stressful situation! Combat is always assumed to be stressful. 

* Impending Danger: This can cover anything from a 
rock about to fall on your character's head (provided she is 
aware of it) to a truck hurtling down the sidewalk in her 
direction. 

* Confusion: Confused characters are in a stressful situa- 
tion. A lone lupus ina large city in full daylight, surrounded by 
traffic and noisy, smelly people, is definitely under stress. 

+ Unexpected Happenings: This coverseverything from 
being ambushed in a dark alley to a simple 
surprise party that really catches 
a werewolf by surprise. 

Frustration: Ifa 
character justcan’tsuc- 
ceed at something, especially if under any sort of pressure, her 
situation becomes stressful. Examples include: disarming a 
bomb, trying to steal a car, fruitless interrogation, etc. Botch- 
ing an important roll is usually considered stressful. 

* Storyteller’s Discretion: This is the catch-all category. 
If your Storyteller thinks that your character is in a stressful 
situation, he is, and you can feel free to start spending Rage. If 
the Storyteller says nay, obviously things aren't quite so bad as 
you imagined. 

Make sure you, the Storyteller, don’t cheat your players out 
of stressful situations. Any combat scene is stressful, and most 
action scenes are as well. There is nothing more frustrating to 
players than not being able to use their characters’ special 
abilities (Rage), and nothing makes players leave a game faster 
than frustration. This is not to say that you should always let 
players convince you into ruling thatascene is stressful. Just try 
to balance things out and use common sense. 


(Dramatic Systems 


Described below are a variety of different systems to resolve 
actions, or, to put it simply, a bunch of ways to make rolls. If 
you prefer to roleplay through dramatic scenes, just use these 
systems as suggestions of what sorts of things can happen 
during the scene. Physical dramatic systems are the most 
numerous, because these actions are impossible to resolve 


y mem. am, 


through roleplaying alone. Social and Mental systems can be 
simulated by the players. 


Physical 


These systems describe physical actions and confrontations — 
dramatic situations in which Physical Attributes predominate. 


Climbing 

When a character attempts to climb any sort of surface 
(atree, cliffor building), ask the player to roll the character's 
Dexterity + Athletics. The difficulty depends on the sheer- 
ness of the climbing surface, the type of surface being 
climbed and, to a lesser extent, the weather conditions. 
Each success indicates that 
thecharacter has climbed 
five feet. Once he accu- M. 
mulates enough successes 
to get to where he wants| 
to go, he can stop roll- 
ing. For example, 
Bonecrusher is 
trying to 
climb 


foot wall, so 
he needs five suc- 
cesses to get to the top. 
A failure indicates the 
character is unable to 
make any progress 
during the turn. A 
botch indicates the 
character falls and 
cannot again at- 
tempt to climb 
without expend- 


Chapter Nine: 


———À 


——-——^———————— ANS 


2 Easy climb: a tree with many stout branches 
4 Simple climb: a cliff with many handholds 
6 Straightforward: a tree with thin branches 
8 Treacherous: very few handholds 

10 Extremely difficult: a nearly sheer surface 


Feats of Strength 


A character’s Strength is often used alone, without an 
Ability, for actions where brute force is all that matters. This 
system works on the same basis as automatic successes. If the 
character’s Strength equals or exceeds the difficulty of the task 
she is attempting, she succeeds automatically. Only if the 
difficulty is higher than her Dice Pool must she make a roll. 

When the character makes the roll, however, it is based on 
Willpower, not Strength. It is a simple roll, so the character 
gets only one chance to make it. The difficulty is almost always 
9, though it can vary according to the surface conditions, the 
wieldiness of the object being lifted, and Storyteller whim. 
Each success increases the character’s effective Strength by 
one step on the chart below (to a maximum of five steps). 
Thus, if the character hasa Strength of 4, but wants to flip over 
acar, she needs three successes on the Willpower roll to do it. 


Dice Pool Feats Lift 

1 Crush a beer can 40 Ibs. 

2 Break a chair 100 Ibs. 
3 Break down a wooden door 250 Ibs. 
4 Break a 2" x 4" 400 lbs. 
5 Break open a metal fire door 650 Ibs. 
6 Throw a motorcycle 800 Ibs. 
7 Flip over a small car 900 lbs. 
8 Break a three-inch lead pipe 1000 Ibs. 
9 Punch through a cement wall 1200 lbs. 
10 Rip open a steel drum 1500 lbs. 
11 Punch through 1" sheet metal 2000 lbs. 
12 Break a metal lamp post 3000 Ibs. 
13 Throw a car 4000 lbs. 
14 Throw a van 5000 Ibs. 
15 Throw a truck 6000 Ibs. 


Jumping 
Jumping requiresa Strength roll, ora Strength * Athletics roll 
if it is a horizontal jump and the character gets a decent 


3 (unless there are difficult weather con- 
ditions or there is a narrow 
landing space). The Story- 
teller calculates how many 
successes are required to 
make the jump. There are 
no partial successes in jump- 
ing; the character either succeeds 
in one roll, or she falls. 

If necessary, you can use the chart below. The number of 
successes required is based on the number of feet that must be 


212 


p mmn am, 


jumped and whether the character is jumping horizontally or 
vertically (see the chart below). 


Type ofJump Feet per Success 


Homid Glabro Crinos Hispo Lupus 
Vertical (up) 2 3 4 5 4 
Horizontal (across) 4 4 5 6 7 


Long Running 


Wolvesare renowned for theirstaminaand ability to run for 
long periods of time without resting. Werewolves are also able 
to run for days without rest. Garou jog when Long Running, 
but they still cover phenomenal distances when they perform. 
this feat. 

Werewolves are able to jog at about 16 miles an hour for a 
number of hours equal to their Stamina without having to 
makea roll. This assumes that they are in Lupus form, the only 
form in which they may LongRun. Afterthat, they must begin 
rolling Stamina * Athletics (difficulty 4) each hour. If they 
fail, they suffer one Health Level of aggravated damage from 
strained muscles and an overexerted respiratory system; the 
difficulty of the next hour's roll is increased by one. If a Garou 
fails two rolls in a row and wants to keep going, he must expend 
either a Rage or a Willpower point. Rage can be spent in this 
situation because Garou who feel that they may look weak in 
the eyes of their packmates are under stress. Even then, the 


difficulties of that — SS 


Werewolf: The Apocalypse 


———————À 


qe 


Garou's Long Running rolls are increased by two until the mightonly want to catch up halfway, in order to get a better 
Garou can rest. shot at the fleeing character. 

Werewolves who Long Run are unlikely to stop for one of » 
thie ow who cannot keep vo. Only de ara survive ani MeDalr 


Long Runs are one way in which werewolves keep their race Getting something fixed is not always as easy as taking it 
free of weaklings. o the garage; sometimes the task has to be performed A 
Pursui oneself. When a character wishes to fix any sort of me- 
ZA ursuit chanical implement, he must roll Dexterity + Repair. The 
This simple system is used when one character attemptsto difficulty is determined by the complexity of the task (see 
catch another. One opponent starts with a certain numberof the chart below). Before the job can be considered com- 
successes. This number is either determined by the Storyteller plete, a certain number of successes must be collected, 
(this is the preferred method) or by having the pursued usually between two and 20. Each roll means that a certain 
character roll Dexterity * Athletics (difficulty 6) foreach turn amount of time is spent — whatever the 
ofheadstart on the pursuer and add up the number of successes demands of the story require. A 
achieved. This number of successes must be collected by N botch indicates that the de- 
the other character before he can 3 vice is somehow 
catch up. Once he does, he damaged in the at- 
cantrytograppletheflee- tempt. 
ing person (see the m" Thissystem can 
combat rules). A-— be fun to use dur- 
Thepursuer UA Z ing combat, as 
one character 
/ y G desperately 
/ 


Chapter Nine: Drama 


——À 


tries to start the car while the others fend off the Pentex 
fomori hit squad. 


Job Difficulty # of Successes 
Simple mechanical repair 4 3 
Soldering job 5 2 
Electronic malfunction 5 S; 
Fitting in new part 6 10 
Repair stalled car 6 = 
Tough auto repair 7 10 
System overhaul 8 20 
Technical glitch 9 2 


Shadowing 


Sometimes a character will want to follow someone. In 
order to be led somewhere interesting, this needs to be done as 
discreetly as possible. That is what shadowing is all about — 
following someone without the pursued 
knowing the character is there. 

There are two components to 
shadowing—keep- 
ing track of ~~ S 
where the 
subject is and A 
making supe 
he doesn’t E 
see his tail. 
Shadow- 


ing can 


be conducted on foot or in vehicles. Rolls can even be made 
ifsomeoneelseisdriving, such asa taxi driver —“I’msorry, but 
I can't remember the address — you'll just have to follow my 
directions. Take a right at the corner. No, wait, a left!" 

The character attempting to shadow must make a Percep- 
tion + Investigation (or possibly Streetwise) roll. The difficulty 
is normally 6 (though it can vary from 5 to 9 depending on the 
thickness of crowds, relative speeds of vehicles, and weather 
conditions). Each success indicates that the target has been 
followed for a turn. A certain number of successes is required 
to follow the subject all the way to his destination. A failure 
indicates that the character has temporarily lost the subject, 
but can try again next turn. If she fails a second time, she has 
lost the subject completely, and the chase is off (unless she can 
think ofanew approach). A botch indicates that not only does 
the character completely lose the subject, but she is so in- 
volved in shadowing that she gets into trouble of her own — 
a gang tries to beat her up, she falls into an open manhole, or 
she has a car accident. 

Though the Perception roll is the most impor- 

tant aspect of shadowing, a Stealth roll must 

also be made to see if the subject notices 

he is being followed. Each turn the 

A Perception roll is made, the Stealth 

m roll must also be made. The player 

2 must roll Dexterity * Stealth (or 
v Dexterity * Drive ifthe character is 


RAD inavehicle). The base difficulty i 
KT) the subjects Perception + Alert- 


ness, but this can be modified by 
ae up to three points in either direc- 


x se tion depending on the 
Z + circumstances (empty streets or 
— e thick crowds, for instance). A 
Le single success indicates the 


A shadower is not detected, and each 
additional successalso makes it more 
difficult for the subject to spot the 
shadower, even if he is actively look- 
ing. A failure indicatesthesubject 
pa becomes suspicious and starts to 
glance surreptitiously over his 
shoulder (and may make Per- 
ception rolls of his own; see below). A botch 
indicates the character completely reveals herself 
, and the subject now knows he is being followed. 
If the subject is alerted somehow (by the 
shadower's failure on the Dexterity + Stealth 
roll) or simply looks to see if he is being followed 
(out of habit, perhaps), roll Perception + Inves- 
tigation (or Streetwise). The difficulty is the 
Stealth + 5 of the shadower. Each success on this 
roll indicates a higher degree of suspicion. Suc- 
cesses can be accumulated from tum to turn; see 
thechart below tosee howalert the subjectistothe 
fact that he is being followed. Failure means 


| 


nothingoutoftheordinary isseen and the “suspicion value" ofthe 
subject decreases to zero. A botch means the subject is convinced 
he isn't being followed and no longer looks behind him. 


Successes Suspicion 
1 Hunch 
2 Suspicion 
3 Near-certainty 
4 Positive knowledge 
5 The shadower has been spotted 


Buddy System: Twoor morecharacterscan share shadow- 
ing responsibilities by trading off. However, they must have 
previously worked/trained together in this technique; other- 
wise, the difficulties of all rolls for the pairare increased by one. 
One player shadows for a turn or more, trading off whenever 
her partner gives the signal. If the pair switches off, the subject 
can’taccumulate successes for very long, which makes it much 
harder for the subject to spot shadowers. 


Sneaking 


When a character attempts to hide in shadows or sneak up 
ona guard, she must roll Dexterity + Stealth (difficulty of the 
guard's Perception * Alertness). Anyone who is on watch or 
actively looking for intruders can be considered a guard. 

The sneaking character needs to collect a certain 
number of successes in order to make it to where she 
wants to go. A Perception + Stealth roll can be made if 
the player wants to estimate how many successes will 
be needed; the difficulty of this feat is usually 7. 

Failure of any sort on a Stealth roll indicates detec- 
tion. 


Stunt (Driving 


This system is used to determine the outcome of nearly 
any type of automobile chase or maneuver. Dice rolls in 
chases are made not only to see how 
fastadrivergoes, butalso tosee 
if she stays on the road. 
Each vehicle is rated 
for its maximum 
safe driving 
speed, as well 
as its maneu- 
verability. 
One vehicle 
is not always 
so fast or ma- 
neuverableas 
another, so the 
detailsofthechase 
often depend on the make of 
the vehicle (see the chart be- 
low). 

A character can make special 
maneuvers inordertocatch or 
lose another vehicle, such 


as spinning around a tight corner, doing a 180? turn, or 
wheeling about to block a road. Essentially, one character 
makes a special maneuver and the other character must copy 
that maneuver by making the same or an approximate roll. 
The player must roll Dexterity (or perhaps Perception) 
Drive. However, the vehicle's Maneuverability rating dictates 
the maximum numberofdice that can be rolled. The complex- 
ity of the maneuver and the speed of the car determine the 
difficulty. You should give each maneuver a basic difficulty 
from 2 to 7, and then designate a speed at which it can be 
completed at that difficulty. This is most often the Safe Speed, 
but can be much less depending on how complicated or tight 
the maneuver is. The difficulty increases by one for every 10 
mph the vehicle exceeds that speed while performing the 
maneuver. The driver decides how fast her vehicle performs 


the maneuver, although she will not always be able to decel- 
erate enough to avoid a crash or collision. 


Vehicle Safe Speed Max Speed Maneuverability 
Six-wheel truck — 60 90 3 
Bus 60 100 3 
18-wheeler 70 110 4 
Sedan 70 120 5 

ZA Mini-van 70 120 6 
Compact 70 130 6 
Sporty compact 100 140 7 
Sport coupe 110 150 8 
Sports car 130 170 9 
Formula One race car 140 240 10 
The Many Forms 


Garou may alternate among five 
forms, rangingfrom the Homid (pure 

EN human) to the Lupus (pure 
N wolf). Each form has its 
j N advantages and dis- 


TERN 
N 


advantages. 


216 


Werewolf: The Apocalypse 


To change from form to form requires a Stamina + Primal- 
Urge roll. The difficulty depends on the desired form (see 
below). 

However, a Garou cannot necessarily shift from Homid to 
Lupus in one action. To shift forms from human to wolf, all the 
forms in the middle must also be assumed. Toshifttoadesired JM. 
form in one turn, the character must score a number of 
successes equal to the number of intermediary forms, plus his 
final form, plus one (number of forms + 1). If the character 
scores fewer successes than required, he assumes whatever 
intermediary form the dice indicate. If he scores no successes, 
he does not shift at all. 

Example: Bonecrusher is in Homid form, but 
to assume Crinos shape for combat. He thus needs 
three successes: one for Glabro, one for 
Crinos (his desired form), and one 
fortheconstant modifier. If 
he wanted to shift 


all the way to 
Lupus, he would need 
five successes. If he wanted to 
shift to Glabro, he would need two 
successes. 
Alternatively, the character may elect to spend a 
Rage point; if he does so, the change is automatic and 
instantaneous, no matter how many forms must be “crossed 
over." Clothes worn at the time of transformation are 
shredded unless they are dedicated to the Garou (see 
Rite of Talisman Dedication, pg. 144), in which case they 
become part of the new form. 


) Homid: The Human 


Statistic Adjustments: None 

Shift Difficulty: 6 

Change Description: This is 
the normal state for most charac- 
ters who wish to interact with 
human society. This form is in all 
ways identical to a human. The 
Homid form does not regenerate 
damage, but may carry silver 


items without 
= 
Ry 


SS harm. L 


Va —————————À 


A 
TARAN a 2 the Glabro form will _ 
p = 


— À SL 


Glabro: The Near-Man 


Statistic Adjustments: Strength +2, Stamina +2, Manipulation -1, Appearance -1 
Shift Difficulty: 7 
Change Description: The Glabro is relatively manlike, but differences are 
apparent. The Garou gains anywhere from 10096-20096 of body weight (none 
of it in fat) and an extra six inches or so in height. The body becomes 
massively muscled, more so than a champion bodybuilder, while the 
face becomes sloping and beetle-browed. Body hair is profuse in 
* this form, and nails and teeth are longer. While the character 
can pass for human in dim light, 


definitely be remembered as strange and scary. 
Younger Garou often give the Glabro form the nickname of “Mr. e 
Hyde” \ 
Roleplaying: The Glabro form is not so filled with bloodlust as the Crinos 
form, and can interact with society in a very crude fashion. Full human speech is 
possible, but the Glabro usually speaks no more than one or two sentences 
ata time, and these are usually delivered in a guttural snarl. However, the 
Garou tongue can be spoken reasonably well. 0 


Crinos: The Wolf-Man 


Statistic Adjustments: Strength +4, Stamina +3, Dexter- 
ity +1, Manipulation -3, Appearance 0 

Shift Difficulty: 6 

Change Description: The Garou gains an additional 
50% height (yes, a six-foot man becomes a nine-foot 
Crinos!) and another 100%-200% weight. The body 
becomes covered in fur, and the head becomes that of a 
snarlingcanine. Fangsand talonsare now pronounced, 
and the arms become long and apelike, suitable for 
running on all fours. The addition of a tail helps the 
Garou maintain its balance. 


o 


Roleplaying: The Crinosisnotaform forgentility 
or persuasion. It is the embodiment of the Beast and is 
protected by the Veil. Human speech of any more than 
a few words (such as: "I hungry!" or “You die!”) requires 
the expenditure ofa Willpower point. Garou in this form 
canspeak the Garou tongue well, andcan speak likea wolf 
(growls and howls), although more crudely than when in 
Lupus form. 


Hispo: The Near-Wolf 


Statistic Adjustments: Strength +3, Stamina +3, Dexterity +2, Manipulation -3 

Shift Difficulty: 7 

Change Description: The Hispo is a huge, hulking, wolflike beast resembling the 
prehistoric dire wolf. The head and jaws are massive, and the bite of a Hispo causes one 
additional die of damage. In emergencies the Hispo can stand on its hind legs, but 
it mostly stays on all fours. It weighs almost as much as the Crinos, but its 


— a LR 


wolflike legs enable it to run at one and one-half times normal 
speed. Perception roll difficulties in this form are reduced by 
one, but the Hispo has no hands and may not hold objects 
save with its jaws. 


akilling machine. Any human speech in this form 
requires the expenditure of a Willpower point, 
buta Hispo can speak the Garou tongue and 
talk to wolves with little difficulty. 


Lupus: Wolf 


Statistic Adjustments: 
Strength +1, Stamina +2, Dex- 
terity *2, Manipulation -3 

Shift Difficulty: 6 

Change Description: Thechange 
to Lupus consists mainly of weight dispersion. The teeth 
becomesmallerand less imposing than those of the Hispo. The 
claws are also not so large. Thus, the Lupus cannot cause 
aggravated wounds with its claws. The bite of a Lupus, how- 
ever, still causes aggravated wounds. The Lupus can run at 
twice normal human speed. The senses of the Lupus are also 
exceptionally sharp; the difficulties of all Perception rolls 
made in this form are reduced by two, and the Lupus may roll 
Perception + Primal-Urge (difficulty 6) to perform many 
sensory feats impossible to humans: sight in near-darkness, 
exceptional hearing and smell, etc. Like the Hispo, the Lupus 
has no hands. 

Roleplaying: The Lupus is the most instinct-driven of 
all Garou forms. Most of the time the Lupus will flee rather 
than fight a battle. Lupus shun human habitats. Lupus 
cannot speak to humans; however, they can freely talk to 
wolves and can speak the Garou tongue to some degree. 

Note: Whenever a Garou is trying to scare or startle 
someone, theManipulation modifiersfor the various forms 

do not apply; the Garou has his 
full Manipulation Attribute 
for this activity alone 
(see Intimidation, be- 


Partial Transformations 


Certain Garou havesuch command overtheirshapeshifting 
abilities that they can transform parts of their bodies. For 
example, a Garou in Homid form might 
transform one hand into a paw, or 
change her ears into those of a wolf 
tosharpen hearing; aGarou in Hispo 
formmightchangehisforepawsinto 
hands. Any partial transformations 
require the expenditure of a Willpower 
point, and a successful Dexterity + Pri- 
mal-Urge roll (difficulty 9). 


Social 


These systems involve social interaction between people. 
They nearly always require a Charisma, Manipulation or 
Appearanceroll. Often these systemsare best leftunused, with 
thesuccessorfailure ofa particular social ploy instead resolved 
through roleplaying. 


Animal Attraction 


Garou can be very attractive to humans, in a dangerous sort of 
way. Theycanalsobe very threatening— response tends tobe one 
way or another, with little middle ground. 

Through the use of his animal magnetism the Garou seeks to 
overcome the human's emotional defenses. This cannot be at- 
tempted if the character has previously induced the Delirium in 
that human (see pp. 202-203). 

This attraction should not be confused with seduction. The 
Garou does not seek to woo the human he targets, but to stir the 
primal passions within her, todrawoutherbestialnatureandchain 
it to his own for a time. However, not everyone is comfortable 
getting in touch with the Beast, and this technique can backfire. 


Animal Attraction is an extended, resisted success test. The 
Garourolls Charisma + Primal-Urge (difficulty ofthe Garou’sown 
Rage). The number of successes needed in this test equals the 


target’s Willpower., A failure indicates that she is uncomfortable 
around the character and does not like to be near him. A botched 
roll signifies that the target received a direct look at the Beast and 
is now under the effects of the Delirium. In either case, it is likely 
that the target will call for help or otherwise endanger the 
character. 

The more successes the character gains, the more at- 
tracted to him the human is. In this way, Garou 
may breed with humans without hav- 
ingtoresortto subtle social tricks. 


Credibility 

This system is used when a character attempts to 
convince someone she istellingthe truth: forexample, when 
she attempts to persuade a jury she is not lying or tries to 
convince a police officer of her identity. The player must make 
a Manipulation + Leadership roll. The difficulty is the other 
subject's Intelligence + Subterfuge. Lower the difficulty by one to 
three ifthecharacteristellingthe truth (itdoesmakeadifference). 
Each success indicates a higher degree of believability. Five 
successes indicate the subject is completely convinced. A failure 
indicates disbelief, and a botch indicates the character is caught in 
a lie (or the subject thinks he has caught her in a lie). 


Facedown 


Itsastaple ofheroic fiction: the heroand the villainstareateach 
other, sweat beadingtheir brows,andthenoneofthem walksaway. 
In Werewolf, a facedown istheactofpsychingoutone’sopponent. 
The system is simple: Each opponent rolls Rage, or Charisma + 
Intimidation (whichever is higher; see below); the difficulty is the 
opponent's Willpower. The one who first accumulates a number 
of successes equal to his opponent’s Wits + 5 wins, thereby forcing 
the other to look away. A character can spend a Willpower point 


Chapter Nine: Drama 


fmm. m, CEPA CERATI TO nm —— TA 


each tum toavoid thisandcontinue glaring, buthe will eventually 
run out of Willpower. 

If two Garou of differing Ranks square off, the difficulty for the 
Garou of lesser Rank is increased by one for every two Ranks his 
opponent is above him. Werewolves who lose a facedown to a 
human always lose one point of Glory if other Garou see them; 
Garou never let someone live that down. Humans who lose a 
facedown to a Garou always flee, unless they spend a Willpower 
point. 

A Garou whose Rage exceeds his Charisma + Intimidation 
Dice Pool must use his Rage to make the roll. The disadvantage is 
thathedoesn’twanttoscore toomany successesatonce; more than 
three and he enters a frenzy! Because of this danger, Garou rarely 
engage in facedowns with one another; it is simply too dangerous 
to be so frivolous with one's Rage. If two Garou do engage in a 
facedown, it isa sure sign that they are about to engage in one-on- 
‘one combat — to the death. 


Fast-Talk 


Fast-talk is a means of verbally browbeating and confusing 
someone into submission. Manipulation + Subterfuge isthe most 
common roll for such a feat; Charisma or Appearance can 
sometimes be substituted, as can Performance. The difficulty is 
the target's Wits + Streetwise. Success indicates that the target 
becomes confused and is likely to agree with the subject, at least 
momentarily. 

Willpower points can be expended to resist fast-talk. Failure 
indicates that the attempt has faltered, and the target can try to 
interject something — an attempt to explain himself, or even an 
attempt tofast-talk back. A botch indicates that the target doesn't 
get confused, only angry. Fast-talk attempts by the character will 

never again work on him. 

Repeated rolls might be necessary to confuse the target. As 
Storyteller, youneedtorunattemptsat fast-talk ina manner 
consistent with the mood of your game. It can be as 
slaphappy or as deadly serious as you like. 


Jnterrogation 


Interrogation can be used in a number 

of different situations. It is a form of 

questioning, not torture, though intimida- 

tion is certainly employed. Torture can be 

used, but you will have to develop your own 

rules for that if you wish to include it in your 
chronicle. 

The player makes a Manipulation * Intimidation roll 
(difficulty of the victim's Willpower). The number of 
successes indicates the amount of information obtained 
(see the chart below). A failure indicates the character 
learns nothing of value. A botch indicates the subject tells 
the character nothing and will never tell him anything — 
or worse, the subject lies. For this reason, the Storyteller 
should often make the roll for the player. 


Successes Interrogation 

1 Only a few mumbled facts 

2 Some relevant facts 

8 Much interesting information 

4 The subject talks on and on 

5 Everything of import is discovered 
Intimidation 


Many of the Garou’s different forms create problems 
during social interaction. These are represented by nega- 
tive modifiers to the Manipulation Attribute. However, 
there is one exception: the raging snarl of the Beast. A Garou 
does not suffer the Manipulation modifier when trying to scare 
her foes. Whether she is letting loose a howl, striking a 
menacing pose or revealing sharp incisors in an evil grin, she 
can use her full Manipulation Attribute for her roll. 

The effect of a Garou intimidation attempt is up to the 
Storyteller, although the following guidelines may help. Manipu- 
lation + Intimidation is rolled; the difficulty ranges from 5 to 9, 
depending on the circumstances (lower in the wildernessat night, 
higher in the brightstreets of Paris). The Storyteller may add 
or subtract dice depending on the Garou's action and 
form (a Crinos is more intimidating than. a Homid). A 
Garou who has just torn a fomor to pieces 
might gain two dice to his roll to scare the 
(former) fomor'sfriends, 


while a Garou e 


Du / 


whojusttrippedand fell flat on his face might lose three dice on his 
roll. A botch on this roll can make the Garou look pretty silly, and 
may allow foes to see a weakness in her they can exploit. 

When a human sees a Garou in Crinos form, the Delirium 
affects his response. Intimidation rolls may heighten the 
effect, at the Storyteller's discretion. 


Oration 


Ifa player wants her character to give a speech, but doesn't 
actually want to recite it, you can use this system. The player 
should at least describe what her character says and maybe 
recite a memorable phrase — that might even get her started 
into roleplaying it out. Oration is often very difficult to 
roleplay, so never force your players to do so. Just use this 
system. 

The player makes a Charisma + Leadership roll. The 
difficulty depends on the mood of the crowd, its willingness to 
hear what the orator says, and its penchant for throwing rotten 
vegetables (difficulty is usually 7). If the orator has any sort of 
reputation, you may wish to adjust the difficulty accordingly. 
The number of successes indicates how impressed 
the crowd is (see the following chart). It is a 
simple roll, so the player has only 
onecrackatit. A failure indi- 
cates the crowd ignores 
the character. A 
botch indicates the 
character is go- 
ing to be 
lynched 


o qa 
ze 


(or, if that sort of thing isn't common, booing begins). 


Successes Crowd Reaction 
1 They listened, but aren't excited 
2 The character has convinced them somewhat 
3 The crowd is won over 
4 The crowd is completely enthralled 
5 The crowd isin the palm ofthe character's hand 


If the speech is vital to the story, the player may make 
several rolls. If you want to spend some time on it, you can 
make it an extended action, interspersing each roll with 
roleplaying. The character can spend as many turns as she 
would like on the speech; after the third turn, however, the 
difficulty increases by one each turn. More successes than five 
might be required to win over the crowd completely. 


Performances 


This system is used whenever a character gives any type of 
performance, whether it be comedy, music, acting or 
storytelling. It can be on a stage or in a nightclub, and can be 
formal or informal. 

The player must roll the appropriate Attribute + Perfor- 
mance (orExpression). The difficulty isbasedon how receptive 
the audience is. A failure indicates a lackluster, eminently 
forgettable performance. A botch indicatesa miserable perfor- 
mance that cannot even be finished — the instrument breaks 
or the character is booed off the stage. 

The number of successes indicates how moved the audi- 
ence is (see the chart below). These successes determine the 
artistic merit or technical verisimilitude of the piece. 


Successes Your Performance Reaction 
1 Mediocre Polite applause 
2 Average Approval 
3 Good Genuine appreciation 
4 Superior Vigorous applause 
5 Exceptional Ecstatic reaction 
6 Superb Immediate sensation 
7 Brilliant Miracle, magnum opus 
Seduction 


Seduction is an unnatural means of gaining intimacy with 
another person, because every step is carefully staged 
and real feelings are not shared. A seduction goes in 
stages, and unless a person succeeds during each 
consecutive stage, he will not succeed at all. 
Thissystem is designed to replicate the activi- 
ties ofadominant person overamore submissive 
one. If the emotions and motives are true, then 
you should ignore this system and roleplay it out. 


Opening Line: The player rolls Appearance + Subterfuge. 
The difficulty is the Wits + 3 of the subject (the player gains 
a bonus of one to three dice if it’s a good line, minus one 
to three if it’s a stupid one). Each success after the 
first adds an extra die to the roll on the next 
stage. 


Chapter Nine: Drama 


Ee 


Witty Exchange: The player rolls Wits + Subterfuge. The 
difficulty is the Intelligence + 3 of the subject. Again, give 
bonuses and penalties for roleplaying. Each success over and 
above the base adds an extra die to the roll on the next stage. 

Conversation: The player rolls Charisma + Empathy. The 
difficulty is the Perception + 3 of the subject. Again, roleplaying 
bonuses come into play here. 

Intimacies: At this point, the couple may move toa private 
area and become physically intimate. No roll is required (save 
possibly a Rage roll should the Garou become overly inflamed 
with passion...). 


Mental 


These dramatic systems deal with the use of the mind and 
Mental Attributes. They are employed in situations where 
drama is caused not so much by the action as by psychological 
tension. 


(Dream Interpretation 


‚Among the Garou, dreams often contain important infor- 
mation. Unfortunately, this knowledge is often shrouded in 
mysterious symbolism and obscure references. This can make 
it very difficult for a Garou to decipher his dreams. 

The player of a Garou who decides to figure out the deeper 
meanings of his dreams must roll Perception + Enigmas. 
Because dream interpretation often relies on one's mystical 
knowledge, the player may roll a maximum number of dice 
equal to the character's Gnosis rating. The Storyteller decides 
the difficulty of this roll, based on the obscurity of the dream 
and its importance to the character. The more important the 
information contained in a dream, the more thoroughly it will 
be hidden, and thus the more difficult the roll will be. Not all 
dreams have information hidden within them, but go ahead 
and let the players roll anyway, to keep them guessing. 

Dreams should be mysterious things, rich with bizarre 
symbolism and personal myths. Storytellers should spare no 
effort when designing important dreams. The players will 
appreciate it. 

Sometimes, a Storyteller may decide to have a recurring 
dream haunt a certain character. If this is desired, Dream 
Interpretation can become an extended action. The Story- 
teller decides the difficulty of the task and the number of 
successes needed to unravel the hidden meaning within a 
recurring dream. This is best used with Theurges, and can be 
thought of as Gaia's guiding wisdom, helping the characters 
find their way. 


Forgery 


Thissystemallowscharacters toforge documents. Tworollsare 
required — one to know the necessary forms and signatures, and 
theothertositdownand forge the papers. The numberofsuccesses 
achieved on the first roll isthe maximum number of dice usable on 
the second roll. It is very difficult to forge documents successfully. 
The Storyteller may wish to make the second roll himself, so that 
the player does not know exactly how good the forgery is. 


— SL 


The first roll is made using Intelligence + Investigation (in some cases Linguistics is necessary). 
The difficulty is based on the complexity of the document being forged (average is 6). A failure 
indicates that not enough is known about the nature of these papers; some research must 4 
be performed. Another roll can be made after a period of hours or days. A botch indicates 
that the character has no clue and cannot try to reroll unless some new information is / 


found. | i, 


Thesecond roll is made using Dexterity + Streetwise. The difficulty varies (average 
is 6). Each success indicates a higher quality of forgery — see the chart 
below for a general idea of relative worth. A failure indicates that the 
paperwork isn’t passable at all — it was too difficult for you and you 
cannot try again. A botch indicates that some fatal flaw was 

made; this will be readily seen by any official to whom the 
pre pie ee J 


Successes Results 
1 Passable only to a casual glance 
2 Could trick those who have never seen 
the real document 
3 Would fool most, but not those familiar 
with the actual document 
4 It would take an expert to detect it 
5 Perfect forgery — no one could tell it was 
a fake 
Gamecraft 


This is a form of riddle and puzzle solving in which the 
contestants ask each other questions or play a mental game 
until one of the participants can't answer or can't continue. 
When it is not roleplayed out, it is adjudicated by rolling Wits 
+ Enigmas (difficulty of the opponent's Intelligence + Enig- 
mas, +1 for every two Ranks she is above you). 

Gamecraft can also take the form of put-downs and 
pranks, which are directed at the opponent within earshot 
of other Garou. The one who makes the most fun of the 
other is victorious. When it is not roleplayed out, it is 
determined by rolling Manipulation + Expression (diffi- 
culty of the opponent's Willpower). 


Harrying 

Wolves are adept at running their prey ragged, hounding it 
relentlessly until it falls to the earth exhausted. The Garou 
have developed a similar technique. They seek to exhaust an 
enemy mentally, instilling such hopelessness in him that he 
succumbs. 

When harrying a person, Garou deploy themselves in 
several groups so that they always have one of their own 
behind, ahead and to the sides of their prey. The rearmost 
Garou chases the prey into a Garou in the lead or on the side. 
That Garou then surprises the prey (ideally) and may choose 
to attack. More often, the surprising Garou simply growls 
threateningly at the target (use the Facedown system, above) 
until the prey flees. Humans who lose a facedown while being 
harried always lose one point of Willpower. Then the surpris- 
ing Garou becomes the rearmost chaser, and the former rear 
Garou rotates up to the lead or a side. This process is repeated 
until the prey has no more Willpower, at which point it will be 
much easier to defeat. 


Chapter Nine: Drama 


fm UR, PA TD m —— UA 


Therulesforthisareasfollows: the chasing Garou 
and the prey each roll Dexterity * Athletics 
(difficulty 5). If the Garou scores the most 
successes, he is successfully steering the prey 
toward another Garou. The distance between 
Jarou is typically 100 yards or so, so the 
4 pursuing Garou must win the success test five 
times (onaverage) tosteer the prey tothe next 
werewolf in line. 

If the prey scores more successes, however, he has momen- 
tarily shaken his stalker and may attempt to escape. Both 
characters roll Dexterity + Athletics (base difficulty 5). How- 
ever, the Garou must add to his base difficulty the number of 
successes by which he lost the last roll. Thus, if the prey scores 
four successes more than the harrying Garou, on the next roll 
the prey has a difficulty of 5, but the Garou has a difficulty of 
9. If the Garou does not win this second success test, he must 
resort to tracking to find the prey. If the prey was less than one 
turn away from the next Garou, that Garou may help as well, 
and they may combine their successes. 

Rarely, the prey will stand and fight, trying to overcome 
either the pursuing Garou ora Garou whosurprised him. If this 
occurs, conduct normal combat. Garou will never back down 
to their prey. 

Werewolves may harry in any of their quadrupedal forms, as 
these forms are best suited to this sort of work. Garou of some 
tribes (Get of Fenris, Shadow Lords, Red Talons) use harrying 
when kidnapping one of their young from its human or wolf 
family. They separate the character from the rest of his pack or 
family, then chase him to exhaustion. Away from his support 
system and mentally exhausted, the character can more easily 
be transported to his tribe, where he can begin adjusting to his 
new life. 


Hunting 


Garou need to eat, and they often don’t have the cash to 
hop down to the local supermarket and pick up a couple of 
steaks. More often, they must hunt down their food. This is an 
extended action using Perception + Primal-Urge. The diffi- 
culty depends on the nature of the hunting grounds (naturally, 
it is easier to find food in a game preserve than in the desert). 
Characters may hunt for up to four hours ina given area before 
they must move on. For every two successes scored, the hunter 
finds enough food for one meal. 


Research 


Research is often the only way fora character to proceed to 
the next stage of a story. A character may have to investigate 
matters ina library, newspaper office or through computer files 
in order to obtain needed information. Research is a great way 
toletacharacter with high Intelligence show off, and takes the 
focus off fast-paced action. 

The player rolls Intelligence + Investigation (or sometimes 
an appropriate Knowledge Ability after a place to conduct 
research has been found). The difficulty is based upon the 
obscurity of the information. 


223 


Difficulty Accessibility of Information 
2 Generally available 
4 Widely documented 
6 Accessible 
8 Difficult to find 
10 Incredibly well concealed 


The number of successes determines how much the charac- 
ter discovers. One success might mean that only the most 
obvious facts are found, while five successes might mean that 
the full (and maybe truthful) story isuncovered. Dependingon 
the precise information sought, 10 or even 20 successes might 
be required to find all the available data. 

The player might want to continue research after gaining 
a partial success. However, continued research takes 
longer than the initial search. Basic research usually 
takes only an hour — that's the first roll. More in- 
depth research (andasecond roll) takes 
onecomplete day. Ifthe player wants 
a third roll, further research 
takes a week; a fourth roll 
takes a month, a fifth 
roll takes a year. After 
that, use your imagi- 
nation. It is easy to 
see how some re- 
search projects can 
take years or even decades 
to complete. 


Search 


Thissystemenablesachar- 
acter to search for something 
in a confined area, like 
a room. 


Have the player roll Perception + Investigation; the difficulty 
depends on how well the object is concealed (it is usually 
between 7 and 10). Each success indicates more is found. 
Sometimes a certain number of successes is required to find a 
cleverly hidden object. If you want, a lower number of suc- 
cesses could warrant a hint or clue from you, thus encouraging 
roleplayingand a degree of puzzle solving. As much as possible, 
lead the player through the search step by step. Have her 
describe to you where she looks. Don't let her succeed if she 
doesn't specifically search in the right area, and let her succeed 
automatically if her description is detailed enough. 


Crack 


This system is used to track people and 
things by following the physical trails 
they leave. The player rolls 
Perception + Pri- 
mal-Urge (or 
Investigation in 
thecity— 


but tracks are rarely left on sidewalks and pavement). The 
difficulty is based on weather conditions, terrain and the age 
of the tracks (average 8 or so). Each success lowers by one the 
difficulty of the next roll. 

The character needs to succeed for a certain number of 
turns; the exact number depends on the length of the trail. 
Each turn is usually about five minutes long. If the character 
misses a roll, she can try again; this time, however, the 
difficulty is increased by one. Once it rises above 10, the 
character loses the trail. 

Characters in the Crinos, Hispo or Lupus forms may have 
their tracking difficulties decreased by one to three because of 
their heightened senses. 


Combat 


One-two, one-two, and through and through 

The vorpal blade went snicker-snack — 

He left it dead, and with its head 

He went galumphing back. 
r — Lewis Carroll, “Jabberwocky” 
Combat in Werewolf attempts to capture 
the drama of violent conflict without 
downplaying the grim reality of what 
isgoingon. We have made every 
effort to create a system true 


to the dynamics, limitations and viciousness of real combat 
while still leaving room for the unique elements werewolves 
bring to it. 

There are three types of combat, all of which use the same 
basic system yet have some minor differences. They are: 
firefight, melee and brawl. 

* A firefight is any type of armed combat using projectile 
weapons — things like Uzis and sawed-off shotguns. Oppo- 
nents normally need to be within sight of each other to engage 
in a firefight. 

* Melee refers to fighting with hand weapons — anything 
from broken bottles to silver axes. Opponents need to be 
within one or two yards of each other to engage in melee. 

* A brawldescribes a hand-to-hand battle fought with bare 
hands or claws — unarmed combat. Opponents need to be 
within touching distance to engage in a brawl. 


The rolls made in combat determine whether or not an 
attack succeeds, whether the target dodges and how much 
damage the target suffers. Almost all combat turns are around 
three seconds long, though they take somewhat longer than 
that to resolve. 

As with all 


action scenes, 


combat turns 
begin with 
an initia- 
tive roll. 


——— NS 


However, because combat can sometimes get a little sticky, 
divide the turn into three stages — Initiative, Attack and 
Resolution — to make it easier to keep track of things. 


Stage One: Jnitiative 


Thisstageorganizesthe turn and is where characters declare 
their actions. Characters can take a number of different 
actions — anything from leaping behind a wall to shouting a 
warning. Each player must declare what his character is doing 
in as much detail as the Storyteller requires. At this point, 
everyone needs to decide what weapon to use, if any. 

Characters make initiative rolls using Wits * Alertness 
(difficulty 4, though Storytellers can vary this roll if they so 
desire). The character with the most successes acts first, while 
characters who rolled fewer successes take their actions in 
descending order of successes. Some characters will act simul- 
taneously because they rolled the same number of successes 
(or, if the Storyteller chooses, the one with the highest 
Dexterity goes first). Those who gain no successes at all on this 
roll go last, and those who botch do not get to take actions at 
all. 

Remember to have players declare what actions they want 
theircharacters to take during the combat turn before going to 
the Attack Stage. A player splitting his character's Dice Pool 
must declare how many dice he isallocatingto each action. He 
must also declare if he is spending any Rage points. 


Alla character's actions happen when it is her turn to act. 
Theonly exception to this is the dodge, which a character can 
perform at any time so long as she has dice left in her Pool. 


Stage Two: Attack 


The attack is the meat of the combat turn. This stage is 
where the success or failure of an action is determined, as well 
as something of its potential impact on the target. 

The Roll: There are three different types of attack rolls; the 
type of combat determines which one to use. 

* For firearms combat, roll Dexterity + Firearms. 

* For melee (with weapons) combat, 
roll Dexterity + Melee. 

* For hand-to-hand (without weap- 
ons) combat, roll Dexterity + Brawl. 

The weapon or attack used by the 
attacker determines 
the base difficulty of 4$ 
the roll. The number 
of dice rolled might 


but the difficulty is usually modified only by the circumstances 
of the attack. If no successes are obtained, the character fails 
his attack and inflicts no damage. If a botch is obtained, then 
not only does the attack fail, but something nasty happens to 
the attacker; the Storyteller needs to invent something truly 


awful. 


Dodging 

Any time someone attacks a character, she has the option 
of dodging. In fact, a player may announce at any time that her 
character is using an action (or part of one, by dividing her 
Dice Pool) to dodge, simply by declaring, “Dodge!” before the 
opponent makes an attack roll. Some situations may prohibit 
adodge, suchas in confined quarters or when the character has 
been surprised. The required roll is Dexterity + Dodge; each 
success subtracts one success from the attacker's roll. A char- 
acter can even subtract successes from different opponents, 
though this means dividing successes between (or among) 
them. 

The difficulty to dodge melee or brawling attacks is a 
base 6, increased by one for each opponent after the first. 

In firefights, the difficulty depends on the availability of 
nearby cover behind which a character can dive to avoid 
getting hit. Each success removes one of the opponent's 
successes. After such a dodge attempt, the character usually 
ends up behind some sort of cover or, at the very least, 
lying on the ground (if there is no cover to be = 
found). 

The difficulty to dodge during firefights is 
determined by the proximity of cover. 


be modified by che 
gun's rate of fire or A 
the use of a scope, S 


> 
“es 


Difficulty Terrain 

2 By moving back halfa step, the character 
is back under full cover. 

4 Fullcoverwithindivingdistance (one yard) 

6 Fullcover within running distance (three 
yards) 

7 Partial cover within running distance 
(three yards) 

8 Flat and featureless, no cover (the char- 


acter dives to the ground) 


Stage Three: Resolution 


During this stage, characters determine the damage in- 
flicted by their attacks, and the Storyteller describes what 
occurs in the turn. The Resolution Stage is a mixture of game 
and story, for though the dice never lie, the Storyteller must 

interpret what luck has decreed. 


Damage: Each weapon or attack allows the wielder to roll 
a certain number of dice in order to inflict damage (difficulty 
6). Each success causes the target to lose one Health Level. 
Additionally, each success scored with a firearm (after any 
dodge) adds one die to this damage roll. Melee and brawling 
successes do not add to the damage. 

Soak: A target may make roll to see how much damage she 
"soaks" because of her natural hardiness. The target rolls 
Stamina (difficulty 6); each success reduces inflicted damage 
by one. 

Exception: Damage andsoakrollsare tworollsin Werewolf 
that cannot be botched. 


Complications 


A number of factors determine whether or not an attack 
hits. Smart combatants head for cover as soon as bullets start 
flying. Others find that ganging up on one foe in a brawl never 
hurts. The following modifiers delineate many of the variables 
that affect combat. 


General Complications 


* Changing Actions: If a character changes her declared 
action after the turn has started, the difficulty for the new action 
increases by one. Generally, the Storyteller 
shouldonlyallowthecharactertochange 
her declared action if events have 
made it impossible. "Yes, I know I 

said my character 

À would jump into 

E the car, but that 
fomor just 
blew it up!" 


Firearms Chart 


Type Difficulty Damage 
Example 

Revolver, Lt. 6 4 
SW M640 (.38 Special) 

Revolver, Hwy. 7 6 
Colt Anaconda (.44 magnum) 

Pistol, Lt. 7 is 4 
Glock-17 (9mm) 

Pistol, Hvy. 8 5 
Sig P220 (.45 ACP) 

Rifle 8 1 8 
Remington M-700 (.30-06) nes = 
SMG, Small* 7 4 
Ingram Mac-10 (9mm) 

SMG, Large* 6 4 
UZI (9mm) 5 e kii E 
Assault Rifle* 7 7 
Steyr-Aug (5.56mm) 

Shotgun 6 8 
Ithaca M-37 (12-gauge) 

Shotgun, Semi-auto 7 8 
Fianchi Law-12 (12 gauge) 

Crossbow** B js BESTS) 


this is considered a long-range shot. 
auto or spray fire. 
making the gun ready to fire. 


cannot be hidden on one’s person at all. 


* indicates the gun is 
** The crossbow is listed to accommodate those cha 


* Immobilization: If a target is immobilized (e.g., held 
down by someone), but still struggles, the difficulty for the 
attack roll is decreased by two. However, if the target is 
completely immobilized (e.g., is tied up or magically para- 
lyzed), then no roll is required and the attack succeeds 
automatically. 


* Stunning: If, in one turn, a target loses a greater number 
of Health Levels than its Stamina rating, it must spend the 
entire next turn shaking off the effects of the debilitating 
attack. The target may not attack, and its Dice Pool for 
defensive actions (i.e., dodging) is halved (round down). A 
Rage point may be spent to counter this effect. 


Firefight Complications 


* Range: Getting close to one's foe is a good idea if a 
character doesn't mind taking a few shots in return. The range 
given on the Firearms Chart is the weapon's medium range; 


228 


Y 


Range: Thisis the practical rage ofthe Bun In Var lc may fire oni target at up to double the listed range; however; 
Rate: The maximum number of bullets or three-round bursts the gun can fire in a single turn. The rate does not apply to full- 
Clip: The number of bullets that can be held in one clip or in the barrel. The +1 indicates a bullet can be held in the chamber, 
Concealment: P = can be hidden in a pocket; J = can be hidden inside a jacket; T = can be hidden inside a trenchcoat; N = 
able of three-round bursts, full-auto fire and sprays. 


ters who wish to use one to stake vampires. However, unlike a firearm, 
it does not add attack successes to the damage Dice Pool. Additionally, a crossbow takes five turns to reload. 


Range Rate Clip Concealment 

12 3 6 P 

35 2 6 ] 7 
20 4 17+1 P 

30 3 7+1 J 

20 1 5+1 N 

25 3 30+1 J 

50 3 32+1 T 

150 3 42+1 N 

20 1 5+1 m 

20 3 8+1 T 

DREHTE 1 T 


the character receives no modifier for shooting at 
this range. Twice that range is the farthest the 
weapon can shoot. Shots within this 
range have their difficulties , 
increasedbyone.On LOT 
the other hand, ==> 

shots made 7 

at targets, ^ 

within a 


of theattacker are considered “point- 
blank”; the difficulty ofa point-blank 
shot is 4. 


yar 


* Cover: Intelligent characters use cover to protect themselves 
from enemy fire. Cover increases the difficulty of an attack by a 
variable amount, depending on how much of the character's body 
isstill out in the open. However, though cover protects, it can also 
hamper return fire, and in some rare instances can completely 
prevent any return fire. For instance, ducking out from around a 
comer toshoot may increase the difficulty by one, while watching 
ashootout through the cracks ina battered wall probably prevents 
a character from firing back at all. 


Cover Difficulty 
Lying flat +1 
Behind pole +2 
Behind wall +3 
Only head exposed +4 


* Movement: Shooting at a moving target increases the 
difficulty by one (or even more), as does shooting while 
moving at any speed faster than a walk (such as firing 


out the window of a speeding car). 
Aiming: A character may add 

her Perception rating to her 

Dexterity + Firearms Dice 

Pool if she spends 


time aiming. However, aiming takes one turn per die added, 
and during this time the character can do nothing but aim — 
it takes time and patience to aim. Additionally, the target may 
not be moving at a speed faster than a walk. Shotguns and 
SMGs cannot be aimed. 

Ifthe gun hasa scope, the character may add two dice to her 
Pool in addition to the dice added for Perception. The scope 
bonus can be added only once — after the initial three dice 
added in the first round (two for the scope and one for 
Perception), thecharactercontinuesaimingasoutlinedabove. 

* Targeting: Aiming fora specific location (gun hand, the 
heart) increases the difficulty by two. 

* Multiple Shots: If a character wants to take more than 

one shot in a turn, he 


AL 


must divide his 
Dice Pool 
into two 


| 


or more actions, or spend a Rage point. Also, for each addi- 
tional shot after the first, the difficulty increases by one. Ten 
is, of course, the maximum number to which the difficulty can 
be raised. A character can fire a maximum number of shots 
equal to the rate of the firearm. 

The recoil penalty is cumulative. Thus, a character adds 
two on the third shot and three on the fourth. It is not usually 
wise to snap off shots blindly; the recoil always catches up with 
the gunman. Using these rules, it is permissible to fire two or 
more three-round bursts in a single turn, though a character 
can only fire on full-auto once per turn (and must reload to do 
it again). 

* Full-Auto: The full-auto option is the most damaging 
attack a firearm can make; the attacker unloads the full 
contents of a gun’s ammunition clip within a very short time 
span. However, the gun becomesa bucking bronco, difficult to 
control and even harder to aim. 

A character gets 10 additional dice to roll on the attack, 
thus increasing the chance to hit and cause damage. However, 
the difficulty is raised by three from the recoil. 

Full-auto fire is permissible only when a weapon has more 
than half its clip remaining. Whenever a character uses the 
full-auto option, he depletes the entire clip of the weapon. 
Reloading takes one full action and requires the character'sfull 
concentration (and Dice Pool). 

* Three-Round Burst: The semi-auto option is the middle 
ground between the full-auto and single-shot options, and has 
some of the strengths and weaknesses of both. A burst gives the 
attacker three additional dice on the attack roll. However, the 
recoil increases the difficulty by one. As implied by the 
option's name, three bullets are expended per use. 

* Spray: When on full-auto, acharactercan decide tospray 
across an area instead of focusing on one foe. A spray uses the 
extra 10 dice given by full-auto fire, but the attack has a base 
difficulty of 5, increased by one per yard covered by the spray 
(in addition to other modifiers). 

The player divides any successes gained on the attack roll 
evenly among all targets in the covered area. If only one target 
is in the sprayed area, only half the successes affect him. The 
player then assigns any leftover successes as she desires. If the 
attacker rolls fewer successes than there are targets, the player 
may only assign one per target until they are used up. This 
attack also empties the clip. 

The difficulty of a dodge roll against a spray is increased 
by two. 


Melee and Brawl 
Complications 


* Multiple Opponents: If a character is battling multiple 
opponents in close combat, that character’s attack and dodge 
difficulties are increased by one per opponent (toa maximum 
of 10). 

Flank and Rear Attacks: The difficulty of a flank attack 
is lowered by one, while that of a rear attack is lowered by two. 


Werewolf: The Apocalypse 


Firefight Complications 


Complication Difficulty 
Changing action +1 
Immobilization 2 
Long range +1 
Point-blank 4 
Lying flat +1 
Behind pole 

Behind wall 

Only head exposed 
Movement 

Aiming 


+Perception (1/tum) 
Scope +2 
Specific area of target — 


Multiple shots +1/extra shot 
Full-auto +3 +10 
Three-round burst +1 +3 
Spray 5+l/yard +10 


Melee Complications 


* Parry: A character using a melee weapon may elect to 
parry an attack, using her weapon to block the blow. Like a 
dodge, a parry can be performed at any time, so long as the 
character still has dice in her Dice Pool. A character cannot 
parry with a weapon as small as a knife, but she can use a sword, 
klaive or axe. She rolls Dexterity + Melee (difficulty 6). Each 
success subtracts one from an opponent's number of attack 
successes. 

A botch on a parry roll usually means that the parrying 
weapon is knocked from the character's hand. 

Usable by: Homid - Crinos 

Roll: Dex * Melee Difficulty: 6 Damage: none 
Actions: Special 

* Disarm: This maneuver is an attempt to knock the 
weapon from an opponent's hand. The character rolls Dexter- 
ity * Melee; add one to the weapon's normal difficulty. If at 
least three successes are scored, she then rolls the weapon's 
damage; if she scores more successes than the opponent's 
Strength rating, the opponent is disarmed. A botch usually 
means the character drops her own weapon. 

Roll: Dex + Melee Difficulty: +1 Damage: Special 
Actions: 1 


Brawling Complications 


* Bite: A bite is one of the most basic attacks in the game. 
It causes aggravated wounds. The Garou simply sinks his teeth 
into his prey. 

Usable by: Crinos - Lupus 

Roll: Dex + Brawl Difficulty: 5 Damage: Str + 1 
Actions: 1 

* Block: A character can elect to block instead 


of dodge. Like a dodge, a block can be performed 


at any time, so long as the character still has dice in his Dice 
Pool. Blocks may be made only against fists, kicks or blunt 
weapons. A blocking action cannot block a sword, arrow or 
bullet unless the defender has a Gift that provides special 
protection (e.g., Luna's Armor). Roll Dexterity * Brawl 
(difficulty 6); each success subtracts one from an 

opponent's number of attack successes. 


Usable by: Homid - Crinos 
Roll: Dex * Brawl Difficulty: 6 Damage: none 
Actions: Special 


N 


Usable by: Homid - Crinos 


Melee Weapons Table Roll: Dex + Brawl Difficulty: 6 Damage: Strength 
Weapon Difficulty Damage Conceal Actions: 1 
Sap Strength P * Kick: A kick can range ve a very simple iue aa 
aerial spins. Depending on the circumstances, the difficulty 
elp a d N and damage modifier may be adjusted (Storyrallersdiscre- P 
ane ^ tion). The damage from a kick is never aggravated. 
Foil Strength Usable by: Homid - Crinos 
Saber Suenghot T Roll: Dex + Brawl Difficulty: 7 Damage: Str + 1 
Axe Strength +5 N Actions: T 
Klaive Strength +2* J * Punch: The attacker balls her hand into a tight fist and 
Grand Klaive Strength +4* — T swings it with all her might. The Storyteller may adjust the 
* This is a silver weapon; Garou cannot soak this damage difficulty and/or allow extra dice if the attacker decides the 
type of punch she wishes to deliver: hook, jab, haymaker, etc. 
* Body Slam: A character charges forward, hurling his The damage from a punch s never aggravated. 
weight into his opponent. Itis possible to damage oneself with Usable by: Homid - Crinos 
thisattack; bodies were not meant to be usedas battering rams. Roll: Dex + Brawl Difficulty: 6 Damage: Strength 


A character needs three successes to unbalance an opponent. Actions: 1 
He inflicts one Health Level of damage on himself for each ; 
success fewer than three. E Special Maneuvers 
If the attack succeeds, the opponent is thrown off balance; Not every character will be able to perform the 
difficulties for the rest of her actions this turn are increased by following maneuvers; they must be learned 
two. Also, if the opponent does not succeed in a Dexterity + through training. For each dot a character has in 
Athletics roll (difficulty of the attacker's successes + 3), she her Brawl Attribute, she may choose one of the 
falls to the ground. The base damage done equals the attacker's following maneuvers. 
Strength; each success scored on the attack roll above the Example: Bonecrusher has Brawl 3. 
minimum adds one to this base. If the attacker does notscore He can choose three special maneu- 
at least three successes, this maneuver fails; he falls to the vers. He chooses Evasive Action, Fur 
ground and is treated as though he has no dice left in his Pool. Gnarl and Leaping Rake. 
The character can move his full running distance, but he Some of the following 
must run in a straight line; weaving around in circlesdoesnot maneuvers require 
build sufficient momentum, thecharacterto 
Usable by: Homid - Lupus spend a Rage f 
Roll: Dex + Brawl Difficulty: 7 Damage: Special point for an 
Actions: 1 extra 
* Claw: The Garou uses his claws to rip into an oy 
opponent's flesh, delivering aggravated wounds. y 
Usable by: Crinos - Hispo (and Lupus, but the dam- e 
age is not aggravated) 
Roll: Dex + Brawl Difficulty: 6 Damage: Str + 2 
Actions: 1 


e Grapple: An attacker can try to grab a foe, hoping to 
immobilize him and subsequently crush him. If the at 
tackerscores more successes than the opponent'sStrength, 
theattacker can immobilize him. In the nextround, she can 
begin to inflict harm. Any character struck by this attack 
loses his attacks for the current turn. 

If the attacker misses altogether (by failing the Dexterity + 
Brawl roll), she is knocked down and must spend an action 
getting to her feet. 

Continuing to grapple during each turn after the first 
requires the combatants to make opposed Strength + Brawl 
rolls. Whoever accumulates more successes may immobilize 

TA the other. If both score the same number of successes, neither 
gains the upper hand this turn. 


232 Werewolf: The Apocalypse 


action. These maneuvers take place in order of initiative 
during the Rage actions, after the other combatants have 
received their regular actions. (See Multiple Actions, pg. 206) 
Players may create special maneuvers not on this list, 
subject to the Storyteller's approval. See the guidelines for 
Freeform Combat, below. 
* Evasive Action: This maneuver in- 
volves leaping, spinning, jumping and 
diving in an attempt to escape harm. 
This maneuver inflicts no damage, but is 
each success rolled subtracts one from 
the opponent's number of attack 


neuver acts like a dodge in every way, except that the roll is 
based on Wits rather than Dexterity; it involves outsmarting 
orfooling your opponent instead of merely avoiding him. You 


cannot, however, abortanaction to performan evasive action; 
you must simply dodge instead. 

Usable by: Homid - Lupus 

Roll: Wits + Dodge Difficulty:6 Damage: none 

Actions: 1 
* Fur Gnarl: The attacker lashes out 
with her claws, slashing 
through the fur of an op- 
ponent and peeling off 
layerafter layerofprotec- 
tivehide. Thisattack does 
an incredible amount of 
damage by itself, and can 
shred an opponent's de- 
S fenses. The damage is 

a ; figured normally and 
Z / 3 is aggravated. 
n addition, 


for every two Health Levels of damage rolled (damage done 
before soak), the opponent loses one die from subsequent soak 
rolls until he either heals (in the case of natural armor such as 
fur) or gets a new set of armor. 

This maneuver is used most often as a pack tactic: one 
packmate performs this maneuver, leaving the opponent less 
resistant to a fellow packmate's attack. 

Usable by: Crinos - Hispo 

Roll: Dex + Brawl Difficulty: 8 Damage: Str + 1 + Special 
Actions: 2 

* Hamstring: By sinking his teeth into the tendons of the 
lower leg and ripping them out, the attacker may disable his 
opponent's movement. If this attack is successful, the oppo- 
nentisrendered unable to walk. Ifthe opponentis quadrupedal, 
she may move at half her normal movement (at best). This 
attack causes aggravated wounds. 

This is often used by a pack member to prevent prey from 
escaping until the rest of the pack can arrive. 

Usable by: Crinos - Lupus 

Roll: Dex + Brawl Difficulty: 8 
+ Special Actions: 1 


Damage: Str 


* Jaw Lock: The character locks her powerful jaws onto 
her opponent — not to harm, but to immobilize. The pressure 
of her jaws forces her opponent to the ground. This attack does 
no actual damage, but if the character’s damage successes 
(rolling Strength + 1) exceed the target’s Strength, the target 
drops to the ground and is immobilized. The character may 

hold the lock for 
— 


successive turns, but the target may attempt to escape. 

Escaping froma jaw lock requiresaStrength + Athletics roll 
(difficulty equal to the attacker's Intimidation + 4). The 
successes needed equal the number of successes by which the 
attacker exceeded the victim's Strength. If the successes are 
exactly equal, the victim still frees himself — but he takes the 
successes as actual damage, as he rips free from the hold. This 
damage is aggravated. 

The roll to break free becomes more difficult the longer the 
jaw lock isheld. Increase the difficulty by one every turn (after 
the first) the jaw lock is maintained. This attack may only be 
performed from behind or atop an opponent, where the 
attacker may use her mass to best advantage. 

Example: Grimfoe, Get of Fenris Ahroun, performs a Jaw 
Lock on Whiner. She rolls five successes. Whiner's Strength 
is3, so Grimfoe succeeds with two successes. Whiner is forced 
to the ground as Grimfoe's teeth lock into his flesh. Next turn, 
the wretched Bone Gnawer tries to escape. His difficulty is 8 
(Grimfoe's Intimidation score is 4). Whiner scores two suc- 
cesses, the exact number required to break the hold (Grimfoe's 
original attack successes). However, because he only scored 
theexactamount required, he must now try tosoak two Health 
Levels of damage as he flails away, tearing his flesh 
from Grimfoe's teeth. 


Usable by: Crinos - Lupus 


Roll: Dex * Brawl Difficulty: 6 Damage: Special 
Actions: 1 

* Leaping Rake: The attacker leaps past an opponent, 
raking him with claws as he flies by. The force of his momen- 
tum carries him out of range of his opponent. The character 
declares how far he wants to leap, rolls Dexterity + Athletics 
(difficulty 3), and compares his successes to the Jumping Chart 
on pg. 212. The Automatic Success rule can be used here for 
simplicity. If the attacker does not have enough successes to 
land where he wished, he lands at the farthest distance his 
successes allow. If he cannot pass his opponent anywhere 
along this trajectory, he cannot attack. If he still wishes to use 
his extra Rage action, his difficulty is raised by one (see 
Changing Actions, pg. 227). 


If the attacker's leaping distance is enough to send him past 
his target, he rolls Dexterity + Brawl to attack. If the attack 
fails, he still lands where he planned (if he scored enough 
jumping successes). This attack causes aggravated wounds. 

This maneuver may instead be performed with a punch, in 
which case the damage equals Strength and is not aggravated. 
A leaping punch can be performed in Glabro or Crinos form. 

Usable by: Crinos 

Roll: Dex + Brawl Difficulty: 8 Damage: Str + 2 
Actions: 2 

* Taunt: By barking, growling, leaping and cajoling her 
opponent, the attacker might actually alarm or distract it. 

Garou employing this 
maneuver 


Brawling Chart 


Maneuver Roll 

Bite Dex * Brawl 
Body Slam Dex + Brawl 
Claw Dex + Brawl 
Grapple Dex + Brawl 
Kick Dex + Brawl 
Punch Dex + Brawl 
Special Maneuvers* 
Evasive Act. Wits + Dodge 
Dex + Brawl 
Dex + Brawl 
Dex + Brawl 
Dex + Brawl 
Man. + Exp. 


Fur Gnarl 
Hamstring 
Jaw Lock 
Leaping Rake 
Taunt 


+ These maneuvers do aggravated damage. 


Difficulty 


Opp. Wits +4 


Damage Actions 
Strength +14 1 
Special 

Strength +2} 

Strength 

Strength +1 


Strength 


none 
Str +1 + Specialt 
Str + Specialt 
Special 

Strength +27 
none 


* These maneuvers cannot be used by a character in frenzy. 


roll about on the ground, leap high into the air, and utter the 
most vivid insults imaginable. Every two successes obtained 
subtract one die from the opponent's next action, whatever it 
is. If more than one character uses the Taunt maneuver on the 
same foe in one turn, the effects are cumulative. In this way it 
is possible for a group of characters to paralyze an opponent 
through confusion and fear. However, as soon as one member 
ofa pack failsa Taunt roll, no further Taunt rolls will affect that 
opponent that turn. 

Victims paralyzed by taunting may only perform actions 
that do not require rolls (although they may dodge). A Garou 
subjected to such treatment must make a Rage roll. 


The Storyteller can elect to award the character extra 
attack dice for roleplaying this maneuver particularly well. 
Usable by: Homid - Lupus 


Roll: Man. + Expression Difficulty: opponent’s Wits + 4 
Damage: none Actions: 1 


Armor 


A character with body armor can add dice to her soak rolls. 
Different types of body armor have different armor ratings, 
which are the number of extra dice rolled on a soak roll. 
Certain types of armor restrict body motion and thus penalize 
the characters Dexterity rolls (all rolls involving this At- 
tribute have their difficulties raised by an amount equal to the 
penalty). 


Freeform Combat (Optional) 


The Storytellershould be flexible when arbitratingcombat 
situations; no rules can fully reflect the variety of situations 
encountered on the battlefield. The Storyteller should feel 
free to let the players devise rules for special 
situations not 


Brawl, Intimidation or Subterfuge). 
Difficulty: The difficulty for a maneuver is usually 6, but 

Class Armor Rating Penalty | this can be raised or lowered depending on the maneuver's 

Class One (reinforced clothing) 1 0 complexity or precision (forexample, a hamstringhasahigher 

Class Two (armor T-shirt) 0 difficulty because it aims for a certain area). 

hey Those (ven) i If the maneuver is designed to fool an opponent, the — A 

1 difficulty is usually the opponent's Wits (or Perception) with 

2 a + 4 constant modifier. Sometimes the difficulty is an 

opponent's Ability + 4 (such as Intimidation for a jaw lock), 

ox, rarely, an opponents Actribute plus an Ability (such as 

Wits + Brawl), in which case the constant modifier is not used. 


Class Four (flak jacket) 
Class Five (full suit) 


covered by any of the existing combat maneuvers. For their 
part, players should remember that the Storyteller is the 
ultimate arbiter in such situations, and her word is final. Resisted Rolls: Sometimesa character can resist an attack 
2 against him, whether by dodging, 


perform- 


If bickering or slowed combat results, go back to the 
standard maneuvers given above. They are broad 


enough to handle most situations. Freeform combat / ing an 
is meant to add depth to the game, not create eva- 
UD sive 


conflict between players and Storyteller. 

Belowaresome guidelinestouse when 
creating special maneuvers. These 
rules are entirely optional; begin- 


ning Storytellers should feel free to 
ignore them or wait until they are 
familiar with the regular rules. 

Dice Rolls: There should only be 
twodice rolls involved in any combat 
maneuver: an attack roll and a dam- 
age (or effect) roll. All effects from the 
maneuver should be figured through 
these two rolls. An exception to this rule is 
a movement-based maneuver (see below). 

A hand-to-hand attack is made with a 
Dexterity + Brawl roll, whileamelee 
attack is made with a Dexterity 
+ Melee roll. Whenever a 
charactertries tooutsmart 
or fool an opponent, such 
as with the Taunt ma- 
neuver, the roll would 
instead use Manipula- 
tion plusan appropriate 
Ability (such as 


action or using another maneuver. The Storyteller should 
decide whether a combatant should receive a resistance roll. 
Theresistance roll will often require the combatant to split his 
Dice Pool if he also wants to attack that turn. 

The exception to this is resisting Gifts. Characters can resist 
Gift attacks without splitting a Dice Pool. See the particular 
Gift write-up for details. 

Successes: Generally, an attack needs only one success to 
hit; damage is then rolled. In some instances, however, a set 
number of successes is required, such as when a character tries 
to grapple an opponent; he must gain more successes than the 
opponent's Strength score. 

Damage (Effect): Use the Brawling Chart to determine 
damage and adjust from there for special conditions. A claw 
rake normally does Strength +2, butclaws only do Strength +1 
when performing a fur gnarl, as they are aimed mainly at the 
opponent's armor rather than vitals. 

The damage is aggravated if inflicted by werewolf claws or 
teeth. The claws and fangs of other supernatural creatures 
(Gangrel vampires, fomori, etc.) inflict aggravated damage, 
but normal animal bites are not aggravated. 

If the effect is to fool or confuse an opponent, the general 
tule is that each success on the attack roll subtracts one die 
from the opponent's Dice Pool. In thiscase, only the attack roll 
is made; there is no separate damage roll. 

Multiple Actions: As always, unless a Rage point is spent, 
acharacter will have to split his Dice Pool to perform multiple 
actions in one turn. Many special maneuvers require a Rage 
expenditure in order to be performed at all. These maneuvers 
usually take place during the first Rage action, after everyone 
has taken their normal actions and before any second or 
successive Rage actions. 

Movement: Normally, a character may not move and 
attack in the same action. However, some maneuvers, such as 
Body Slam and Leaping Rake, do permit this. The Storyteller 
can allow other movement-based maneuvers to be performed 
with the following guidelines. 

If a character is performing some acrobatic feat, such as 
leaping, swinging from a chandelier, etc., then a Dexterity + 
Athletics roll may also be required. The difficulty depends on 
the complexity of the maneuver. A simple roll to determine 
leaping distance has a difficulty of only 3 (see Jumping, pg. 
212), while a leap from a hurtling train onto a running horse 
may have a difficulty as high as 9. Unless the character spends 
aRagepoint, he mustsplithis Dice Pool between theacrobatic 
roll and the attack roll. However, the Storyteller should use 
the Automatic Success rule whenever possible. 

There are some exceptions to this rule, in the interest of 
dramatic license. If a character has seen many swashbuckler 
movies and practiced the flamboyant moves she has seen, the 


Storyteller might allow her to swing from a chandelier and 
attack without having to spend a Rage point or split her Dice 
Pool. Alternately, the Storyteller may require her to "pur- 
chase" this as a special maneuver (see Special Maneuvers, 
above). 

Frenzy: Generally, a character cannot perform a special 
maneuver during frenzy. Only berserk actions, such as ripping, 
tearing and biting, are allowed. The Storyteller should be very 
conservative about letting a frenzied character perform a 


special maneuver; the answer should, more often than not, be 
no. See Frenzy, pp. 200-201, for some guidelines. 


Combat in the Umbra 


By "stepping sideways,” a Garou can physically enter the 
Umbra. In the Umbra, a Garou can attack spirits and Banes 
with all the powers he possesses in the physical world. Because 
the Garou are as much spiritual as they are physical, their 
natural weaponry can affect and harm spirits. This includes 
punches and kicks. 

Garou are the exceptions to the rule. Not all beings can 
physically affect spirits; à human who has somehow become 
trapped in the Umbra may swinga punchata spirit only to find 
his hand passing harmlessly through it. A supernaturally 
treated weapon or magical attack is required to affect spirits. 

A Garoucan use weaponry, but the weapon must have been 
mystically treated in order to damage a spirit. All fetish 
weapons can harm spirits; this includes klaives. The Garou 
must still make a Gnosis roll to activate the fetish, but the 
difficulty istwo lower in the Umbra. A Garou can take into the 
Umbra anything that has undergone the Rite of Talisman 
Dedication (see pg. 144). 

See Chapter Seven for more details on the Umbra, and 
Appendix One for examples of spirits. 

Spirits 

Spirits do not have Physical Attributes in the Umbra. 
Instead of attacking with claws or fists, they use their Will- 
powerandRage. Spirits “strike” by rolling Willpower (difficulty 
6). Ifsuccessful, the spirit has hit its target. Then roll the spirit's 
Rage (difficulty 6); one Health Level of aggravated damage is 
inflicted per success. A Garou can soak this damage by rolling 
Gnosis (difficulty 6); the number of successes is the amount of 
damage soaked. If the target is another spirit, the attacking 
spirit inflicts one Power point of damage per success on the 
Rage roll. Use the Spirit Combat Table (on the Combat 
Summary Chart, pg. 246) to help run spirit combats. 

A spirit is not actually swinging punches, throwing kicks or 
slashing with claws, although it might appear to do so. A 
spirit’s attack isa mystical attack of pure Rage; the spirit usually 

flies about its enemy, engulfing him in its anger. 
A spirit cannot soak damage; it must take 
whatever is dished out to it. Only those 
spirits with the 


m ruf SL om rr arms 


Charm: Armor (pg. 182) can soak damage. There is no difference between 
normal and aggravated damage for a spirit. 


Note: When a spirit Materializes onto the physical plane, it attacks using 
its Materialized Attributes and Abilities. Combat is handled normally. (See 
the Charm: Materialize, pg. 182.) 


Garou Maneuvers 


When Garou attack spirits in the Umbra, they can use any attack 
maneuvers they choose. The difficulty of a physical attack in 
the Umbra is increased by one. For example, 
Gnasher uses a claw attack against a Bane. 
He rolls his Dexterity + Brawl versus a 7 
rather than a 6. A maneuver such as 
Taunt, however, is unaffected, for it is not 
aphysicalattack butanattempttounnerve V 
an opponent. 

Any maneuver with a difficulty figured 
against an Attribute (Wits, for example) is 4 
instead figured against the spirit's Willpower, 
and the constant modifier is not used. 

Example: Gnasher tries an evasive action to 
avoid the Scrag’s attack. The difficulty is nor- 
mally the opponent's Wits + 4, but the Scrag has 
no Wits Attribute. Instead, the difficulty is the 
Scrag's Willpower of 6 (the +4 modifier isnotused). 


Damage e 


Damage for Garou attacks is figured normally, bue V ` 
it is applied to the spirit’s Power; spirits have no Health 


Levels. Garou punches, et al., work as well as Garou claws; 
attacks do not have to be aggravated. When a spirit has 
no Power left, it dissipates, dissolving out of 
existence. A Garou can choose to bind the 
defeated spirit (see Rite of Binding, pg. 
144). 

For this reason, most spirits flee 
when they are reduced to a quar- 
ter or less of their Power. Many 
Banes, however, will simply stay 
andrabidly attack until eitherthey 
or their opponents are dead. 


Oursuit in the Umbra 


When aspirit or a Garou tries to 
flee the battle, use the Pursuit rules 
on pg. 213; the fleeing or chasing spirit 
rolls its Willpower. Spirits begin with an auto- 
matic three successes because of their ability to t 
fly in the Umbra. If a fleeing spirit scores 10 successes more 
than its pursuer, it gets away, outdistancing its pursuer. If 
the pursuer matches the spirit's successes, he moves 
alongside the spirit and may attack it. A spirit with the 
Charm: Reform may simply dissipate instead, 
recoalescing elsewhere. 


EXAMPLE 07 PLAY 


Sam gathers his players for a session of Werewolf. The characters are: Evan (played by Michelle), a young Wendigo Philodox who 
is somewhat new at being a Garou; Lord Albrecht (played by Rob), a Silver Fang Ahroun who is in conflict with his tribe on issues of honor; and 
Mari (played by Josh), a Black Fury Theurge who is as good at fighting as she is at speaking with spirits. Together, these three are a pack, 
formed from a grand adventure they had during Evan’ Rite of Passage. (See “Legacy Rite," the Werewolf comic story in this book.) The 
rivalry between Albrecht and Mari (as seen illustrated earlier in this chapter) was put behind them (for the most part); Mari's healing abilities 
ensured that only a mild scar remains. 

Sam, the Storyteller of this chronicle, has set his game in Jw York City, 
using the Central Park Caern given in the Appendix (pp. 276-288). The situation y e 
Thus far: Evan discovered rumors of a Bane infestation near the caern. He foolishly Mari uses her Gift: Sense Wyrm. Josh 
went off by himself to investigate. He discovered a fs ina small caren market, rolls Mari's Perception (3) + Occult 
but-it wasn't alone: the basement is being used as a breeding ground for more 5 ix di i 
Banes. Evan barely escaped. He ran back to the park and gathered Albrecht and [3;'a (BRIT EST dico), Sein dottdgs The 


Mari to help destroy the things. But now the Banes are ready for them; as they difficulty is only.5; this place is a 
approach the market, they are unsure what to expect. . breeding ground. Josh rolls 6, 7, 3, 5, 


8, 6 — five successes. This is exem- 
As they enter the store, Albrecht and Evan are in plary, allowing Mari to sense the Bane 
Homid form, while Mari has shifted to Glabro. down the stairs. . . 


Josh, in character as Mari, yells a warning to 
Rob's character, Albrecht. But Sam deems it is 
too late for Albrecht to act first... 


Rob says he is speriding a Rage point so Albrecht can 
shift info Crinos form instantly. Sam lets him because Mari 
yelled a warning. 


The Bane; a Materialized Scragling (half the power 

of a regular Scrag; see pg. 272), attacks Albrecht. 

Sam rolls its Willpower (5) against difficulty 6 and Albrecht attacks with his Grand Klaive (see pg. 232). 
scores three successes — it hits. He then rolls its Rob rolls Albrecht's Dexterity (3) + Melee (5; total of 
Rage (7), also against difficulty 6, and scores four eight dice) against difficulty 7: He scores two suc- 
successes — Albrecht must now soak four Health cesses, so he hits. He.now rolls damage: his Strength 
Levels of damage. Rob rolls Albrecht's Stamina (8 in Crinos form) + 4 (12 dice!); he scores 10 
against difficulty 6 and scores three successes — successes. The Scragling tries to soak this with its 

he only takes one Health Level of damage. He Stamina (it is Materialized), but fails. It takes 10 
marks this on his sheet as an aggravated wound, Health Levels. Because the damage was aggravated, it 
for it was inflicted by a supernatural being. also loses 10 Power (from its total of 15; it has 5 left). 


EXAMPLE 07 PLAY 


Mari steps sideways: 
Josh rolls her Gnosis (7) 
against the local Gaunt- 
let rating of 6 (it has 
been weakened by 
Because the Scragling Bane passage). She 
took more Health scores five successes — 
Levels of damage instant passage. (See 
than it possessed, it the chart on pg. 175.) 
loses its Materialized Mari arrives in the Penumbra, the 
body, fading from the area of the spirit world closest fo the 
physical world. physical world. 


Evan leads Albrecht into the 

Umbra. Michelle rolls his Gnosis 

(6) against the Gauntlet of 6: 
Mari slugs a Scragling: Josh rolls her Dexterity (4) + Brawl (5; total of three successes — instant, 
nine dice) against difficulty 6 (a Punch maneuver). She scores three suc- Albrecht's Gnosis is 4; he may. 
cesses; she hits. Josh now rolls her damage: Strength (5 in Glabro form) not have made the passage so 
against difficulty 6: five successes (a rarity with only five dice)! The Bane quickly. Thus, Evan helped him 
cannot soak this and loses five Power — which destroys it. along (see pg. 175). 


The players get into a bit of aggressive 
roleplaying between their characters... 


The characters are 
beginning a facedown 
challenge. If Evan 
can't break it up, Sam 
will make them begin 
rolling (per the rules 
on pg. 219) next turn. 


The players decide that 
their characters will 
listen to Evan in this 
situation, and pull back 
before things get 
worse. 


Michelle decides that Evan willuse 
one of his Gifts: Cutting Wind, a 
Wendigo power. She tells Sam that 
Evan wants.to whisk the Banes into the 
air, so Mari can hit them before they 
fall again. She spends a Willpower 
point and rolls Evan's Dexterity (3) + 
Occult (2; total of five dice) against 
difficulty 6: two successes. Sam decides 
that the Banes, disoriented from the 
light, are flung into the air for one 
turn. 


Sam is fudging the rules a bit; the Scraglings should have some Power left and still be 
around, but this is his prerogative as Storyteller. The real plot lies down the stairs, and 


EXAMPLE 07 PLAY 


Rob states that Albrecht is using a Gift: Lambent Flame, a 
Silver Fang power. He spends a Willpower point and the 
Gift activates. Sam decides that this is unexpected, so the 
Banes will be temporarily blinded for one turn. 


Josh says that Mari will spend a Rage 
point for an extra action and use her 
Black Furies Gift: Wasp Talons. He 
says that she is using both hands, one 
to attack each Bane. Normally, this 
attack may only be used once before 
the claws regenerate, but Sam will 
allow two uses here, because Josh is 
spending a Rage point and the 
"double-barreled" action is fun. Josh 
rolls Mari's Dexterity + Brawl (nine 
dice) against difficulty 6: three 
successes, a hit... 


he wants to get the characters through it before the night is over... 


Josh rolls for damage 
twice (once for each 
Bane): Strength (6) + 2 
(her claws; eight dice). 
She scores six successes 
against one and five 
against the other! Sam, 
wanting to move the plot 
forward, rules the Banes 
destroyed. 


Combat Summary Chart 


Stage One: Initiative 


* Roll Wits + Initiative (difficulty 4). The winner declares her action last (after she has heard 
everyone else's actions) and performs it first. 


* Declare Dice Pool division if performing multiple actions. 
* Declare any Rage point expenditures (maximum of character's Dexterity rating). 


Stage Two: Attack 

* For firearms combat, roll Dexterity + Firearms. 

* For melee (with weapons) combat, roll Dexterity + Melee. 

* For hand-to-hand (without weapons) combat, roll Dexterity + Brawl. 


* Dodge: roll Dexterity * Dodge. A character can forfeit some or all of his Dice Pool to dodge at 
any time; each success subtracts one from the opponent's successes. 


Stage Three: Resolution 
* Roll damage, determined by weapon or maneuver (difficulty 6). 
* Soak damage: roll Stamina (difficulty 6). 


General Complications 


* Changing Actions: The difficulty increases by one. 
* Immobilization: The difficulty to hit an immobilized target is decreased by two. 


* Stunning: When Health Level damage exceeds Stamina rating, the target is stunned and 
cannot act next turn (a Rage point will counter the effect). 


Spirit Combat Table 


Stage One: Initiative 
* As above. Spirits roll Willpower for initiative. 


Stage Two: Attack 
* Roll Willpower (difficulty 6) unless a Charm is being used (refer to the Charm description) 
* Dodge: Willpower (difficulty 6), or split Willpower Dice Pool between attack and dodge. 


Stage Three: Resolution 

* Roll Rage (difficulty 6); one Health Level of aggravated damage is inflicted per success (Garou 
can soak this with a Gnosis roll, difficulty 6); one Power point per success is lost if the target isa spirit. 

* Soak damage: spirits cannot soak damage. 


246 Werewolf: The Apocalypse 


p/m. am, um. mr BEER ——— — T 


Miniatures and 
Werewolf 


At some point, every Storyteller deals with player confu- 
sion and complaints, especially during combat scenes. Where 
is my character? How far away am 1 from the Black Spiral? Is the 
Leech in range of my crossbow? What do you mean didn't see the 
fomor? How did the Pentex goons see me? Bloody Jaws needs to 
retake his last action — he knew the hunters were standing right next. 
tohim, IH justdidn' thear you. Callme when someone figures out how 
many Banes are left. 

Does any of that sound familiar? 

Miniatures enhance combat scenes by helping players and 
Storytellers visualize the encounter. A map allows a player to 
answer many of her own questions. Storytellers have an easier 
job keeping track of everything, and play proceeds more 
smoothly. Some groups fear that miniaturesare too hard to use 
and cost too much. Others think that setting up miniatures 
interrupts a game too much. Ifa map can alleviate arguments, 
then the time spent setting up is worth it. As far as cost goes, 
adequate counters, etal., can be acquired for under two dollars. 

Miniatures can make Werewolf games more fun. Some 
players really love having small painted pieces represent their 
characters. Also, miniatures help players visualize some of the 
special combat maneuvers. With a map, movement becomes 
more important, and Gifts like Leap of the Kangaroo are much 
more impressive. The range of guns has meaning. Further- 
more, destroying terrain features and physically removing 
enemy pieces provide an immediate sense of satisfaction. 

All ofthe rules in this section are suggestions. If they make the 
gametoocomplexordetractftomtheatmosphereofyourchronicle, 
don't use them. Each group has its own playing style. 


The Materials 


If you can't afford miniatures and can't find hex paper, don't 
despair. With a few pieces of paper (or dice) and a good ruler, you 
can run the War of the Amazon. The scale of all Werewolf 
miniatures rules is: 1" hex = one yard. If characters move off the 
map, use the ruler to keep going. If you make paper pieces, 
rememberthat Garouin Hispoand Crinosformsoccupy twohexes 
(see Space, below), and use an arrow to indicate the direction that 
each piece faces. If you use dice as miniatures, make a quick key on 
scrap paper and try to choose dice of different colors. For extra 


Movement Rates Chart 


Movement Distance (yards per turn) 

Homid Glabro 
Walk d 7 
Jog 12 + Dex 12 + Dex 
Run 20 + Dexx3 20 + Dexx 3 


dramaticeffect,theStorytellercanchangethenumbersonthedice 
to reflect damage, lowering them for each wound a character 
suffers. Dice and paper work well for extras in massive battles 
wherein the combatants exceed group's miniatures supply. Clear 
plasticrulershave dozens ofapplicationsin miniatures battles, such 
as determining range and areas of effect, creating terrain, and 
establishing line of sight. 

Most stores that carry gaming materials stock at least a few 
miniatures. Ral Partha puts out a line of miniatures for 
Werewolf: The Apocalypse and Vampire: The Masquer- 
ade. The Werewolf line includes Garou (in all forms), fomori, 
Black Spiral Dancers, and Wyrm beasts. Most models meant 
for use with near-future or cyberpunk games also work for 
characters in Homid form, and there are other werewolf 
models available for Garou in Crinos or Lupus forms. Fantasy 
monsters make wonderful Wyrm spawn, especially when 
given suitably toxic paint jobs. Most stores that sell miniatures 
also sell paints, brushes and primer, or at least can order them. 
Model and hobby shops also sell paints and brushes. 


Maps 

When choosing a map, make sure that it can represent the 
needed terrain. Investing in a reusable map saves the most money 
inthe long run. Hex maps of 1" scale are available in many gaming 
stores, and many mail-order companies sell them. If you can't find 
1" hex maps, 1" square maps work fine. In case you can't find 
anything in 1" scale, any surface can be made into terrain by using 
a ruler to measure movement and ranges. 

Mapsare made from different materials. Make certain that you 
purchase markers that wash off your map. Use water-based markers 
for acetate maps and overhead projection markers for vinyl maps. 
Dry-erase boards (used with rulers to measure distances), which 
have the advantage of letting you draw terrain, are available in 
most office-supply stores. Special dry-erase markers are sold for use 
with the boards. Always check with the store or mail-order 
company to find out which markers to use. 

Cleaning maps is the key to ensuring their life. Always clean 
maps immediately after finishing with them. Glass cleaner makes 
removing old markings fairly easy. A great cleaning trick that 
workseven on maps left uncleaned for months is coloring over old 
lines, then wiping or using glass cleaner. 

Some Storytellers draw planning maps before their games. 1/4" 
hexagonal grid paper makes a good scale for planning maps. This 
paper is both cheap and widely available. A planning map lets a 
Storyteller designa huge area without having toconstructaplaying 


Crinos* 
7 (9) 
12 (14) + Dex 
20 (22) + Dex x3 


* Number in parentheses applies when quadrupedal 


x = Multipliers are applied to Homid movement rates 


Note: for miniatures: 1 yard = 1" hex 


Chapter Nine: Drama 


POL PST TR -—————Ü 


247 


map. The planning map should be at the one hex = one yard scale. A 
planning map aids in consistent storytelling, especially ifa certain site 
provides the backdrop for multiple combats. Drawingaplanning map 
of the pack's caern for permanent reference is handy. 


Terrain 


Industrious groups may want to build their own terrain 
instead of drawing it on maps. Buildings and trees (primarily 
made for model trains), on sale at hobby shops, add a lot of 
atmosphere to battle scenes. A little imagination can turn a 
variety of household objects into scenery. Boxes can become 
buildings, and old toy cars or bulldozers make wonderful props. 
Cloth, construction paper, poster board, even old socks can be 
hijacked for use as terrain. True miniatures lovers may go all 
out and build a sandbox for their games. 


Putting Maps to Use 


When you want to use miniatures, have the characters set 
up on the playing map — either on an edge or in the center, 
depending on the scene. Some Storytellers like to draw maps 
before a scene, while others draw features as the characters 
perceive them. The first option has the advantage of expedi- 
ency, while the second keeps characters from being aware of 
things or NPCs that they can’t sense. Experiment and use the 
method that works best with your group. 

If you draw the map once characters are positioned, remember 
thatGarou in Crinos, Hispo, and Lupusformshave preternaturally 
sharp senses. A werewolf can identify objects using hearing and 
smell. A fun way to get a feel for how much a Garou can sense is 
totakeadogforawalkatnightand compare hisawareness to yours, 
such as when he growls at things you don’t even notice. 

Remember, when you draw a playing map, it’s not impor- 
tant to be exact, but it is important to be consistent, and all 
players should be able to see the play map. Ifa player can’t see 
the map, then the advantages of using miniatures are lost. 


The Rules 


A few of the rules need to be adjusted or clarified to 
survive the transition from imagination to concrete figures 
and terrain. Most changes are slight. When in doubt, run 
the combat exactly as you would without the miniatures. 
As always, if a rule doesn't work for you, throw it out. If the 
rules don't cover something you'd like, embellish them. 
Miniatures should enhance play, not detract from it. 


Space 


All figures take up space on the playing map. A human 
occupies a single hex, as does a Garou in Glabro form. Hispo 
and Crinos forms occupy two hexes. A Lupus fills one to 
two hexes, depending on how long it is. It is possible to 
move without penalty through a hex containing a Homid 
or Lupus figure. Glabro, Hispo, and Crinos figures fill their 
entire hex or hexes. Only by flying, leaping or using some 
other special maneuver can another figure pass through a 
hex containing a werewolf in one of these forms. 


248 


Facing 

You must be certain of the facing of all miniatures involved 
in a battle. For most miniatures, the direction of the head 
determines the facing, but some miniatures have the heads 
pointed in odd directions. Forclarity, you may mark each piece 
with asmall piece oftape on the forward facing. The tape helps 
ensure that everyone knows who is facing what. Characters 
can normally attack only those targets in their front three 
hexes. Most groups have characters face only hex sides, but 
some will want to use points as well. 

When a Garou transforms, her facing remains constant. For 
miniatures that occupy more than one hex, try to keep the rear 
legs planted in the original hex. Hispo and Lupus miniatures 
expand to the forward hex, while a Crinos extends to either 
the right or left side hexes. 

Characters have a triangular field of vision, extending 
outward from the hex in front of the head. Line of sight 
depends on situational modifiers such as daylight, fog, smoke, 
etc. Walls, trees, cars and other objects may also block line of 
sight. Garou using other senses, such as smell or hearing, sense 
outward in a radius around their head. Factors such as wind, 
burning rubber, or heavy machinery may require Perception + 
Alertness (or Primal-Urge depending on the form) rolls to use 
these other senses effectively. In all cases, common sense 
should be the ultimate guide. 


Movement Calculation 


Movement is the most important element in miniatures 
rules. Garou may always choose movement as an action. 
Beforea battle, calculate and record the movement rates forall 
characters involved. Garou have three movement modes: 
walking, jogging, and running. See the Movement Rates 
Sidebarfor the amount of hexes/yards a character can move in 
one turn . For more information, see Moving, pg. 209. 

No roll is required to move, but movement is the only 
action the character can perform in that turn (the exceptions 
to thisare special maneuvers such as Body Slam and Leaping 
Rake; see below). 

When walking or jogging, characters may turn one hex- 
facing to the right or left for each hex they move. A character 
may turnan extra hex-facing by reducing his movement by 1" 
per facing change. Characters who walk backward may only 
move 4" per turn, regardless of form. 

Running characters may only change facing once for every 
3" they move. 

Characters may only move in one mode in a given turn. 
Characters who stand in place may turn to face any direction. 
A character never has to use all of her movement, but she 
cannot save it for another turn. 

Terrain may drastically affect movement rates. A deep 
marsh reduces walking and jogging movement to one-quarter 
normal, and prevents running altogether. Some surfaces, such 
as a wet tile floor, may require Dexterity + Athletics rolls to 
avoid slipping and losing any remaining movement. A slope 
or grade may reduce a character's movement rate by up to 10". 


Werewolf: The Apocalypse 


p/m. am, EEE BEER c————À 


Other obstacles may also shave hexes off a character's move- 
ment. Dexterity * Athletics rolls made by running characters 
to avoid terrain difficulties have difficulties of 8. 

Ifaplayer character slams into an obstacle, the Storyteller may 
rule that the Garou suffers from one to three Health Levels of 
damage, depending on her speed and the strength/shape of the 
object. The character receives a Stamina roll to soak the damage. 
A glass window would inflict only one Health Level, and a 
werewolf would shatter it as she leapt through. Running into a 
large construction crane at breakneck speed in Lupus form might 
inflict three Health Levels of damage. Damage from obstacles is 
optional and completely up to the Storyteller. 


Dodges and Evasive Actions 


When a werewolf dodges or evades, she moves behind 
nearby cover or away from her opponent. In brawling or melee 
combat, a character who successfully dodges may move one 
hex, regardless of whether or not she is hit. 

In a firefight, a character may move up to three hexes in 
search of cover. The difficulty of her dodge depends on the 
availability of cover (see Dodging, pp.226-227). The facing of 
adodging character shifts to the direction in which she moves. 

A character using the Evasive Action maneuver may shift 
his facing in whatever direction she desires, or not at all. 


Hand-to-Hand Combat 


Characters may engage in brawling combat when they are 
within one hex of each other. Ifa character want to attack an 
opponentat his flank, his difficulty increases by two. Toattack 
acharacter directly to the rear, the difficulty increases by three. 
Some combat maneuvers and Gifts modify these rules. 

Melee combat may occur at a range of one or two hexes, 
depending on the length of a character’s weapon. A long, 
hand-held weapon, such as a spear, whip, pole, or two-handed 
sword, gives a character the advantage of attacking while 
standing two hexes from his opponent. 


Movement-Based Combat Maneuvers 


Body slams and leaping rakes both require that the character 
move. In order to perform a body slam, a Garou must run toward 
hisopponent; walkingorjoggingdoes not build sufficient momen- 
tum. A character can body slam a target only one hex away from 
her, but the Storyteller may raise the difficulty or lower her Dice 
Pool because of her low momentum. The character ends her 
movement in the same hex as her target. Ifshe fails this maneuver, 
she falls to the ground in the target’s hex. 

The Leaping Rake maneuver lets a character move through a 
hexcontaininganother figure. The player picksa target hex where 
he wantsto land, and then leaps. He rolls Dexterity + Athletics (or 
uses the Automatic Success rule) to see if he can reach his target 
hex. His successes are compared to the Jumping Chart (see 
Jumping, pg. 212). A character must leap in the direction he faces, 
and his facing doesn’t change when he lands. 

Players may design other movement-based combat maneuvers 
using the freeform combat rules. Keep new maneuvers plausible, using 


Chapter Nine: Drama 


ES ae e 


the Body Slam, Leaping Rake, and Dodge maneuvers as guidelines. 
Remember to account for facing changes. So long as a Garou with a 
new maneuver doesn't ruin the fun of combat, let players enjoy. 


The Umbra and Spirit Combat 


Spirits can fly a maximum distance of 20 yards + Willpower per 
turn. Because spirits fly, terrain doesn't modify how fara spirit may 
move. Attacks from spirits in the Umbra take place at brawling 
range. Whenaspirit Materializes, it is treated like any other figure. 

Some Garou like to step sideways during combat. To 
represent characters in the Umbra, the Storyteller can move 
their miniatures toanother mapor placea piece of black paper 
underneath the figure. Spirits and other beings lurking in the 
Umbra should also stay on a separate map or have some 
marking to show their presence outside the physical world. 


Painting Miniatures 


‚At some point you may decide to paint your miniatures. Many 
people are intimidated by the thought of trying to paint a miniature. 
All it takes is some practice anda little bit of knowledge. 

First, wash the miniature. Then file down any extra material and 
wash itagain. Some peopleattach apiece of cardboard with two-sided 
tape to the bottom of the miniature after it dries. This piece of 
cardboard isused to handle the piece while painting it. Youthen need 
to prime the piece. Primer helps the paint stick to the miniature and 
makesthe whole painting process much easier. We suggest using gray 
or white primer. Following the directions on the primer, give your 
miniatures an even coatand enough time to dry. If you leteverything 
dry ovemight you should be safe. 

There are different types of paints for use with miniatures. We 
recommend water-based acrylic paints. Good colors to start with are 
black, white, a flesh tone, a medium shade of brown, and blue or red. 
Other good Garou colors include gray, silver and green. Purple, 
orange, yellow, black and green can make sickening Wyrm creatures. 
Mixing small amounts of white and black with other colors creates 
lighter or darker shades. Plastic counter trays for wargames are good 
placesto mix paints. Ifyouseal the trays, the mixed colors willstay wet 
fora few days. 

Nylon bristle brushes with sharp points are good. Buy at least two: 
avery fine size anda medium size. Paint out ofthe lids of the paint jars 
and coat only the tips of the brushes. Do not let the paint reach the 
roots of the bristles; this ruins brushes. 

Cover the painting area with newspaper or paper towels. Have a 
cup of water handy, one from which people will never need to drink. 
Make sure the area is adequately illuminated. Have astack of napkins 
or paper towels ready for drying your brush. Always be gentle with 
brushes; bristles are easily destroyed. 

Paint light colors first; you can paint over light colors more easily 
than dark ones. If you completely mess up, water-based paints wash 
off with a little effort. If you want to preserve a favorite paint job, use 
some sealant, available wherever paints are sold. 

There are many advanced painting techniques: for example, 
highlighting, shading, and dry-brushing. As you continue paint- 
ing, develop your own style. You will soon realize that most 
painting suggestions are just expressions of personal preference. 


249 


Antagonists 


Fomor (plural Fomori) 


Fomori are humans who have turned to the Wyrm. In the 
process, they gain great power, but are marked or deformed 
in some way. Many fomori are mindless, deformed canni- 
bals who lurk in the woods and near landfills. Some, 
however, retain their sentience and appearance; these are 
used by the Wyrm to infiltrate human society. 

A fomor is created when a Bane possesses a body. Most 
often, the person's personality and consciousness remain 
the same, but are now fused with a malevolent spirit. If the 
person was already corrupt and evil, the resulting fomor 
may be a truly psychotic creature. 

Pentex (see Chapter Two) has an active division dedi- 
cated to the creation and training of fomori. This division, 
called Project Iliad, "recruits" employees from Pentex sub- 
sidiaries and uses them in horrific experiments, hoping to 
create fabulous new kinds of fomori. Pentex uses these 
"promoted" workers as its front-line defense against Garou 
assaults. 

Attributes: Strength 3+, Dexterity 2+, Stamina 3+, 
Charisma 1*, Manipulation 1+, Appearance (usually) O, 
Perception 2, Intelligence 1+, Wits 1+ 

Abilities (typical): Brawl 1 to 3, Dodge 1, Firearms 1, 
Melee 1 or 2, Stealth 1, Survival 2, Occult 1 


Appendix 


p/m. am, EN amar n -—————— //, 


Powers: All fomori have one or more special abilities: 
"gifts" from the Wyrm's corruption. See the list below for 
examples of powers, or feel free to make up your own. 

Equipment: Pentex fomori are often equipped with an 
array of military weaponry: assault rifles, combat knives, 
flak jackets, radios, etc. 


Fomori Powers 


Most common fomori have only three powers; some 
have fewer and some have many more. The fomori created 
by Pentex usually have three to five, in addition to Immu- 
nity to the Delirium. 

* Berserker — The fomor has five Rage points and can 
use these just like any Garou. However, the fomor is also 
susceptible to frenzy. 

* Claws and Fangs — The fomor possesses natural 
weaponry similar to Garou claws and teeth. He may attack 
using claw or bite maneuvers, and he inflicts aggravated 
damage. 

* Extra Limbs — Fomori often have a number of extra 
limbs, usually in the form of tentacles or masses of tendrils. 
Such extra limbs often sprout from awkward places: for 
example, an extra arm growing from a fomor's thigh. 

* Eyes of the Wyrm — The eyes of the fomor are weird 
and can actually dilate, revealing images of the Wyrm's 
damnation. An opponent who gazes into the fomor's eyes 
must make a Willpower roll (difficulty 8) or be frozen in 
horror for (five turns minus Wits rating; minimum one 


251 


turn). The fomor itself cannot attack its victim, but its 
friends can. 

* Fungal Touch — The inside of the fomor's body has 
been replaced by a foul-smelling fungoid substance. The 
fomor may infect an opponent by touching him — the 
victim must make a Stamina roll (difficulty 7) or begin 
losing one point from all Physical Attributes, as well as 
Appearance, per day (as the fungus slowly covers him...). 
The infection may only be cured by supernatural means 
(such as with the Gift: Resist Toxin or a healing fetish). 
Also, thefomor may exude the fungoid mucus over its body, 
causing all who attack in melee to subtract two from their 
Dice Pools because of the revolting stench. 

* Immunity to the Delirium — Most fomori are im- 
mune to the Delirium. The Wyrm-taint has erased the Veil 
along with their humanity. Notall fomori are thus immune, 
and the degree of immunity seems to depend on the amount 
of Wyrm-taint possessed. Pentex Inc. injects its fomori with 
a special serum that destroys the part of the brain suscep- 
tible to the Delirium. Assume that all fomori created by 
Pentex will not be affected by the Delirium. 

* Poison Tumors — The fomor is covered in tumors 
filled with a noxious pus — whenever the fomor is hit with 
a claw, the attacker is splattered with pus and must imme- 


diately attempt to soak three dice of damage (five dice if the 


fomorisbitten). Ifthefomor is hit with a melee weapon, the 
attacker must make a Dexterity roll (difficulty 6) to avoid 
the flying pus, or take damage as above. Firearms are, of 
course, safe. 

* Voice of the Wyrm — The fomor's tongue is long and 
sluglike, and the fomor may speak in the Wyrm's own 
language. When this fomor chants the vile syllables of the 
Dark Litany, all in hearing range (save Wyrm creatures) 
must make a Willpower roll (difficulty 8) or lose half their 
Gnosis points. This power may only be used on a given 
victim once per encounter. The tongue may also lick 
opponents in close combat, inflicting two dice of damage. 


Black Spiral (Dancers 


Also known as the Lost Tribe, the dreaded Black Spiral 
Dancers are those Garou who turned to the Wyrm. Once 
the White Howlers, a noble tribe akin to the Fianna, they 
were corrupted by the Wyrm into the foul, vicious things 
theyare today. The Dancers have lived underground among 
horrors for ages, and all are quite insane; however, the 
Wyrm has given its slaves terrible powers of their own, as 
well as a violent hatred for the Garou. 

Black Spiral Dancers roughly resemble other Garou; 
however, many of them are malformed, either through 
metis birth or close proximity to the radioactive balefires of 
the Wyrm. The heads of their Crinos forms are often huge 
and slaver-jawed, resembling a hyena's, while their ears are 
hairless and pointed like a bat's. Their eyes are huge and 
round, glowing with a red or green luminescence, while 
their fur is patchy and usually either albino-white or gray- 


ish-green. Black Spirals’ human forms are usually twisted 
and deformed, but some are quite beautiful. 

The Dancers’ totem is Whippoorwill, whose mad call 
the Dancers emit during their hunts. They name them- 
selves after a mysterious labyrinth that exists in the realm 
of the Wyrm; they are said to “dance” this Black Spiral to 
gain dark powers and wisdom. Indeed, to dance the Black 
Spiral and survive is considered by the Black Spiral Dancers 
to be the most sacred of feats. 

Black Spiral Dancers should be generated like any other 
Garou, but most of them are metis, having inbred for ages 
in the deep darkness. Their “Gifts” often resemble muta- 
tions, and their nature is up to the Storyteller; some 
suggestions follow: 

Sense Wyrm (Level One) — Same as the Metis Gift. 

Ears of the Bat (Level Two) — Black Spiral Dancers 
with this Gift have large, batlike ears in their wolf forms; 
even in their human forms, their ears are abnormally large. 
This Gift enables the Black Spiral Dancer to use sonar like 
a bat, allowing him to sense objects and foes even in total 
darkness. 


Patagia (Level Three) — The Dancer has flaps of skin 
under her arms, resembling the membranes of a pterodactyl 
or flying squirrel. By outstretching her arms and leaping 
from a height, she may glide at 25 mph. The Dancer has 
these patagia in all forms. 

Foaming Fury (Level Three) — The Dancer’s mouth 
bubbles and foams with a greenish fluid. Anyone bitten 


must succeed in a Stamina roll (difficulty 8) or fly into a 
rabid frenzy. 

Crawling Poison (Level Four) — This Gift enables the 
Black Spiral Dancer to infect other Garou with a slow 
poison. This poison, when injected into a Garou via claw 
or bite, inhibits her regenerative powers. The Dancer rolls 
its Gnosis (difficulty of the victim’s Stamina); the effect 
lasts for one hour per success 

Balefire (Level Five) — The Dancer can hurl spheres of 
sickly green flame at her opponent. If she hits (Dexterity + 
Athletics; difficulty 6 — use the Firearms Chart for compli- 
cations), the victim must roll Stamina (difficulty 8) and 
match or exceed the Dancer’s number of successes. If he 
fails, he is mutated in a manner decided by the Storyteller. 
These mutations are always harmful, and each success on 
the Dancer’s roll is treated as a level of aggravated damage 
for the purpose of healing/rejecting the mutation. 


Governments 


I hear much support for the monarchy 

I hear the Union Jack’s to remain, 

I see Namatjira in custody 

I see Truganini’s in chains. 

— Midnight Oil, “Truganini” 

How much do the world governments suspect? How 
much do they know? It is hard to say. Many governments 
have agencies or departments devoted to the investigation 


Appendix 253 


| 


of paranormal occurrences, but many of those, especially 
on the military end, seem to be devoted to extrasensory 
phenomena, such as ESP, clairvoyance and telekinesis. In 
general, it seems clear that the Veil has remained intact 
and that humans know very little. 

Britain has such an organization, but it is very difficult 
to trace. Some suspect that it is actually of a quasi-mystical 
nature, possibly with ties to similar organizations dating 
back hundreds of years. British Garou have reported in- 
stances of unnerving accuracy in the investigations of 
Scotland Yard following unfortunate Garou-related occur- 
rences. Some say that this group is actually controlled by a 
vampire and used by her to combat her enemies. 

In the United States, interest in Garou activity can be 
traced to two agencies: the Federal Bureau of Investigation 
and the National Security Agency. 

The FBI might contain several individuals who suspect 
the truth. There is even a special department devoted to 
the investigation of the paranormal. Originally formed to 
neutralize the impact of suspected "Communist Thought 
Control" research, this department, known generally as 
Special Affairs (though its members rarely identify them- 
selves as such) is involved in continuing investigations. 
Some of Special Affairs’ investigations during the '50s and 
'60s may have uncovered some Garou-related information. 
Despite this, Special Affairs has dwindled significantly in 
power and membership over the years. Proof of suspected 
activities is demanded by the FBI before action can be 
taken, and proof is what has thus far eluded the depart- 
ment. Circumstantial evidence of werewolf activity no 
doubt abounds, but that last, necessary piece of tangible 
evidence has escaped Special Affairs — so far. 

It is believed that the NSA keeps an active file on 
supernatural events, but treats them as a subclassification 
ofterrorism. The agency has not yet made the connections 
that would reveal the whole picture. The NSA is a giant 
fact-sifting agency concerned with national security from 
an internal perspective. The NSA flags police and news 
reports that contain interesting or anomalous facts. Inves- 
tigation only occurs after the computer, or a reviewer, 
notices undue occurrences that may be related. Should the 
NSA actually deduce any significant Garou-related con- 
nections, the resources that could be brought to bear are 
truly frightening. 

Police Officer: At one time or another, werewolves will 
find themselves on the wrong side of the law, whether 
through their own folly or some devious plan of the Story- 
teller. Most local cops patrol in police cruisers. Help isonly 
aradio call away; usually one to five other cars arrive within 
minutes of an emergency call. In extreme emergencies, up 
to 50 other police officers can be summoned within 10 
minutes (at least in a city). 

Character Creation: Attributes 7/5/3, Abilities 15/9/3, 
Backgrounds 7, Willpower 6 

Suggested Attributes: Assume ratings of 2, except for 
Physical Traits, where you can assume ratings of 3. 


254 


Werewolf: The Apocalypse 


(PIE ME Ps CDA TD E —————— 


Suggested Abilities: Alertness 2, Brawl 2, Computer 1, 
Dodge 2, Drive 2, Firearms 3, Investigation 2, Law 2, 
Leadership 1, Melee 1, Police Procedure 3, Stealth 1, 
Science 2, Streetwise 1 

Equipment: Lt. Revolver, Lt. Auto. Pistol, Pump Shot- 
gun, Billy Club, Handcuffs, Radio, Badge, Flashlight 

Police Detective: Police detectives are called to the 
scenes of murders and other major crimes. They may be- 
come very involved in the investigations of certain 
mysterious kidnappings (taking young Garou off for their 
Rites of Passage...). 

Character Creation: Attributes 8/5/3, Abilities 17/9/3, 
Backgrounds 7, Willpower 7 

Suggested Attributes: Assume ratings of 2, except for 
Perception and Wits, where you can assume ratings of 3. 

Suggested Abilities: Alertness 3, Brawl 2, Computer 2, 
Dodge 1, Drive 2, Firearms 3, Intimidation 1, Investigation 4, 
Law 2, Leadership 2, Melee 1, Police Procedure 4, Stealth 1, 
Subterfuge 3, Science 2 

Equipment: Lt. Revolver, Lt. Auto. Pistol, Handcuffs, 
Radio, Badge, Flashlight 

Government Agent: These characters can be from the 
FBI, the NSA, the CIA, or whatever local government 
agency is appropriate. They often have a great deal of 
backup and authority. 

Character Creation: Attributes 9/5/4, Abilities 18/10/6, 
Background 7, Willpower 8 

Suggested Attributes: Assume ratings of 2, except for 
Perception and Intelligence, where you can assume ratings 
of at least 3. 

Suggested Abilities: Alertness 3, Athletics 1, Brawl 3, 
Computer 1, Dodge 2, Drive 3, Expression 1, Firearms 3, 
Intimidation 2, Investigation 4, Law 3, Leadership 3, Police 
Procedure 5, Politics 1, Stealth 3, Subterfuge 1, Science 2 

Equipment: Lt. Revolver, Hvy. Auto. Pistol, Submachine 
Gun, Video Camera, Forensics Lab, Portable Phone Tap, 
Portable Lie Detector, Bugs, Class II Armor, Mirrorshades 

SWAT Officer: These officers are trained in the use of 
high-powered weapons and military tactics. If things ever 
get out of hand with the Garou — a gun battle, for instance 
— they will certainly be called in. 

Character Creation: Attributes: 8/5/3, Abilities: 15/9/3, 
Background: 7, Willpower: 7 

Suggested Attributes: Assume ratings of 2, except for 
Physical Traits, where you can assume ratings of 3. 

Suggested Abilities: Alertness 3, Athletics 1, Brawl 3, 
Dodge 3, Drive 3, Firearms 4, Intimidation 2, Investigation 4, 
Law 1, Leadership 2, Melee 2, Police Procedure 3, Repair 2, 
Stealth 2, Streetwise 1 

Equipment: Lt. Auto. Pistol, Assault Rifle, Radio, 
Bullhorn, Class III Body Armor, Battering Ram, Rappelling 
Equipment, Armored Vehicle 


«Che Jnquisition 


These loathsome parasites that cling 
To the cross — the cloth and the skin 
Soaked in the blood of men — NOT the body of Christ! 

— Christian Death, "This Is Heresy" 

It is generally acknowledged that the Roman Catholic 
Church learned of the Garou during the years of the 
Inquisition. Instituted in 1229, the Inquisition concerned 
itself with the active suppression of the various heresies 
spreading through Europe. Partially in response to the rise 
of the Catharist heresy in southern France and northern 
Italy, Pope Innocent IV approved the use of torture in 1252. 

There are tales that the Catharist beliefs were actively 
supported by many Garou Kinfolk of the time. It is said that 
a few Garou fell into the hands of the Inquisition when 
their Kin were forced to confess their heresy. If this is so, it 
could explain the rapid escalation in the tyrannical prac- 
tices of the Inquisition. Perhaps they had seen proof, with 
their own eyes, of evil incarnate in the world. 

Whatever the truth of those events during the 13th 
century, all indications are that the Church remains aware 
of, and concerned about, the Garou. There are rumored to 
be two orders within the Church that are the focus of those 
concerns. Indeed, the Inquisition continues still, albeit in 
a different form. 


Today the Inquisition is an organization of scholars and 
researchers of the occult, as well as a clearing house for 
many of the greatest hunters of the supernatural. Though 
the Inquisition is no longer supported or sanctioned by the 
Church, mostof its membersare from the Catholic Church. 
It is a loose confederation of scholars and high-ranking 
priests who keep in touch mainly through letters and rare 
conferences. Though the Inquisition has taken a new 
name, "The Society of Leopold," and though its members 
say they are only interested in research (they keep most of 
the oldest records), they are preeminent among hunters of 
vampires, Garou, and even mages! 

Witch-hunter: These are the agents of the Inquisition, 
most often members of one of the various holy orders. They 
act without the formal knowledge of the Church. 

Character Creation: Attributes 8/6/3, Abilities 21/12/7, 
Backgrounds 6, Willpower 10 

Suggested Attributes: Assume ratings of 2, except for 
Intelligence, which should often be 3. Most successful 
witch-hunters have high Physical Attributes. 

Suggested Abilities: Alertness 2, Enigmas 4, Etiquette 3, 
Expression 2, Intimidation 3, Investigation 2, Linguistics 3, 
Medicine 3, Occult 3, Politics 2, Subterfuge 2, Survival 1, 
Science 1; many witch-hunters possess Brawl 3, Dodge, 4, 
Firearms 4, Melee 3, Stealth 3 

Equipment: Bible, Silver Cross, Medal of St. Ignatius, 
Relics, Robe 


The Arcanum 


Lentered, charmed, and from a cobwebbed heap 

Took up the nearest tome and thumbed it through, 

Trembling at curious words that seemed to keep 

Some secret, monstrous if only one knew. 

— H.P. Lovecraft, Fungi from Yuggoth 

The formation of the Arcanum can be traced to the 
mystical "War of the Roses" that centered around Paris in 
the late 1800s (not related to the English Baronial Wars). 
A war of words (and, if the combatants’ words are to be 
believed, mystic forces) arose between two orders of 
Rosicrucians. The fighting between the orders become 
such a public scandal (and entertainment, hence the Pari- 
sian newspapers' "War of the Roses" brand) that many of 
both groups' best practitioners and scholars left their re- 
spectiveorders. Afterdraftinga greatcharter, these dissidents 
united to form the Arcanum. This order persists to the 
present. 

Though the Arcanum has only formally existed for less 
than 100 years, its history dates back even farther. The core 
of the Arcanum consists of a group that has branded itself 
the "White Monks." It is believed that these so-called 
White Monks were somehow involved in the Inquisition 
and learned of Garou there. However, they are not cur- 
rently connected with the Inquisition, and never actually 
engage in witch hunts. The Arcanum studies, but does not 
destroy. 

The Arcanum has three known Foundation houses — 
one in Boston, one in Paris, and a third in Vienna. Its 
members, recruited from the cream of intellectual society, 
are today concerned more with theory than practice. They 
seem devoted solely to the gathering and study of occult- 
related information, but are focused primarily on the past 
rather than the modern world. Some members have shown 
a degree of interest in the here and now, but these members, 
and the Arcanum itself, likely believe werewolves to be 
long gone if they ever existed at all. The Arcanum as a 
whole seems to be more interested in phenomena of a less 
tangible nature: magic, miracles and hauntings. 

Scholar: These intellectuals are involved in the gather- 
ing and classification of paranormal matters of all sorts, 
including alleged werewolf sightings. They are not inter- 
ested in violent confrontation with the supernatural and 
will avoid such at all costs. When in the field, investigators 
operate in groups of two to four to provide witnesses and 
greater safety. 

Character Creation: Attributes 9/6/3, Abilities 15/9/3, 
Backgrounds 7, Willpower 10 

Suggested Attributes: Assume ratings of 2, except for 
Charisma, Intelligence, and Manipulation, which should 
be 3 or even 4. 

Suggested Abilities: Drive 1, Enigmas 3, Etiquette 2, 
Expression 2, Intimidation 1, Investigation 4, Leadership 4, 
Linguistics 4, Occult 4, Science 3, Subterfuge 2. Those who 


256 


Werewolf: The Apocalypse 


parem am, mrt mr GE TRA ———— MÀ 


routinely perform field work — photographing ghosts, 
collecting ectoplasm, measuring the “magical” energy of ley 
lines — often possess Alertness 1, Medicine 1, Survival 1. 

Equipment: Automobile, Various “Gadgets,” Investiga- 
tive Paraphernalia 


Other Supernatural 
Beings 


Dampires 


Lay down in the web of the black spider 
I'll drink your blood like wine 
So come on in 
it ain't no sin 
take off your skin 
and dance around in your bones. 
— Tom Waits, "The Black Rider" 

Vampires are creatures of the cities. They feed from the 
human population of urban areas. Vampires are largely 
responsible for the unchecked growth of urban sprawls. 

Vampires subsist on human blood and derive many 
special powers from it. A vampire who has recently feasted 
on blood is usually much stronger and faster than a mortal. 
The Blood Pool listing below takes this into consideration. 
A vampire may use one Blood Point to increase a Physical 
Attribute up to 5 (and sometimes higher) or to heal one 
Health Level (except for damage caused by fire, sunlight, or 
the teeth and claws of supernatural entities such as Garou). 

Gifts: The Gifts rating is the total level of Gifts a 
vampire possesses. These are not Garou Gifts as such, for 
vampires have no Gnosis and Rage and thus few ties to the 
spirit world — these are merely the equivalent powers. 
Many vampire powers deal with controlling the minds of 
mortals (and Garou) or corrupting others. 

If you are using Vampire: The Masquerade, use the 
Disciplines from that book instead of Gifts. 

Neonates: These are the youngest vampires, who have 
not yet reached 100 years of unlife. They are the “teenagers” 
of vampiric society. Garou are most likely to encounter 
these vampires, because neonates don’t know enough to 
stay hidden from werewolves. 

Character Creation: Attributes 7/5/3, Abilities 13/9/3, 
Backgrounds 7, Willpower 7, Gifts 2, Blood Pool 10 

Suggested Attributes: Assume ratings of 2 in all At- 
tributes. 

Suggested Abilities: Alertness 2, Athletics 1, Brawl 2, 
Dodge 1, Etiquette 1, Expression 1, Intimidation 2, Melee 1, 
Occult 1, Stealth 3, Streetwise 1, Subterfuge 3 

Suggested Gifts: Heightened Senses, Awe, Resist Pain 

Equipment: Fashionable Clothing, Switchblade, Sun- 
glasses 


Elders: Elders are the princes of their urban realms and 
often dominate a city’s politics. Elder vampires have potent 
blood, have survived between 300 and 1000 years, and thus 
have considerable inherent powers. The vampire stats 
below represent a traditional Western variety. 

Character Creation: Attributes 10/7/5, Abilities 21/9/3, 
Backgrounds 12, Willpower 8, Gifts 4, Blood Pool 20 

Suggested Attributes: Assume ratings of 4 in Social, 3 in 
Mental, and 2 in Physical Attributes. 

Suggested Abilities: Alertness 3, Athletics 1, Brawl 2, 
Dodge 3, Enigmas 2, Etiquette 3, Expression 1, Intimidation 4, 
Melee 2, Occult 2, Stealth 3, Streetwise 1, Subterfuge 4 

Suggested Gifts: Heightened Senses, Awe, Glib Tongue, 
Mindblock, Roll Over, Ultimate Argument of Logic 

Equipment: Outdated but Expensive Clothing, Tinted 
Glasses, Pocket Watch, Sword Cane 

Ghoul: Many vampires create ghouls. This is accom- 
plished by giving a mortal or animal some vampire blood 
without first draining the creature of its own life force. 
Because ghouls are essentially mortals, no statistics are 
given; use human or animal stats, maybe with slight addi- 
tions to Physical Attributes (particularly Strength) 

Special Rules: So long as ghouls imbibe vampire blood 
regularly, they can live forever. However, once the point of 
their natural lifespan has passed, ghouls must always have 
vampire blood in their systems. Otherwise, they will age 
and die very quickly — within a few days, or perhaps even 


a few hours. Ghouls can use the blood within them in 
precisely the same manner vampires do (i.e., to increase 
stats and heal). Assume ghouls have one to 10 Blood 
Points, depending on the generosity of their master. 


Mages 

Our fellow men are the black magicians. 

— Carlos Castaneda, Tales of Power 

Mages are humans with the apparent power to bend 
reality to their will. The uses to which they put this power 
vary with the mage in question, but most Garou distrust 
mages on principle. 

Many mages seek “Quintessence,” or the raw life-force of 
creation. This so-called Quintessence flows from caerns 
(which the mages call “Nodes”), and mages often form 
raiding parties to drain the sacred sites of their precious 
Quintessence. Naturally, this does not sit well with Garou. 

There are a variety of mage factions, and they wage a 
shadowy war over reality itself, fighting for something they 
call “Ascension.” Certain mages, called Marauders, em- 
brace the Wyld; others, called Nephandi, apparently serve 
the Wyrm. Two large factions, the Traditions and the 
Technocracy, are conglomerations of different groups gath- 
ered to pursue a common purpose; while the Traditions 
seek to liberate reality and expand the horizons of the 
human mind and spirit, the Technocracy strives to bind all 
of reality into a safely controlled static pattern, a Weaver- 


mesh for the common good. Most Garou neither know nor 
careaboutthedivisionsamongmages, butsomefew werewolves 
whoknow thesecrets of mage society have allied with Maraud- 
ers or Tradition mages. Two of the Traditions, called the 
Verbena and the Dreamspeakers, are especially close to some 
Garou. Nevertheless, mages are generally regarded with dis- 
trust, and they often earn their bad reputations. 

Amusingly enough, mages seem to feara mystic force called 
“Paradox.” This effect, a sort of reality backlash, limits the 
effects of the magick mages dare to use. Because of Paradox, 
mage magick tends to take the form of surprising coincidences 
rather than fireballs down Main Street. Paradox isa mystery to 
the Garou, who are immune to its effects; some Theurges 
speculate that Gaia herself punishes those prideful humans 
who step out of line too often, while other Garou have less 
prosaic theories. Galliards tell great tales of mages dragged to 
the Abyss by fearful Paradox spirits, or exploding from accu- 
mulated Paradox energy. Ragabash have tried to figure out 
how to use Paradox to their advantage, but only a few Uktena 
and Glass Walkers are willing or able to deal with such a 
manifestation of the Weaver. 

Gifts: Mages have a broad range of powers to call upon; 
using Gifts to approximate mage magick is problematic at best. 
TheStoryteller would be within her rights simply to allow an 
NPC mage to accomplish a range of given effects within one 
or twoareas of expertise. These effects would have difficulties 
from 5 to 8; the effectiveness of the magick would depend on 
how many successes the mage rolled — very little with one, 


un nf SL INTI A Ue CUI A IE, 


noticeable effects with two, a fair amount with three, great 
success with four and exceptional success with five or more. 
Most magick does not inflict aggravated wounds, but fire, 
electricity, silver and a powerful attack of pure Quintessence 
will do so with three or more successes: two Health Levels per 
success over the second. Give the mage two to six dice to roll 
for this, depending on the power of the mage. 

Alternatively, simply assign the mage 10 to 15 Gifts of 
Levels One to Five. If you have Mage: The Ascension, use 
the Spheres and Arete from that book instead. 

Adept: The mage listed below is a Tradition adept of the 
Order of Hermes, accomplished in magick and possessing 
some degree of mundane skill as well. 

Character Creation: Attributes 9/6/4, Abilities 20/8/3, 
Backgrounds 10, Willpower 8, Gifts/Magick Dice Pool 12/5 

Suggested Attributes: Assume ratings of 2 in Physical 
Attributes, 3 in Social, and 4 in Mental. 

Suggested Abilities: Alertness 2, Dodge 2, Empathy 2, 
Enigmas 3, Etiquette 3, Expression 1, Linguistics 2, Melee 2, 
Occult 4, Rituals (human) 4, Subterfuge 3 

Suggested Areas of Expertise: Forces (elements), Spirit 
(like Garou spirit Gifts) 

Equipment: Elegant Clothing (in vaguely archaic style), 
Ritual Accessories, Cold Iron Sword 

Most mages have skilled compatriots or followers of 
some sort. 


Wraiths 


Wraiths are dark shadows that dwell in forgotten places. 
Many Garou have sensed these creatures on the edges of their 
keen awareness. They are spirits, but notofthesort with which 
Garouare familiar; rather, they are spirits of the restless dead, 
and dwell in an Umbra all their own. Indeed, few Garou Gifts 
allow interaction with these spectral creatures; Spirit Speech 
and Sense the Unnatural have been used from time to time 
with varying effect, while the Rite of Summoning, Rite of 
Binding, Command Spirit and Call to Duty all fail. It is said 
that the Silent Striders understand wraiths’ true nature — 
indeed, it is said that the tribe's elders possess arcane knowl- 
edge about wraiths and can enter the dark, gloomy, 
fog-enshrouded Umbra in which they dwell. It is also said that 
some Hellholes connect to the dark Underworld and that 
some, ifnotall, wraiths are allied with the pawns ofthe Wyrm. 
Some Black Spiral Dancers have spoken of the Darkness and 
their ability to wander its fog-enshrouded depths. 

Wraithsdonotenterthe Living Umbra; they are unable toexist 
there, so Garou know them only by their infrequent manifesta- 
tions on Earth. Wraiths are definitely not spirits of Gaia, but hold 
many secrets of far Realms. At times they seem to be confused and 
quiet; at others, manic and demanding. 

Wraiths will often be found guardinga specific place, usually an 
abandoned area such as an old warehouse or rundown pool hall. 
Bone Gnawers often know of “haunted” sites. 

Theurges warn that these beings from beyond have powers 
that allow them to invade one’s soul and take control of one’s 
body. The Uktena believe they can be repelled by simple use 
of a salt water ward and windchimes. 

So far, no Garou has seen his Garou ancestor manifest as a 
wraith. Indeed, many point to the existence of Past Lives as proof 
that Garou ancestors retire to a common resting place. 

Wraiths can be used by Storytellers to add an element ofhorror 
to their Werewolf games. They often have things to say to 
werewolves and will try to get them to perform various small 
requests. Not all are of the Wyrm, although they certainly seem 
that way: many are grateful for whatever small quests they can get 
a Garou to perform. Some wraiths are initially affected by the 
Delirium, although they quickly become immune toit. A fewhave 
been known to incite Garou to frenzy. 

The Traits below are fora wraith that has manifested in the 
physical world. 

Attributes: 6/4/2, Abilities: 10/6/2, Health Levels: 7, 
Gnosis 5, Rage 8, Willpower 8 

Powers: Possession (2 Gnosis points cost; roll wraith’s 
Willpower versus target’s Willpower; difficulty is the target’s 
Intelligence + 3). Each success drains a Willpower point. 
When the Garou’s temporary Willpower is gone, the Garou 
becomes possessed. The Rite of Cleansing has been known 
to force a wraith out of a Garou or human body. 

Shadow Body: Wraiths are not harmed by normal weap- 
ons. A fetish weapon, such as a klaive, will damage them. 
When a wraith has no more Health Levels, it vanishes, 
temporarily destroyed. No one knows precisely how long it 


Appendix 


POL PS LT TR a 


takes wraiths to reform in the Underworld, but they invari- 
ably return to wreak vengeance on those who banish them. 


Changelings (Faeries) 


Long-time allies and friends of the Fianna, faeries are 
mostly gone from this world. During the early days of the 
Inquisition, most faeries departed for their homeland in the 
Deep Umbra, leaving behind only the ancient Trods they 
used to bridge the worlds. However, many faeries stayed 
behind in this world, and as the Gauntlet grew thick, they 
forgot who they were and became increasingly more mun- 
dane. Their blood became diluted with human blood, and 
soon their faerie nature was forgotten. Only a few true 
faeries escaped to ancient holdings beneath the hills (secret 
pockets in the Umbra) and retained their society. These 
last faeries called their quasi-mortal kin “changelings,” 
after the ancient practice of substituting faeries for human 
babies. The true faeries tried to help these half-kin when- 
ever possible, but the Trods to Arcadia were blocked, the 
bawn of the Summerlands was raised, and the Gauntlet 
prevented escape from the harsh reality of Earth. 

The Garou know many of these faeries and empathize 
with them; they too have been edged out of their traditional 
homes and wild forests. 

The Sidhe of Earth are changing and will not speak to 
the Garou of these changes. Several changelings have 
begun attempting to find ways to reenter Arcadia, and 
many Garou have been employed in their quests to do so. 

Below are some basic Traits for a changeling: 

Attributes: 7/5/3, Abilities: 13/9/5, Health Levels: 7, 
Gnosis 8, Rage 3, Willpower 5 

Powers: Faeries have powers based on their associations 
with various concepts and potentials. For example, a faerie 
allied with Winter would have powers of cold, snow, and 
ice, but would also be able to call forth the powers of Night, 
Stars, and the Wind because these are related concepts. 

Faeries usually appear as young, adolescent, or elderly 
humans. They are noble, powerful, and unearthly. 


Spirits 
The gods are here, if they are anywhere at all in the world. 
— Algernon Blackwood, “The Willows” 
Below are some examples of the spirits Garou often 


encounter, whether friendly or hostile. The Storyteller is 
free to create any spirit not detailed. 


Pack Totems 


The process of allying with, or “adopting,” a totem is 
more like that of a parent adopting a child than two friends 
devoting themselves to each other. The totem feels a tie to 
the Garou and speaks of those Garou who choose it as its 
"Children." The actual spirit that attends the Children is a 
Jaggling representative called a totem avatar. 


259 


Generally, a totem spirit is an Incarna. Totem spirits are 
usually animal spirits, but can be mythological creatures, 
elemental forces, or other kinds of spirits. Animal totems are 
alsocalled Animal Fathersby lupus (see Animal Spirits, below). 
Generally, all totems fall into one of three categories: Totems 
of Respect, Totems of War, and Totems of Wisdom. 

* Totems of Respect: These are ancient spirits that have 
been associated with the greatest of the Garou. They are 
Totems of Honor. For many years they have provided 
leadership advice, diplomatic assistance, and other kinds of 
aid. They have been known to lend their iron Will to their 
Children. 

* Totems of War: These are most often predatory 
animal spirits and ancestral warriors. They are Totems of 
Rage, aiding the Garou in battle, in tactics and strategy, and 
in reconnoitering. They are perhaps a bit too bloodthirsty 
to win much lasting respect from the Garou as a whole, but 
they are helpful in times of battle. They have been known 
to lend Rage to their Children and to aid them in war. 

* Totems of Wisdom: These are wild, strange, spiritual 
totems, usually nature spirits and elemental forces. They teach 
many Garou mystics the secrets of magic, and they continue 
to aid the Theurges of the Garou. Often these totems are 
looked upon with a measure of disrespect because they are 
secretive and unpredictable. They have been known to teach 
Gifts to their Children and protect them spiritually. 


Background Costs and Traits 


The Totem Background enables characters to “purchase” a 
totem spirit affiliated with their pack. The total number of 
Background points allocated by the characters to the pack 
totem provides the pack with a pool of points to spend. 
However, the pack must first spend the Background Cost of 
the particular totem they select, and then provide the totem 
with otherabilities. For more information, see Totem, pg. 113. 

All Traits granted by totems are granted on a per-turn basis, 
and to only one pack member at a time (except for Renown), 
unless stated otherwise. Traits may be “passed” back and forth 
among pack members; the current power-wielder designates 
the next receiver. All Attribute or Ability bonuses add to the 
pack member's Dice Pool for that Trait, even if the pack 
member normally has no dots in that Trait. All Renown 
bonuses and penalties apply immediately upon the pack's 
choosing the totem, unless otherwise stated. 

Each totem has a Ban, a rule or rules its Children must 
followtoremain in the totem’s favor. Garou who do not follow 
the Ban will find themselves cut off from their pack totem and 
will have to undergo a Rite of Contrition to regain its favor. It 
is possible that a totem will totally abandon a pack that 
continually violates its wishes. 

Pack totems, as with other spirits allied to the Garou, can 
teach Gifts to their Children. The types of Gifts they teach 
relate to their affiliations and powers. 

Below are lists of available totems and their affiliations. 
Many of these totems are also tribal totems. Members of a 


260 


tribe allied to that totem do not gain the Traits listed with 
each totem; these bonuses apply only to those packs allied 
to an avatar of that totem. Tribes instead benefit through 
the imparted wisdom and patronage of the totem: their 
tribal Gifts were first taught to them by their totem. 


Totems of Respect 


Falcon 


Background Cost: 5 

Noble and brave, Falcon soars high and leads all Garou. 
Falcon helps the Garou to be strong through his insight into 
their hearts. The Silver Fangs are served by Falcon, who 
helps them maintain communication and thus unity. Fal- 
con is a highly respected totem, although, because of the 
rumors about the Silver Fangs’ failings, perhaps not as 
respected as he once was. 

Traits: Packs chosen by Falcon can call upon four 
Willpower points per story, and gain +3 to a Leadership 
Dice Pool. Each pack member’s Honor rating increases by 
one. Silver Fangs often look upon packs of Falcon as being 
noble, although some will scoff and consider them poseurs. 

Ban: Children of Falcon can never allow themselves to 
lose permanent Honor. If they do, it is expected that they 
will right this discrepancy or perform the Rite of Contrition 
and atone by throwing themselves into an impossible battle 
with a minion of the Wyrm, thus effectively committing 
suicide. 


Grandfather Thunder 


Background Cost: 7 

“Thunder rules with a fist of Iron and a voice of Silk,” is 
the ancient adage. Thunder is more feared than respected, 
yet his place among the Totems of Respect is secure. His 
Stormcrows have eyes everywhere, and he rarely chooses a 
pack on his own. Instead of relegating a totem avatar to the 
pack, he sends one of his Stormcrows to tend to his 
Children. Thunder teaches patience, ingenuity, subtlety 
and strategy to those he chooses. 

Traits: Packs chosen by Thunder can call upon an extra 
five Willpower points per story, and gain +3 toan Etiquette 
Dice Pool. Very few people will trust them, but pack 
members can gain +2 to an Intimidation Dice Pool by 
invoking Thunder. Each pack member gains one point of 
Honor. Shadow Lords will want to know what packs of 
Grandfather Thunder are doing at all times. 

Ban: Children of Thunder usually do not tell the truth 
to those they do not respect. They never respect those 
whom they dominate. 


Pegasus 


Background Cost: 4 

Although this totem is associated with the Black Furies, 
it is also known for the power in its wings and the nobility 
it exudes. Pegasus is chiefly concerned with sacred places, 


Werewolf: The Apocalypse 


POL EN LT TR a A 


ever seeking to protect them. Because of the feud between 
the Get of Fenris and the Black Furies, Pegasus will not 
adopt a pack that has a Get in it. Pegasus is often repre- 
sented as a black, winged horse with fiery eyes. It controls 
the element of Air and can teach its Children Gifts associ- 
ated with travel and air. 

Traits: Packs chosen by Pegasus can call upon an extra 
three Willpower points per story, and gain +3 to an Animal 
Ken Dice Pool. Each pack member gains two points of 
Honor. Black Furies will always be well disposed toward 
them. 

Ban: Children of Pegasus must always aid females of all 
species, especially young females. 


Stag 


Background Cost: 4 

The master of the Wild Hunt, Great Stag is the represen- 
tation of the wild, masculine power of nature. He is an 
ancient totem, older than the Garou, and represents one of 
the fundamental aspects of life. He taught the Garou their 
affinity with nature and was perhaps instrumental in end- 
ing the Impergium; he is associated with virility as well. 
Stag will occasionally appear to lost Garou, leading them 
out of danger or aiding them in a crisis. 

Traits: Packs chosen by Stag can call upon an extra 
three Willpower points per story, and gain +3 toa Survival 
Dice Pool. Each pack member gains three points of Honor. 


Appendix 


Fianna will always be well disposed toward them, as will 
faeries. 

Ban: Children of Stag must always aid faeries or their 
kin. 


Totems of War 
Bear 


Background Cost: 5 

Great Bear is a fierce warrior but very wise in peacetime. 
He is the ancient healer and ritemaster, old and wise in the 
ways of Gaia’s Vale (the Earth). He is viewed unfavorably 
by the Garou, however, because they distrust his true 
children, the Gurahl (werebears). 

Traits: Children of Bear gain +3 to a Medicine Dice 
Pool and the ability to hibernate for up to three months at 
a time without need for food or drink. Each pack member's 
Strength Attribute is permanently raised by one, and each 
pack member may use the Gift: Mother's Touch once per 
day. 

However, all members of a pack that has chosen Bear 
lose five temporary Honor points (if they have any) and 
must subtract one from any temporary Honor rewards they 
receive, thus making it harder for them to rise in Honor. 
Werebears look favorably upon Garou with this totem, as 
do certain native peoples. 


Ban: Bear asks nothing of his Garou children, for he 
knows that they already give him much simply by affiliating 
themselves with him. 


Coyote 


Background Cost: 7 

Coyote is the trickster. He is wild, unpredictable, the 
outlaw. He is the shadow in the woods. He is the root that 
tripseven themightiestof wolveson the run. Coyote's howl 
pierces the moon and calls Her down to dance. He is a great 
warrior, a master of deception and skullduggery. 

Traits: Coyote gives his Children +3 to a Stealth Dice 
Pool, +1 Survival, +3 Streetwise, and +1 Subterfuge. He 
always has the ability to find his pack wherever they are, 
automatically (this extra ability doesn't have to be pur- 
chased separately). 

However, the Garou do not see him as an especially wise 
totem. Each pack member subtracts one from any tempo- 
rary Wisdom rewards received. The pack is constantly 
blamed for problems and troubles, whether or not it is at 
fault. Coyote is quite a powerful totem to have, but very 
difficult. Boredom, however, will never bea problem for the 
pack. 

Ban: Coyote does not limit his Children. 


Fenris 


Background Cost: 5 

Fenris was known to the Norse of old, for he was their 
dreaded Wolf-God. The legends do not stray far; Fenris is 
bloodthirsty, powerful and strong. He expects no quarter 
and gives none. His is the warrior way. He chooses only 
warlike packs. 

Traits: Fenris’ patronage provides a pack with one 
additional point ina Physical Attribute (Dexterity, Strength, 
or Stamina — individual pack members choose), even if it 
increases the Attribute over 5. Each pack member gains 
two points of Glory. Get of Fenris will respect the pack a 
little more and will constantly invite its members on wild, 
frenzied hunts. 

Ban: Fenris requires that his Children never pass up the 
opportunity for a fight. 

Griffin 

Background Cost: 4 

Hungry, continually hungry, Griffin murders with light- 
ning claws and feasts on his fallen foes. He guards the 
wilderness against human encroachment and represents 
the most primal and animalistic powers. 

Traits: Griffin is a swift hunter and grants +3 to an 
Alertness Dice Pool. In addition, each pack member can 
communicate directly with all birds of prey without the 
need of a special Gift. Each pack member gains two points 


of Glory. Red Talons recognize Griffin devotees as kindred 
souls. 


262 


Ban: Griffin requires that his children not associate with 
humans and will only very rarely allow a Garou of the 


homid breed to be his Child. 


Rat 


Background Cost: 5 

Silent, quick and crafty, Rat is a master of guerrilla 
warfare, survival, and camouflage, and knows well the truth 
of the old adage, "Safety in numbers." Rat has taught many 
Garou these virtues and is quite violent himself when 
cornered. 

Traits: Packs chosen by Rat can call upon five Will- 
power points per story, and are taught how best to bite a foe, 
subtracting one from the difficulties of all rolls to bite. Rat 
Children also subtract one from the difficulties of all rolls 
to be stealthy or quiet. Each pack member gains one point 
of Wisdom. Bone Gnawers will aid Children of the Rat as 
best they can, but will generally not risk their own lives for 
them. 

Ban: Rat asks that his Children never kill vermin. 


Wendigo 


Background Cost: 7 

Wendigo is the beast of the snow and ice, the marauder 
of the frozen northern lands. It is a cannibal spirit, devour- 
ing the hearts of its foes, but it is too much of the Wyld to 
be tainted by the Wyrm. Wendigo teaches the Garou how 
to use the wild tactics of the storm in battle. It also teaches 
them to harness the cold bitterness within them, turning it 
into murderous rage. 

Traits: Each pack member gains five Rage points per 
story, regardless of actual Rage rating; thus, Children of the 
Wendigo can have more Rage points to spend than their 
ratings may allow. Each pack member also gains two points 
of Glory. The Wendigo tribe does not automatically trust 
Children of the Wendigo; it is often too wild and unpredict- 
able for sound judgment. 

Ban: Wendigo asks that its Children always aid native 
peoples when they are in trouble. 


Totems of Wisdom 


Chimera 


Background Cost: 5 

Chimera is She of Many Faces, the Lady of Mirrors, the 
Ever-Changing. She is the mysterious caretaker of dreams, 
and is thus the mistress of Enigmas and inner wisdom. 

Traits: Chimera gives her Children the ability to dis- 
guise themselves as something or someone else when in the 
Umbra (roll Gnosis; difficulty 7). The pack gains *3 to an 
Enigmas Dice Pool and +1 to Perception. Each pack mem- 
ber subtracts two from all difficulties involving riddles, 
Enigmas, finding things or interpreting dreams. Each pack 
member gains two points of Wisdom. Stargazers will notice 


Werewolf: The Apocalypse 


p/m. am, um. mar n —————— UA 


the pack's affiliation, but this will not necessarily affect 
their opinion of them. 

Ban: Chimera does not limit her Children, but will not 
visit them if they do not seek enlightenment. 


Cockroach 


Background Cost: 6 

Cockroach is quick, hardy, and incredibly adaptable. 
Though ancient beyond measure, it is a totem of the 
modern age. Its kin scuttle through every corner ofthecity, 
infiltrating any nook and cranny. 

Traits: Cockroach’s Spawn gain the ability to Peek from 
the Umbra into datastreams and through electrical con- 
nections; that is, pack members can enter the Umbra, make 
a Gnosis roll, and view data that is stored on media or 
streaming through a computer cable. Each pack member 
favored by Cockroach subtracts two from all difficulties 
involving computers, electricity, and science (including 
Repair). They gain *3 toany rolls to activate Gifts affecting 
technology. 

Ban: Cockroach asks that all of its kin be spared by the 
pack. 


(Dana 


Background Cost: 8 

Dana is a powerful totem of the ancient Celts. Often 
thought to be a faerie spirit, Dana is actually the spirit of an 
ancient wise woman. Dana isa very hard totem to reach and 
thus does not often reveal herself to the Garou. In fact, not 
many Garou know of her. 

Traits: Dana grants her Children Second Sight, giving 
them the Gift: Pulse of the Invisible. Her packs gain the 
ability to entrance listeners through singing or howling 
(Manipulation * Performance; difficulty 8); the actual 
effects are up to the Storyteller. In addition, the pack gains 
Past Life 3; this is not an actual affinity with Garou 
ancestors, but an ability to learn ancient knowledge and 
lore by accessing primal memories. All Fianna and faeries 
will recognize and honor Children of Dana. 

Ban: Dana asks that her Children hold a moot in her 
honor on the solstices and the equinoxes. 


Owl 


Background Cost: 6 

Owl is silent and swift. In the night, Owl rules. He 
represents secret and hoary wisdom culled from the deepest 
recesses of the night. Owl is also associated with the secrets 
of death and the Dark Umbra; certain Native American 
tribes believed owls to be avenging ghosts. 

Traits: Owl lends quiet aid to his Children, often gifting 
them with premonitions of danger and leading them to 
forgotten mystic places (Storyteller’s discretion). Owl gives 
wings to each of his Children when they enter the Umbra, 
allowing them to fly from place to place. Owl’s Children 
subtract two from all difficulties involving stealth, silence, 


Appendix 


p mmn m cr m —n —— LP; 


or quiet. The pack gains three additional dice when using 
any Gift involving the air, travel, movement, or darkness. 
Each pack member gains two points of Wisdom. Silent 
Striders will often appear seemingly out of nowhere to aid 
the pack when it is in danger. Children of the Rat do not get 
along well with Children of the Owl, as their totems are 
constantly in conflict. 

Ban: Owl asks that his pack leave animal sacrifices for 
him in the woods, in the form of small vermin that are tied 
in place or caged. 


Uktena 


Background Cost: 6 

Uktena is a dark, powerful, and ancient water spirit with 
the features of a serpent and a cougar. Few spirits know and 
understand as many occult secrets as Uktena. 

Traits: Uktena surrounds each.of its Children with a 
protective ward when they are in the Umbra; this adds 
three dice to their soak rolls. Each pack member favored by 
Uktena is taught secret lore and knowledge, gaining two 
extra experience points per story that may only be applied 
to learning Enigmas, Occult, Rituals, Gifts, or other mysti- 
cal knowledge. 

The pack's association with Uktena is distrusted by 
other Garou; Social roll difficulties are increased by one 
when interacting with other Garou (except, naturally, 
Uktena Garou). Each pack member gains two points of 


263 


| 


Wisdom. Garou of the Uktena tribe will treat the pack as 
lost siblings. 

Ban: Uktena asks that its children recover mystical lore, 
places, animals and objects from minions of the Wyrm (this 
definitionoften includes magesand always includes Tremere 
vampires). 


Unicorn 


Background Cost: 7 

Unicorn is pure, powerful, strong and wise. She is a 
totem of peace, of harmony, and of healing. She represents 
the pure understanding and unbridled love of Gaia, and she 
extends this bliss to her Children. 

Traits: Unicorn's Children gain her swiftness in the 
Umbra, moving at twice normal speed across the shadowy 
landscape. Children of the Unicorn subtract two from all 
difficulties involving healing and empathy, but add two to 
all difficulties to harm or injure other Garou (at least those 
not of the Wyrm). They gain three additional dice when 
using Gifts involving peace, healing, strength and protec- 
tion. Each pack member gains three points of Wisdom. 
Children of Gaia will always give aid and will usually side 
with the pack in any disputes. 

Ban: Unicorn asks that her Children continually aid and 
protect the weak, the helpless, the abused and the ex- 
ploited, but not to the extent of furthering or aiding the 
Wyrm. 

There are many other totems, but the above are the ones 
most friendly and familiar to the Garou. 


Maturae 


These nature-spirits of the wilds are found most often in 
Glens, the places within the Umbra where they spawn. 
Many naturae are the spirits of dead and departed animals, 
while others are generated from the special significance or 
beauty of a particular spot. 

In the days when Gaia's Garden stretched across most of 
the Near Umbra, all rivers and trees may have had spirits. 
Now the Umbra is largely barren, and only a few such places 
have spirits. 


Animal Spirits 

Garou often interact with the spirits of animals, whether 
to learn Gifts from them or to appease them after hunting 
their kind for food. Animal spirits are similar to their 
physical counterparts, but they usually have a power they 
can teach to Garou — for example, a vole who can teach a 
Garou to burrow ora rabbit who can teach a Garou to leap. 
See Gifts, pp. 114-137, for more information on which 
particular animal spirits teach Gifts. 

The sheer variety of animal spirits prevents categoriza- 
tion, and the Garou believe many spirits have existed and 
disappeared along with their extinct animal counterparts. 
Garou believe that all Jaggling and Gaffling animal spirits 


264 


BEE ME UR, EEE RATED EZ ER 


are allied to their patron Totem Incarna, whom the lupus 
call Animal Fathers. The Animal Fathers, so say the lupus, 
regulate the earthly populations of animals. If they are 
slighted or insulted, they will prevent new births of their 
kin into the harsh world. This can be disastrous for wolves 
if the slighted Incarna is Caribou or Deer; depletion of these 
herds would cause starvation among the few wolves left in 
the world. The Animal Fathers are said to live in lodges 
somewhere in the Near Umbra. 

Below are some sample animal spirit Gafflings: 

* Snake 

Willpower 5, Rage 6, Gnosis 8, Power 20 

Charms: Paralyzing Stare (Cost 1; as the Shadow Lord 
Gift) 

* Owl 

Willpower 7, Rage 4, Gnosis 6, Power 20 

Charms: Airt Sense, Materialize 

* Falcon 

Willpower 10, Rage 6, Gnosis 5, Power 25 

Charms: Airt Sense, Awe (Cost 1; as the Silver Fang 
Gift) 


Glade Child 


Glade Children are tree spirits, the true souls of trees. 
They maintain the physical form of the tree, but in the 
Umbra they can be seen as luminescent figures, draped in 
robes, asleep within the tree. Their kind and wise faces keep 


| 


cm ed IR 


a careful vigil over their surroundings, and their green eyes 
watch all who pass by. 

The spiritual form of a Glade Child depends primarily on 
the physical location of its tree. If it is beside a busy 
highway, the spirit-tree will be grimy with the Blight, and 
perhaps Pattern Webs will be spun among its branches. In 
the wild the spirit appears magnificent and majestic. 

Glade Children possess a wealth of knowledge about the 
area within their sight; they will sometimes impart their 
wisdom to friendly Garou. However, the closer a tree is to 
the Blight, and the farther it has been woven into the sterile 
Pattern Web, the more warped its perception becomes, 
resulting in less reliable and sometimes misleading infor- 
mation. 

Glade Children are usually Gafflings or Jagglings, al- 
though some extremely old or powerful ones may be Incarna 
(these are usually associated with ancient trees and are 
called Oak Kings). 

Willpower 7, Rage 3, Gnosis 8, Power: variable (20 fora 
sapling, 80+ for an ancient redwood) 

Charms: Airt Sense, Cleanse the Blight, Forest Sense 


Lune 


Lunes are Jagglings of Luna. They appear as shimmering 
ribbons of light surrounded by auras of gold and blue. Great 
friends of Garou, they communicate empathically, undu- 
lating into various forms as they silently commune with 
another spirit. This motion becomes increasingly unstable 
as the moon waxes. The demeanors of Lunes change dra- 
matically depending on the phase of the Moon. Like their 
mistress, they are susceptible to lunar madness during the 
full moon. 

Lunes have the power to open any Moon Bridge at will, 
should they so desire. They sometimes perform this service 
to Garou who successfully petition them — a taxing task. 
However, should the Lune be suffering from madness, there 
is no guarantee the spirit will send the traveler where she 
wishes to go. 

Willpower 8, Rage 4 (8 during the full moon), Gnosis 7, 
Power 35 

Charms: Airt Sense, Open Moon Bridge (Cost 5), 
Reform 


Stormcrows 


Stormcrows are the spirit servants of Grandfather Thun- 
der, totem of the Shadow Lords. They are most often 
Jagglings, although they can also appear as pack totem 
avatars. They are connected to Thunder at all times, for 
they are his eyes and ears. 

Willpower 9, Rage 7, Gnosis 6, Power 35 

Charms: Airt Sense, Create Wind, Tracking 


The Wendigo 


The avatar of great Wendigo itself, this creature appears 
as a twisted humanoid with blue skin, claws and fangs, 


Appendix 


blazing eyes, and black, hooflike stumps in place of feet. 
The Wendigo can run at up to 50 mph through the sky. The 
Wendigo is occasionally called by Garou on missions of 
vengeance; it will track its prey, rip it apart, and eat its 
heart. It may be summoned with the Wendigo Gift: Call 
the Cannibal Spirit. 

Willpower 7, Rage 10, Gnosis 3, Power 45 

Charms: Create Wind, Freeze, Frozen Breath, Ice Shards, 
Materialize (Power cost 30; Str 6, Dex 6, Sta 6, Brawl 5, 
Dodge 1, Claws: Str +2, Fangs: Str +1, Health: 12), Track- 
ing 


The Wild Hunt 


The manifestation of Stag’s vengeance, the Hunt is 
occasionally called by the Fianna against the worst of the 
Wyrm's menaces. This is very dangerous, however, for the 
Hunt is a personification of the Garou's rage and fury, and 
those who participate in the scourge may well be consumed 
by it. 

The Hunt iscomposed of raw spiritual energy. If "killed," 
it will merely dissipate into the Umbra once more, to 
reappear if called later. 

* The Huntsman: The Huntsman appears as a stag- 
antlered man with a pack of hounds. The Huntsman is a 
powerful Jaggling servant of Stag. 

Willpower 10, Rage 10, Gnosis 5, Power 60 


Charms: Airt Sense, Armor, Materialize (Power cost 
28; Str 6, Dex 6, Sta 6, Melee 5, Dodge 1, Spear: Str * 3, 
Health: 10), Tracking 

* The Hounds: There are usually 10 Hounds; these can 
run as swiftly as a Garou in Lupus form. The Hounds are 
Gaffling servants of the Huntsman. 

Willpower 6, Rage 7, Gnosis 2, Power 28 

Charms: Airt Sense, Materialize (Power cost 16; Str 4, 
Dex 4, Sta 4, Brawl 4, Bite: Str * 1, Health: 7), Tracking 


Ancestor-Spirits 


Garou maintain connections to those who came before 
them, even beyond the veil of death. Garou believe their 
forefathers and mothers still exist in the spirit world, ready 
to aid their descendants with wisdom or battle prowess. A 
Garou with the Past Life Background can actually call upon 
his ancestors to possess him and act with him in the here 
and now. These Ancestor-spirits can often be found in the 
13 Near Realms in the Umbra (see Chapter Seven: The 
Spirit World). 

There is a controversy among Theurges as to the true 
nature of these spirits; some believe they are the actual 
spirits of the dead, while others argue that they are simply 
shadows, ephemera wrapped about memories, and that the 
true spirits reside in Gaia’s Womb, waiting to be reborn. 
Most Garou believe both of these arguments: that the dead 
leave something of themselves behind to aid their breth- 
ren, though their true selves return to Gaia. 

Sometimes, human ancestor spirits can be encountered, 
especially those of Kinfolk shamans. These spirits can 
sometimes be called upon to teach homid breed Gifts. 

Ancestor-spirits vary greatly in powers and abilities, 
depending on their power before death. The following is a 
sample Garou spirit: 

Willpower 6, Rage 8, Gnosis 7, Power 30 

Charms: Per their tribal Gifts. Children of Gaia might 
have the Healing Charm, while Glass Walkers might have 
Charms similar to an electricity elemental. 


Elementals 


These spirits are the manifestations of the elements — 
the building blocks of Gaia and all life. In recent years, the 
classical concept of the four elements of air, fire, earth and 
water has been replaced by the discovery of a multitude of 
different elementals. Indeed, in the urban domains, spirits 
of glass, metal and plastic have been contacted by certain 
Glass Walkers. The power level of elementals ranges; some 
are no more than Gafflings, while others are as powerful as 
any Incarna. The following are examples of minor elementals 
that might be contacted by Garou Theurges. 


Air Elemental 


Willpower 3, Rage 8, Gnosis 7, Power 40 
Charms: Airt Sense, Create Wind, Reform, Updraft 


un SAD 


Earth Elemental 


Willpower 10, Rage 4, Gnosis 5, Power 40 
Charms: Airt Sense, Armor, Materialize, Umbraquake 


Fire Elemental 


Willpower 5, Rage 10, Gnosis 5, Power 30 
Charms: Airt Sense, Blast Flame, Create Fires 


Water Elemental 


Willpower 6, Rage 4, Gnosis 10, Power 30 
Charms: Airt Sense, Cleanse the Blight, Flood, Healing 


Electricity Elemental 


Willpower 6, Rage 7, Gnosis 5, Power 40 
Charms: Airt Sense, Control Electrical Systems, Light- 
ning Bolts, Short Out 


Glass Elemental 


Willpower 4, Rage 7, Gnosis 7, Power 45 
Charms: Materialize, Shatter Glass, Throw Glass 


Atomic Spirits 

These are spirits that dance in the atomic fires. They are 
not radiation (that is of the Wyrm), but raw reaction. They 
do, however, understand much of the Wyrm and the basic 
structure of the universe, for they existed at the Beginning 
of All Things. They are occasionally consulted by Glass 
Walkers, and an atomic spirit will answer the queries of 
mortals, but only if they help it “advance” — often by 
detonating the cyclotron in which it is trapped. 

Willpower 10, Rage 5, Gnosis 10, Power 40+ (up to 1000 
at ground zero of a 100-megaton strike) 

Charms: Airt Sense, Break Reality, Materialize, Re- 
form, Solidify Reality 

Atomic Blast: The spirit can inflict damage as a bio- 
chemical attack. The Power cost is three per die of damage. 


Enigmatic Spirits 


Many spirits are inscrutable even to Garou. These are 
most often full-time residents of the Umbra, having no 
animal, plant or elemental equivalent in the physical 
world, and thus no common frame of reference by which 
they can be understood. Nonetheless, the Garou have 
allied with certain enigmatic spirits and gained much from 
the relationship. 


Chimerlings 


Chimerlings are Jagglings of the totem Chimera. They 
are mysterious wisps of ephemera given sentience; they live 
at the ends of dreamquests and embody Enigmas. Like their 
patron, they are amorphous and malleable, taking the wispy 
shape of this or that thing as they choose. They often teach 
enigmatic Gifts to Garou. They sometimes appear to Garou 


Appendix 


in dreams to impart strange messages, which are rarely 
understood. 

Willpower 3, Rage 5, Gnosis 10, Power 35 

Charms: Airt Sense, Reform, Shapeshift 
Englings 

Englings are Jagglings of Gaia and carry a part of Her 
within them. They are spirits of Gnosis, and Garou often 
ritually hunt them during moots. Once an Engling has been 
caught by the hunters, it must be ritually thanked for giving 
itself to the Garou so they may become stronger in their 
fight to defend Gaia. If the hunt is properly performed, 
Garou participants regain all their Gnosis. The Engling 
Reforms elsewhere in the Umbra. For more information on 
the hunt, see Gnosis, pg. 157. 
Willpower 5, Rage 1, Gnosis 10, Power 25 
Charms: Airt Sense 


Epiphlings 

Some spirits embody concepts or ideas, such as War, 
Death, Pain, Peace, Calm, Protection, etc. The Garou are 
not exactly sure how such spirits fit into the spirit hierarchy 
or Umbral courts. The Stargazers say that these spirits are 
pure ideas or abstract concepts filtered down from the 
Heavens (or up from the Underworld) into the middle 


a 4 
©9989 


e. 


W 


SS 


NZ 


Ns 


xy 
AS 


world, where they become mere shadows of their true 
power. Others believe they are Penumbral ephemera that 
spawn from strong emotions or ideas in the physical world. 
The Stargazers call these spirits Epiphlings, for they are 
often found near Epiph Domains. The Storyteller is free to 
create Traits for these spirits; they are almost always en- 
countered as Gafflings. Garou often bind them into fetishes. 


Wylolings 

Wyldlings are the children of the Wyld. They prefer to 
reside in the Deep Umbra, for the Pattern Web has made 
Gaia too stagnant and permanent for them. They generally 
appear as constantly shifting maelstroms of matter and 
energy. 

All Wyldlings have the Charm: Break Reality. 


Dortex 


The great Vortex is one of the most powerful Wyldlings, 
and is respected and feared by spirit and Garou alike. It 
appears as a huge, cloudy implosion of energy and solid, 
liquid and gaseous matter, always swirling and writhing. 
Vortices used to enter the physical world from time to time 
(where they feasted on the Wyld energies of magic), but 
now spend most of their time in the Deep Umbra. They are 
capricious, unpredictable and totally alien. 

As a Vortex comprises all things, all of its attacks do 
aggravated damage. 

Willpower 8, Rage 8, Gnosis 10, Power 80 

Charms: Airt Sense, Break Reality, Disorient, Material- 
ize, Reform, Shapeshift 


Lesser Wyldling 


While not so powerful as the Vortex, Lesser Wyldlings 
are nonetheless extremely dangerous spirits. They appear as 
shifting, hazy patterns. They will sometimes act as spirit 
guides, but are not to be trusted. 

Willpower 4, Rage 7, Gnosis 6, Power 40 

Charms: Airt Sense, Break Reality, Materialize, 
Shapeshift 


Weaver Spirits 


Weaver spirits are the myriad spawn of the Weaver. 
They inhabit the labyrinthine branches of the Pattern 
Web. Most Weaver spirits appears as spiders or strange 
geometric patterns. 

All Weaver spirits have the Charm: Solidify Reality. 


Pattern Spider 


Pattern Spiders are the most common and numerous 
servants of the Weaver. They ceaselessly spin the Pattern 
Web. Though primarily workers, Pattern Spiders can also 
attack those who violate the tenets of the Weaver, calcify- 
ing them into the Web for all eternity. 


Willpower 6, Rage 4, Gnosis 6, Power 25 
Charms: Calcify, Solidify Reality 


Net-Spider 

Wondrous things can be created when the Weaver and 
Wyld merge, an all-too-rare occurrence these days. Virtual 
reality is one such recent occurrence. There is a spiritual 
aspect to this new reality, a heart of the Wyld within the 
deepest reaches of the Pattern Web. Within this Umbral 
computer realm reside the Net-Spiders, tending the grow- 
ing mass of information. 

Net-Spiders are capable of discovering details about any 
and all data that is held on-line. Net-Spiders can travel 
only along phone lines or computer cables, and can be 
blocked by security programming (which is itself often a 
Net-Spider). 

Net-Spiders are used by Glass Walkers to recover infor- 
mation about institutions and corporations. They appear as 
small spiders floating atop strange fractal patterns of en- 
ergy. They are exceedingly useful in pirating data. All 
Net-Spider actions are half difficulty and cost when they 
relate to electronics and computers. 

Willpower 8, Rage 4, Gnosis 9, Power 40 

Charms: Airt Sense, Reform, Solidify Reality, Spirit 
Static 


Banes are the vile spirit minions of the Wyrm. They 
assume countless forms, for destruction takes many shapes 
throughout reality. Certain Banes are avatars or personifi- 
cations of principles such as hate and disease; others are 
simply random demonic entities. Banes are perhaps the 
greatest enemies of the Garou. 

All Banes are lost to the Wyrm, and destruction is the 
only sure way to rid an area of their influence. Even then it 
may be too late, for their dark emotions may have infected 
nearby humans. These emotions fester and grow, eventu- 
ally becoming strong enough to project a Blight in the 
Umbra. This often happens when groups of evil and corrupt 
people gather, thus allowing a Bane to manifest and feed 
from the cold hearts of those gathered. 

Banes, when in true form, are horrifying, and often cause 
an effect similar to the Delirium in humans. 

Most Banes have the Possession Charm. Banes also tend 
to have a specific power, or powers, based around the 
emotion or force they characterize. These powers can range 
from basic emotion control, to the ability to remove the 
Delirium from humans (allowing them to face Garou), to 
the ability to spread living corruption throughout the 
reality of a Realm. 


Storytellers should feel free to let their imaginations run 
free when creating Banes, so long as their powers reflect the 
forces they represent. These powers often require "activa- 
tion," which can be achieved by an expenditure of Power or 
by making success rolls based on Gnosis. Many Banes have 
powers of corruption or mutation, and Garou who fight 
these creatures risk their bodies and souls. 

The Storyteller should avoid letting Banes take the 
blame for every form of human evil. Banes simply magnify 
and parasitize the evil and corruption already inherent to a 
person's soul; they are not attracted to anyone who is not 
yet ready to come to the Wyrm. For this reason, Banes find 
it easiest to possess already deranged or corrupt souls. 

The Banes listed here are a scant few of the Banes that 
infect the Tellurian. Storytellers should feel free to create 
their own Banes, using those given here as guidelines. 


@light Chilo 


A Blight Child was once a Glade Child (see above), but 
has become corrupted and warped by the Blight. Such 
spirits are highly malevolent and dangerous to Garou, 
discarding their once valuable friendship for hate. 

Trees within the Blight take on wiry and gaunt appear- 
ances, and the humanoid spirits are nightmarish, with 
tattered robes and faces of rotting wood. Insect spirits 
burrow in and out of their bodies, causing them constant 
pain. 


Blight Children roam the Blight, seeking to spread their 
corruption. 


Willpower 6, Rage 8, Gnosis 4, Power 20 
Charms: Blighted Touch 


Kalus 


A Kalus is the spiritual manifestation of evil thoughts. 
These spirits roam the Blighted parts ofthe Penumbra, search- 
ingfor humans who can be easily corrupted. Once a Kalus has 
found such a victim, it latches onto the target’s mind and 
begins to suggest evil ideas and deeds to the target. 

The Kalus has no physical manifestation, but often 
appears in the target's dreams as a shadowy phantasm 
around 18 inches tall, with wings, tiny clawed hands and 
cloven hooves. If threatened, the Kalus will flee from the 
area, only to return again when it is safe. 

This purely malevolent spirit serves no other purpose 
save forcing one person to inflict misery upon others. A 
victim need only think some "bad thought" accidentally; 
this is fodder enough for the Kalus, who can turn one 
friendly and compassionate being against her family and 
friends. 

Willpower 5, Rage 3, Gnosis 7, Power 15 

Charms: Corruption 


Nexus Crawler 


Few minions of the Wyrm are as feared as the dread Nexus 
Crawlers. From whence they came is unknown, but it was 
definitely not from our continuum, for their presence causes 
reality to ooze and run like melted wax. In their natural state 


——— 


they are undetectable save for a black shimmering in the air; 
awarbling, vibrato drone; anda feeling on the skin like ground 
glass or nails scraped across a chalkboard. However, they are 
able to use their considerable store of Power to generate all 
manner of loathsome avatars. 

Nexus Crawlers have sentience of a sort, but they are 
very alien, and even other Wyrm minions are uncomfort- 
able around them. Their actions in combat rarely smack of 
rationality, and they do not often employ "logical" tactics. 

A Nexus Crawler may, after Materializing, spend one 
Power point to create a truly vile body — mortals will run 
screaming in terror, and even Garou must make a Will- 
power roll or fly into a Fox frenzy. Extra Power spent when 
Materializing allows the Crawler to form all sorts of gro- 
tesque appendages and weaponry — extra mouths, grasping 
arms, etc. 

Their most feared power, however, is the ability to warp 
reality (see below). 

Crawlers exist in the Umbra and may be defeated nor- 
mally. All of the Crawler's entropic effects (except damage 
sustained and other instantaneous effects) vanish when the 
Crawler is banished or destroyed. 

Willpower 6, Rage 10, Gnosis 10, Power 60 

Charms: Airt Sense, Materialize, Reform 


Warp Reality: Nexus Crawlers are beasts of raw entropy 
and may alter reality by spending Power. For one point, 
Crawlers may cause a minor shift in the reality paradigm — 
they may create a blurry and distorted illusion, cause a 
normal fire to light, change the facial features of an indi- 
vidual, or drop the temperature in a localized area. 


For three points, a Crawler may cause more serious 
changes — turning a stone floor viscous, changing a steel 
weapon to silver, changing the sweat of a foe to sulfuric 
acid, creating a sharp, clear illusion that affects sight and 
sound, or darkening an area to pitch night. The Crawler 
may also damage foes with blasts of raw entropic force — 
the damage is three dice, and the Crawler must make an 
attack roll based on its Willpower. 

For five points, a Crawler may cause truly spectacular 
effects: turning a person's bones to jelly, changing the air to 
carbon monoxide, removing a Garou's entire face (and all 
sensory organs), creating an illusion that affects all senses, 
altering the entire floor of a room to silver. At this level, 
damaging effects from the Crawler cause six dice of damage. 

Cost Effect 


1 Minor 
3 Serious; can do three damage dice with a Will- 
power roll 


5 Spectacular; can do six damage dice with a Will- 
power roll 


Psychomachiae 


Psychomachiae are dark spirits that feed on fear and life 
force. These entities possess disturbed individuals, corrupt- 
ingthem intopsychotic serial killers. Physical manifestations 
of these spirits can be very horrible, with razors, fangs, or 
other instruments of torture and death. 

Willpower 7, Rage 10, Gnosis 8, Power 20 (+10 per 
death inflicted by its host) 

Charms: Airt Sense, Materialize, Possession 


Scrag 


Scrags are one of the many warrior Bane races that serve 
the Wyrm. Within the Umbra they appear as semi-physi- 
cal, almost incorporeal ghoulish spirits with razor-sharp 
claws and fangs. Scrags do not walk upright, but slouch in 
a nearly quadrupedal position; this does not seem to affect 
their speed of movement within the Umbra. 

Scrags are killers, without mercy orremorse. They live to 
kill, reveling in the mayhem and bloodshed they cause. 
They often indulge in frenzies of killing and dismember- 
ment. Scrags travel in packs and are malevolent in the 
extreme. 

When entering the physical world (or a Realm in the 
Umbra), a Scrag must attempt a possession in order to 
manifest. The possessed being suffers extreme pain during 
the brief possession process, but then feels fine — for the 
time being. Successful possession places a dormant Scrag 


272 


within a body; the spirit will slowly attempt to take control 
of the victim. Unless an exorcism takes place, the victim 
will become a Scrag in about 48 hours. During this time the 
victim will begin to exhibit many traits of the Scrag: 
antisocial habits, bad attitudes, a short and violent temper, 
and a ravenous hunger for raw, red meat. The physical 
transformation takes effect at the end of this period. Should 
theScrag depart the body at any time, the victim will return 
to normal and must face the carnage she has caused. 

Willpower 6, Rage 10, Gnosis 4, Power 40 

Charms: Incite Frenzy, Possession 


The (Dark Trinity 


You are not like Cerberus, three gentlemen at once, are you? 
— Richard Brinsley Sheridan, The Rivals 

Within the World of Darkness there are three legendary 
Banes that work their evil in concert and have become a 
true threat to the Garou. This “pack” of malign beings is 
called the Dark Trinity. Its members are: Gorgul, the Nexus 
Crawler; Raza, the Scrag; and Fek, the Psychomachiae. 
They lurk in the Penumbra surrounding New York City, 
hatching their dark plots against unsuspecting humans, but 
they can also be found elsewhere throughout the reaches of 
the spirit world, skulking on mysterious errands. 

The Trinity's leader, if it can be said to have one, is 
Gorgul, the most powerful of the three Banes. Gorgul is 
certainly not its true name, but only a pronounceable 
approximation given it by the Garou. This cosmic horror 
seeks to destroy the source of the Garou's power in New 
York — the Central Park Caern. Its motivations cannot be 
fully fathomed, for its intelligence is alien and incompre- 
hensible. Its power to warp reality makes it a deadly 
opponent, and Garouare thankful that Gorgul spends most 
of its time in bizarre Wyrm Realms in the farthest reaches 
of the Umbra, gathering strange powers and allies. Gorgul 
isrumored to be an agent of the Eater-of-Souls aspect of the 
Wyrm. 

Next in power is Raza. This monstrous entity prowls the 
Penumbral streets seeking victims, be they spirits in the 
spirit world or humans in the physical world. Its ever- 
watchful eyes constantly Peek into the physical world, 
seeking hapless prey. Raza is the enforcer of the Dark 
Trinity, the one who performs the most dangerous combat 
tasks. While Gorgul plots and plans, Raza acts. Raza is 
rumored to be an agent of the Beast-of- War aspect of the 
Wyrm. 

Finally, there is Fek. This Psychomachiae is more pow- 
erful than any of its brethren, but is nonetheless the least of 
the Trinity (at least, so the Garou and the rest of the Trinity 
believe). However, it is most cunning and wily, and its 
powers ensure that it can hurt the Garou in ways they can 
least counter — by possessing their loved ones and driving 
them mad. Fek is perhaps the most reviled of the Trinity, 
although not the most feared. Fek is rumored to be an agent 
of the Defiler Wyrm. 


Werewolf: The Apocalypse 


p mmn m mr mr TE Rr 


These beings are rumored to have their lair in a Blight 
underneath the Penumbra of the Wollman Rink. (See 
Central Park, below.) 


Gorgul 

Gorgul appears — in the Umbra or when Materialized — 
as a giant, insectoid thing with long, thin limbs and long, 
spidery fingers. It is covered in a chitinous carapace, the 
folds and whorls of which appear to shape dark runes. 

Willpower 7, Rage 10, Gnosis 10, Power 70 

Charms: Airt Sense, Materialize, Reform, Warp Reality 


Raza 


Raza is about the size of a Garou in Crinos form (eight 
feet tall). It resembles a cross between a human, a lizard and 
a predatory mammal, and is mottled with disgusting, sharp 
bristles and reptilian scales. Its fingers are razor-sharp 
blades; its eyes are swirls of glowing light. Its limbs and torso 
appear tattered (scars from previous battles). Like the rest 
of its kind, it runs on all fours. 

Willpower 7, Rage 10, Gnosis 5, Power 45 

Charms: Incite Frenzy, Possession, Tracking 


Fek 


Fekappeatsasaliuman male of indeterminate race. “He” 
is thin and looks sickly; mucus continually runs down his 
chin from his nose. His hair is long and greasy, and he 


Appendix 


appears to be wearing tattered clothes, the kind gathered 
from dumpsters. His eyes, however, are beautiful, brimming 
with compassion. This compassion, like everything else 
about Fek, is a lie — a lure for his prey. 

Willpower 7, Rage 10, Gnosis 8, Power 35 (* 10 per 
death inflicted by its host) 
Charms: Airt Sense, Materialize, Possession 


Sample Fetishes 


Below is a short list of fetishes the Storyteller may use 
within a chronicle. They are ranked by level, from one 
through five, corresponding with the Fetish Background 
Trait. Characters with this Background may choose one or 
more of these items (up to their level in the Background), 
or the Storyteller may make up one of his own. 

Storytellers are encouraged to create their own fetishes 
using the basic rules outlined in Chapter Seven: The Spirit 
World (Fetishes, pp. 184-185) and the Rites section of 
Chapter Six (Rite of the Fetish, pg. 146). However, they 
should take great care to avoid including too many fetishes 
in their stories, for these items are rare and cherished. 


Harmony Flute 


Level 1, Gnosis 5 
This small flute is made from hickory and has many small 
feathers attached to it. When activated and played (this 


273 


| 


— 20 LS PA BID IVA ATADO CUI 


requires a Performance roll), the flute emits a harmonious 
melody; all aggressive creatures who hear the song must 
make successful Rage rolls or cease fighting. If they are 
attacked, they may defend themselves, but they can initiate 
no offensive action. 


To create a Harmony Flute, one of the following spirit 
types must be bound into the hickory flute: Peace, Calm, 
Water, or Bird-spirit. 


Spirit Tracer 

Level 2, Gnosis 5 

This is a human hair suspended in an iron ingot. When 
the wielder concentrates upon a specific spirit, the ingot 
pulls in that direction. 

Tocreate a Spirit Tracer, one of the following spirit types 
must be bound into the ingot: a Hunting- or Predator-spirit, 
or one that has the Charm: Tracking. 


Baneskin 


Level 3, Gnosis 7 

This tiny piece of a Bane spirit is carefully wrapped in 
cloth and worn as an amulet. When activated, it causes all 
malevolent spirits, especially Banes, to react to the wearer 
as if she were a kindred soul — a “wolf in Bane’s clothing” 
as it were. 


Fang Dagger 

Level 3, Gnosis 6 

This dagger is carved from the tooth of some great beast. 
After the character has made a successful melee attack, he 
can activate the dagger. If successful, the damage inflicted 
is doubled as the fang “bites” deeper into the wound. The 
damage is aggravated. 

To create a Fang Dagger, one of the following spirit types 
must be bound into the tooth: War, Pain, Death, or Snake- 
spirit. 


Ohoebe's Ueil 


Level 3, Gnosis 7 

This is a small, golden pendant in the shape of a half 
moon. It is attached to a leather thong and meant to be 
worn around the neck. When the pendant is activated, the 
wearer becomes invisible to both mundane creatures and 
spirits for one minute per success scored. This works against 
all senses but touch (sight, sound, scent). 

Tocreate Phoebe's Veil, one of the following spirit types 
must be bound into the pendant: Illusion, Shadow, Hiding, 
or Chameleon-spirit. 


Sanctuary Chimes 


Level 3, Gnosis 6 

This miniature tubular bell, when activated, emits chimes 
into the wind. All spirits, unless invited to do so, may not 
Materialize within 100 feet. 

To create Sanctuary Chimes, one of the following spirit 
types must be bound into the tubular bell: Protection, 
Guardian, or Turtle-spirit. 


Klaive 

Level 4, Gnosis 6 

A klaive is a ritual dagger of the Garou. Klaives are rare 
weapons, for they are made of silver, and their manufacture 
and use are deadly to Garou. A klaive is about as big as a 
Bowie knife. A Garou who carries a klaive loses one point 
from his effective Gnosis rating (see Silver, pg. 198). A 
War-spirit is usually bound into the klaive, allowing the 
weapon to inflict aggravated damage upon non-Garou foes. 
Without the spirit, a klaive does not inflict aggravated 


damage. However, a Garou does not need to attune a klaive 
that has no spirit in it. 


Pulling a klaive on another Garou is considered a grave 
action, for a klaive duel is most often a duel to the death. 
Nonetheless, klaive duels among Garou are becoming 
increasingly common as the wilds dwindle and tribal fric- 
tion grows. 

The difficulty to attack with a klaive is 6, and it inflicts 
Strength *2 damage. Because it is a silver weapon, Garou 
may not soak this damage. 


Monkey Puzzle 


Level 4, Gnosis 6 

This talisman ofambercontainsasingle human hair. Wher 
activated, it causes all humans viewing the Garou to believ 
him a normal human, regardless of current form. However, a: 
action such as tearing out an enemy's throat will be seen as th 
act of a psychotic. 

Tocreate a Monkey Puzzle, one of the following spirit type 
must be bound into the talisman: Ghost, Illusion, or Trickste: 
Spirit Whistle 

Level 4, Gnosis 8 

This small ivory whistle, when activated and blowr 
emits a wailing scream causing immense pain to all spirit 
within the wielder's line of sight. Any spirits present must 
roll Gnosis (difficulty 6) and score a number of successes 
equal to or greater than the wielder’s successes; otherwise, 
they will flee from the scream. 

To create a Spirit Whistle, one of the following spirit 
types must be bound into the ivory whistle: Screaming, 
Madness, Discord, or Screech Owl-spirit. 


Grand Klaive 


Level 5, Gnosis 7 

These are the legendary klaives of heroes. They are as big 
as swords and, like their smaller counterparts, are made of 
silver. A Garou who carries a Grand Klaive loses two points 
from his effective Gnosis rating (see Silver, pg. 198). A 
War-spirit is usually bound into the Grand Klaive, allowing 
it to inflict aggravated damage upon non-Garou foes. With- 
out the spirit, a Grand Klaive does not inflict aggravated 
damage. However, a Garou does not need to attune a Grand 
Klaive that has no spirit in it. 


Grand Klaives are very rare and are often handed down 
by Garou lineages, especially among the Silver Fangs, 
Fianna and Shadow Lords. Besides the usual War-spirit, 
another spirit is sometimes bound into the Grand Klaive — 
for example, a Gnosis-spirit (to provide magical energy to 


the Garou), or even an Ancestor-spirit. Because these YA 
weapons are so honored and legendary, the secondary spirit 
usually does not mind sharing the fetish. 

The difficulty to attack with a Grand Klaive is 7, and it 
inflicts Strength +4 damage. Because it is a silver weapon, 
Garou may not soak this damage. 

Talens 

Below are a number of sample talens. The Storyteller 
should feel free to create more, bearing in mind that they 
are always one-shot items. 

Gane Arrows 

Gnosis 4 

These obsidian-headed arrows are able to seek out and 
home in on Banes, whether or not they are visible. These 
arrows automatically hit and inflict three dice of aggravated 


damage. Furthermore, the bite of a Bane arrow is so painful 
that no Bane can resist howling in agony. 

Tocreate a Bane Arrow, one of the following spirit types 
must be bound into the arrow: War, Air or Pain. 


(Death (Dust 


Gnosis 6 

This small jar of dust, when broken open, activated and 
sprinkled over the body of a recently (within a day) dead 
creature, allows the wielder to communicate with the spirit 
of the corpse. 

To create Death Dust, one of the following spirit types 
must be bound into the jar: Death, Communication, or 
Divination. 


Moon Glow 


Gnosis 8 
This is a single moonbeam caught within a small crystal. 
Upon embarking on a journey into the Umbra, the wielder 


—-—-—-—^€^^—^—€^^«^«^A^-«-«-—»—»—»-—-————— MSS 


may activate this talen from Luna. So long as it is continu- 

ally carried, the journey will be a safe one. However, the 

crystal shatters once the Garou reaches his destination. 
Only a Lune can empower a Moon Glow talen. 


Moon Sign 


Gnosis 5 

This small waxen seal bears the sign of the full moon. 
When activated and thrown down before any Garou, the 
Garou must make a Willpower roll (difficulty 7) or imme- 
diately change to Lupus form. 

To create a Moon Sign, one of the following spirit types 
must be bound into the seal: Lune, Change, Wolf, or Wyld. 


Nightshade 


Gnosis 5 

This talen is distilled from the very essence of night. One 
fluid ounce of this liquid, when quaffed, turns the imbiber's 
body into shadow, rendering her virtually invisible in 
darkness. This effect wears off after an hour. 

To create Nightshade, one of the following spirit types 
must be bound into a vial: Night, Hiding, or Darkness. 


Wyrm Scale 


Gnosis 8 

Thissigil is imbued with a limited resistance against the 
power of the Wyrm. Servants of the Wyrm will, when the 
sigil is activated, revert to their true forms. However, this 
action alerts the Wyrm to the existence of the sigil, and the 
sigil will thereupon be consumed in a blaze of flames. 

To create a Wyrm Scale, a Wyrm spirit must be bound 
into the sigil. 


m 120 SL P RS AERA VIA CU A: 


Central Park: A Setting 
for Werewolf 


on a nice afternoon, 
to go poisoning pigeons in the park... 
—Tom Lehrer 

The following is a sample setting for Werewolf: The 
Apocalypse. Below you will find all the information you 
need to begin a chronicle in New York's Central Park. 
Several brief adventure ideas are given at the end of this 
section. 

Keep in mind as you design adventures for your pack that 
the Gothic-Punk world differs from our own. The influence 
of supernatural forces has shaped and molded the course of 
history. There are numerous differences between the New 
York of the World of Darkness and our own Big Apple. For 
instance, in our world, New York is slowly winning the 
battle to restore Central Park. Olmstead and Vaux's origi- 
nal vision is being restored. In the World of Darkness, much 
ofthe needed financial and political assistance never came. 
The fight to keep the park alive is entirely up to the Garou, 
and they have remade parts of the park for their own uses. 
In this world, Central Park is slowly falling apart, crime in 
the neighborhood is on the rise, and the forces of the 
Weaver and the Wyrm are slowly encroaching. 

However, there have been some changes for the better. 
Automobiles are not present in the park. Horses and horse- 
drawn carriages are more common (despite the horses’ 
occasional tendency to spook at the scent of werewolves), 
and the roads for automobile traffic that run through the 
middle of the real Central Park were never built in the 
Gothic-Punk world. The residents of New York don't drive 
through the park anymore; some are used to the idea of 
riding in a taxi to the edge of the park, hopping in a horse- 
drawn carriage fora ride across the park and hailing another 
cab on the other side. This has decreased pollution and 
made the park more peaceful. The world of the werewolves 
is dangerous, but it is not without victories. 

Central Park is a refuge of wilderness surrounded by the 
madness of civilization — a source of life and energy in the 
midst ofa prison of rigid order and conformity. Anyone who 
walks into Central Park enters a slightly different reality: 
vibrant, living and energetic, but also violent, unpredict- 
able and grim. The world of the humans is left behind. The 
world of the Garou lies ahead. 

Watch your step. 


Sept of the Green 


Caern: The Central Park Caern, Central Park, New 
York 

Level: 3 

Gauntlet: 3 

Type: Fellowship 


| 


The caern was originally dedicated to the Wyld, but as 
the city grew around the caern, the forces of the Weaver 
reduced its power. After the Bone Gnawers started to care 
for the dying caern, a second totem was brought into the 
park. Now the location acts as a magnet, drawing Garou 
together. Indeed, the caern is nicknamed "The Melting Pot 
Caern,” because of its open policy and location near what 
was once the immigrant capital of North America. 

Caerns of Fellowship are sites where Garou can celebrate 
their diversity and set aside their differences. The caern is 
a gathering place for many important regional moots. The 
points gained from activating the caern (see Rite of the 
Opened Caern, pp. 140-141) can be added to Expression, 
Performance and Empathy. 

Tribal Structure: Mostly Bone Gnawers, but all tribes 
are represented here. 

Totems: The caern has two totems: Mera, originally 
summoned by the Silver Fangs; and the Great White 
Mouse, who came to the aid of the Bone Gnawers. 


Mera is a powerful water spirit whose domain includes all 
the water that flows through New York City. Water acts as 
a focus for her powers, and her Moon Bridges join several 
bodies of water within the park. 

The Great White Mouse is an old totem fighting to 
survive. His existence predates the origin of the Bone 
Gnawers. He was once a minor totem of the Garou, but 


when the Bone Gnawers formed long ago, the followers of 
Mouse were slain by the Children of Rat. 

The caern's original totem, Mera, was summoned when 
the Silver Fangs first opened the caern in 1855. As the site 
declined, Mera weakened. During the Great Depression, 
however, the number of homeless in the park drastically 
increased, and a great Theurge brought Mouse from the 
depths of the Umbra to help the Bone Gnawers survive. 

Mouse gains power from large gatherings of Garou. 
(Afterall, one mouse can only hide, but a nest of many mice 
can achieve far more to ensure their communal survival.) 
He is meek and unassuming, but his powers are excellent for 
gathering lost Garou together. 


Geography 

Central Park is located in Manhattan. 110th Street (or 
"Central Park North") forms the northern border, and 
visitors can enter from the north through the Farmer's Gate 
or the Warrior's Gate. East 59th Street (or "Central Park 
South") forms the southern border. The Artisan's Gate and 
the Artist's Gate are located here, along with Columbus 
Circle and Grand Army Plaza. The western border of 8th 
Street, with four entrances, is referred to as Central Park 
West, and Fifth Avenue, with five entrances to the park, 
lies along the eastern border. There are many other smaller 
entrances. Refer to the accompanying map for more details. 


= 

g Heckscher | 

El Ballfields 

TE & Playground — | 
g 
| © jong 

Chess & // 
Checkers/ / 

x House | / 

3 Wollman * 

" Memorial 

9 Rink” J rem The Mall 

ps Dairy | 


Grand Army Plaza 


Four horse paths cut across the park from west to east: 
they roughly correspond to 97th Street, 85th Street, 79th 
Street and 65th Street. The Reservoir is the most visible 
landmark, dividing the park in half. 


The Bawn 


The entire park forms the bawn of the caern, allowing 
the Garou to watch the humans quite closely. The force of 
the Wyld is strong here, and it holds the Weaver at bay. The 
Bone Gnawers want the citizens of New York to enjoy the 
serenity of nature while drawing upon the energy of the 
wilderness. The diversity, energy and beauty seen through- 
out Central Park show that their stewardship is working 
quite well. 

At the same time, Garou have a chance to interact with 
(and attempt to understand) humans. People expect un- 
usual things in New York, especially in Central Park, so 
there is a great deal of freedom. The Gnawers’ communal 
attitude and acceptance of everyone is part of the demo- 
cratic spirit pervasive throughout the caern. However, 
despite the liberal nature of Central Park’s Bone Gnawers, 
there are rules governing conduct within the bawn. 


The Center 


The caern actually has two “centers.” The stronger one, 
overseen by Mera, encompasses the Esplanade and Bethesda 
Fountain. The spirit of Mouse can also be summoned near 
the Great Lawn: there is a nexus of energy located under 
nearby Turtle Pond. 


278 


CENTRAL PARK 


Inventors'Gate — — | 


J. 
| | Swedish, 
ia Cottage 


iJ 
Belvedere Ii 
Chory | Rambi e 
Bethesda | 
Fountain 


Boathouse iM 


Metropolitan 
Museum 
ot Art 


Fifth Avenue 


Bethesda Fountain is a focus for Mera’s power. The 
fountain marks the spot where the Silver Fangs first opened 
the caern. Since then, the ground has been covered in 
concrete, but the fountain, named after a place of healing 
in Jerusalem, is still a place of power. The nature of the 
Wyld is alive there, and meditating by the fountain or 
looking out upon the lake gives insight and inspiration to 
troubled souls. 

On one side of the fountain is a huge restored building 
with a massive open area on the ground floor. Staircases 
ascend on either side of the building, and the roof of the 
edifice allows an outstanding view of the surrounding area. 
A lake can be seen on the other side of the fountain; boats 
and canoes from the Loeb Boathouse traverse this body 
during the day. A peninsula extends into the lake. From its 
tip, the Master of the Rite can call upon Mouse or Mera to 
open a Moon Bridge. 

Turtle Pond, the less powerful center, is located at the 
southern edge of the Great Lawn. The Wyld, aided by 
Mera, long ago created a Chimare (a Realm of dreams) 
around the park. Silver Fangs sleeping near the pond had 
incredible, inspirational dreams. Unfortunately, neglect 
has weakened this spiritual power. 

During the Great Depression, many of the city's home- 
less built a shantytown on the Great Lawn. They called it 
“Hooverville.” The Bone Gnawers of the city protected the 
residents. Seeking the wisdom to guide the Bone Gnawers, 
a powerful Theurge (the Reverend Barnaby Morton of the 
Church of Hooverville) slept by the banks of Turtle Pond. 


Werewolf: The Apocalypse 


IE i 
Central ParkWest 


Ail 
Saints" 
Gate 


Tennis 
Courts $ 


His dreams took him through the Chimare surrounding it 
and led him deep into the Umbra. He quested for anything 
that could help the sept. Deep in a lost Realm, he found the 
lair of Mouse and brought him back to the park. The spirit 
ofthe Great White Mouse now rests beneath Mera's waters, 
dreaming in the Chimare. 


Landmarks 


Dozens of unusual sites grace the park, but each tribe has 
a favorite meeting place. Garou visiting the park are wel- 
come to explore anywhere, but if a pack is trying to find 
members of a particular tribe, it helps to know where to 
look. 

* The Great Lawn — Although Bone Gnawers feel free 
to sleep anywhere and explore all sections of the park, they 
always get nostalgic about the Great Lawn. The grass there 
is among the most carefully tended flora on Earth; in fact, 
a Kinfolk descendant of Olmstead still cares for it. The 
northern end of the lawn has a number of softball fields, but 
the majority ofthe lawn is reserved for picnics and relaxing. 
In the center of the southern part of the lawn is a magnifi- 
centelm tree, the largest in the eastern U.S. Folk entertainers 
and storytellers can often be found there, along with the 
occasional Galliard trying to pick up a few tips about the 
Bone Gnawer art of street performance. 

Another favorite site of the Bone Gnawers is a fetish 
called the Ever Meal, known to many as “The Moldy 
Grail." It isa garbage can that refills empty containers with 
food or drink. Empty cups placed in the Grail are magically 
refilled with soda, and Styrofoam containers become warm. 
again as they are replenished with fast food. Each container 


1000 Yards | 


Appendix 


d 
z^ 


_ Central Park 


Gate ] 


Hill 


BIO sioe M 


a9 sawed 


can only be used once, however, and expensive food is 
always replaced with sleazy, yet delectable alternatives. 

* The Great Hill — Wild forests surround this hill, and 
the Black Furies have claimed this area as a gathering place. 
Hidden from prying eyes, they organize occasional religious 
ceremonies and try to avoid the hustle and bustle of the 
park. 

* Strawberry Fields — This is one of the most beautiful 
gardens in the park. It serves as a memorial to John Lennon, 
who was tragically slain outside his nearby home. One 
memorial marker is a round mosaic with one word in the 
center— "Imagine." 

Children of Gaia often meet here to discuss politics and 
news from around the world. Intellectuals discussing phi- 
losophy are common here, as are musicians practicing their 
craft. In addition, the Gauntlet in the middle of these 
gardens has a rating of 3, just like the caern center. 

* Belvedere Castle — Constructed in 1872, this castle 
was one of the park's original buildings. When the Silver 
Fangs controlled the park, many Theurges communed with 
the spirits of rain, wind, thunder and other forces of nature. 
As the Weaver strengthened, the spiritual connection to 
the elements faded, and the castle was converted into a 
weather monitoring station in 1919. 

Thanks to some fancy bureaucratic manipulation from 
Simon Gentle, a local Glass Walker, the facility was reor- 
ganizedsothatall the weather instruments could be operated 
by remote control. The hiring of a Fianna Kinfolk to 
supervise the facility was also fortuitous. 


The Fianna now cc atrol Belvedere Castle. They have 
added a few features t the inside of the castle, including a 
secure “guest room" ‘or important visitors. The Fianna 
demonstrate their hospitality quite well. Among the visi- 
tors to Belvedere Castle in 1993 were two faeries, a group 
of three Dreamspeaker mages hiding from vampires, and 
the ghost of a demented 14th century Irish chieftain, who 
confused the castle with an old haunt of his. 

* Swedish Cottage — This building, constructed in 
Sweden for an exposition in Philadelphia, was moved to 
New York in 1876. When the landmark was refurbished in 
the '80s, it almost became the home of a charming mari- 
onette theater. Unfortunately, the presence of angst-filled 
Germanic headbashers who hung out there discouraged the 
troupe of puppeteers, and they moved to another section of 
the park. Since then, two Get of Fenris Kinfolk have 
opened a German restaurant in the building. It is now the 
best place to get German beer in the park. 

Many Get of Fenris feel uncomfortable in a setting as 
sedate as Central Park. One permanent resident of the sept, 
Wilhelm "Quarterback" Krause, has been trying to coax 
visiting Get to make use of the many athletic fields in the 
park. Rugby and tackle football games become extremely 
violent when the Get play. Krause, however, has been very 
disappointed that he cannot assemble a team of nine Garou 
who can match the Bone Gnawers' "All-American" base- 
ball team. 

The puppeteers, by the way, have moved to the Delacorte 
Theater, although they do compete with the occasional 
Shakespeare Festival. The Theater Building also has an 
amusing German clock. Every hour, a carefully crafted 
animal band circles the clock to the accompaniment of a 
mechanical glockenspiel. 

* "Millionaire Mile" — Throughout the history of the 
park, there has always been a movement to preserve the 
park proper as a place for "The People." However, many 
wealthy organizations and philanthropic individuals have 
fallen into the recurring habit of thinking of the area as 
"their park." Some of the tenants on Millionaire Mile have 
even been known to consider the park a kind of huge 
"backyard." 

Fifth Avenue is home to some very expensive real estate 
overlooking Central Park. The houses and apartments 
owned by thearea’s Glass Walkers are no exceptions. These 
Garou feel much safer transacting their business close to 
the safety to the park, especially with so many Sabbat 
vampires in the city. Simon Gentle holds most Glass 
Walker meetings in his penthouse apartment. A consider- 
able portion of his time is spent getting some of the 
residents of Fifth Avenue, as well as many large corpora- 
tions, to direct their time and resources toward keeping the 
park alive. 

* Central Park Zoo — The old zoo met with great 
approval when it opened, but eventually became one of the 
greatest tragedies of the park. Animal activists (including 
some Kinfolk) were quite vocal in their opposition to many 


280 


Werewolf: The Apocalypse 


p/m. am, EN mar n ————— À 


of the zoo’s inhumane practices. Under the subtle direction 
of the Garou, the new zoo serves both the animals and the 
werewolves quite nicely. A Kinfolk of the Get of Fenris 
works as a night watchman, and a Kinfolk of the Children 
of Gaia oversees the wolf enclosure. 

Many Red Talons hate visiting the park, mainly because 
the sept forbids any Garou to wander freely in Lupus form. 
Only one Red Talon permanently resides in the park: 
Spotlight, who sleeps in the zoo by day and patrols the 
Ramble by night. However, the Kinfolk night watchman 
has been known to allow visiting werewolves to roam freely 
behind the locked gates of the zoo at night, so long as they 
stay clear of the animal enclosures. The carefully orches- 
trated arrangement has worked well so far. 

* The Ramble — During the day, the Ramble is a scenic 
area, ideal for leisurely strolls. Birdwatchers are especially 
fond of the area. At night, however, the Ramble becomes 
one of the most dangerous parts of the park. This is partly 
because of the nightly patrols of the Red Talon, Spotlight 
(mentioned above). Many New Yorkers tell horror stories 
about violent crimes committed in the Ramble. Part of this 
also stems from the effects of the Delirium. 

However, something very dangerous is indeed occurring 
in the Ramble. Some of the sequestered areas of this 
labyrinth provide meeting places for the Shadow Lords who 
visit the park. Spotlight has become part of their con- 
spiracy, and he keeps an eye out for anyone who would 
interfere with these machinations. More details are in- 
cluded in the section on “Personalities” below. 

* The Obelisk, “Cleopatra’s Needle" — One of the 
most spectacular monuments in the park was a gift from the 
Khedive of Egypt in 1877. The 71-foot Egyptian obelisk was 
a monument to King Thometes III and was built around 
1600 B.C. The obelisk, known to many as "Cleopatra's 
Needle," has a sinister history; it is rumored that over a 
dozen men died transporting it to the United States. 

Many of the hieroglyphics carved on its pink granite 
surface have eroded, but a plaque donated from Cecil B. de 
Mille contains an (alleged) translation. There is also an 
account of several lead-covered time capsules buried under 
the monument. This document lists many bizarre items 
buried underneath, including a ship's propeller, a copy of 
the U.S. Constitution, a freshly made anchor, a copy of 
Webster's Dictionary, and a collection of the works of 
William Shakespeare. This account is, of course, com- 
pletely fabricated. Only a few Garou know what's really 
buried under Cleopatra's Needle. 

Every three months, a different Silent Strider messenger 
visits the caern and waits by the obelisk for an entire 
afternoon. The tribe also retains the right to perform 
undisturbed rituals by the monument in the middle of the 
night. The Striders will not, however, explain why the 
rituals are needed. Other Striders are asked to perform. 
mysterious missions involving the obelisk, missions even 
those who perform them do not understand. Despite inves- 


tigation by various members of the sept, the secrets of the 
obelisk have been kept. 

* Cherry Hill — Cherry Hill sees quite a bit of traffic, 
mainly from horses and carriages. The fountain there once 
served as a trough for passing horses. It is also a favorite 
resting place for the only Silver Fang permanently residing 
in the park. Alexandra Zamyatin is a Galliard who loves to 
tell tales about the history of park, including stories dating 
back to the time when the Silver Fangs cared for it. 

Alexandra is also a fanatic equestrian. She loves to go for 
long rides on the horse trails throughout the park. A four- 
and-a-half-mile track runs along the periphery of most of 
the park. Any visiting Silver Fangs will be invited to 
accompany her on a ride. 

* Zan Shu, Greatest of the Elusive Treehouses — Over 
a period of eight years, the police in Central Park were 
confronted with a very adventurous and ambitious indi- 
vidual. Someone was covertly building treehouses in the 
park. Each house was camouflaged and carefully placed, 
and police often had trouble finding the latest project. 

The first houses were destroyed, but the police later 
proved reluctant to look too closely into the incidents. This 
is because the builder of these treehouses had friends: he 
was a Kinfolk of a Stargazer living at the sept. Several of the 
houses are still secretly hidden. Late at night, Crinos 
werewolves hide on the rooftops and gaze at the stars. A 
total of 13 treehouses have been built; the most elaborate 
is a two-story, five-room house near 79th Street. 


* Sheep Meadow — This is the most meditative section 
ofthe park. The area is officially a “quiet zone": loud music 
and noisy conversations are not tolerated here. Stargazers 
and Children of Gaia enjoy this location, but Wendigo are 
the werewolves most commonly found here. Many visitors, 
including humans, are oddly affected by spending an after- 
noon in the meadow. The spirituality in the meadow is 
strong, and many people completely forget about the mod- 
ern world while they rest within. No one ever leaves with 
a violent thought. 

However, if any Garou is in the meadow at midnight 
during a time corresponding to her auspice, the area be- 
comes a focal point for the energies of the Wyld. Shocking 
scenes are witnessed in the middle of the field. Brutal 
visions of the past, and sometimes of distant eras, come to 
life. The individual who sparked these visions often re- 
ceives insight into her present situation and sometimes 
even a prophecy of her future. For this reason, Garou often 
meetaround this time to create the proper environment for 
oneofthese visions. The Delirium conceals their activities. 

* Harlem Meer — This lake has undergone many 
changes. The most recent one involved lowering the water 
to create an island spanning a quarter of an acre in the 
middle of the lake. An underwater fence prevents boaters 
or canoers from approaching the island...unless they know 
the secret of getting there. Tall reeds obscure the center of 
the island, and a few Uktena occasionally gather there to 
meet in privacy. 


Other Locations 


* Wollman Memorial Rink — The Garou considered 
this artificial ice rink to be an ugly blight on the park and 
were happy when it closed. Unfortunately, Donald Trump 
financed its restoration a few years ago. The ice rink is quite 
busy during the winter; it also converts into (gasp) a 
miniature golf course during the rest of the year. 

* Chess House — Many elderly people frequent this 
location, and chess and checker sets can be checked out for 
free. Certain Garou are devoted chess players (and crafty 
characters can learn about their personalities by challeng- 
ing them to a game or two). 

* The Dairy — This now serves as an Information 
Center, and general information about the park is easily 
found — Tuesday through Friday during partial business 
hours, of course. 

* Police Precinct — There isa police patrol in the park. 
A Glass Walker Kinfolk on the force helps keep the Glass 
Walkers informed of police activity. Additionally, any 
Glass Walker can easily monitor their radio traffic. 

* Metropolitan Museum of Art — This huge museum 
holds a variety of exhibits, including a room recreating an 
Egyptian temple from the same era as Cleopatra's Needle. 


Umbrascape 


The physical world is only one part of the caern. Hidden 
in the Umbra, the force of the Wyld struggles to emerge 
intothephysical world. Conversely, the force ofthe Weaver 
can be seen outside the park, waiting for the opportunity to 
rush in and impose its stasis. Garou traveling into the 
Penumbra can see the spiritual roots of the activity within 
the bawn, as well as representations of the battle between 
the Weaver and Wyld. Some examples are listed below. 

* Turtle Pond: Anyone peering deeply into the pond 
will see a shifting white mass at the bottom. Further 
examination reveals the spirits of hundreds and hundreds of 
tiny white mice climbing over each other. There is the faint 
stench of a mouse nest, and a frightened, childlike voice is 
sometimes heard singing from the depths. 

* Belvedere Castle: The elements are strong here. On 
tempestuous days, elemental forces batter against the battle- 
ments of the castle. A thread of electrical energy (a data 
stream) spurts from the castle, but the spirit of the Wyld can 
be sensed glowing warmly behind the castle walls. 

* Fifth Avenue: Everything is orderly and precise. Long 
threads stretch along the street, struggling to keep the 
traffic flowing in regular patterns. The bright green energy 
of the forest quickly fades into life-sapping gray. Spirits 
trapped in nearby stoplights shout one-word commands. 
About once a week, a foolish Pattern Spider will make a 
desperate foray into the park, only to be consumed by the 
Wyld. 

* Zachary Ellison: This agent of the Shadow Lords 
(listed below) is continually surrounded by a cloud of 


282 


Werewolf: The Apocalypse 


parem am, mrt mr TRA. -—————— À 


darkness. Banes hover around him, whispering dangerous 
and obscene thoughts. His determination and spiritual 
focus hold them at bay. 

* Bethesda Fountain: An aura of healing surrounds the 
fountain. The concrete around it ripples like water, and the 
whole area is more than alive: it's capricious, contempla- 
tive, mysterious and rejuvenating. Waves on the nearby 
lake roll from the peninsula into a huge whirlpool; this 
watery vortex marks the spot where Moon Bridges are 
strongest. 

* Wollman Rink: Layers of spiderwebs and dancing 
fields of electricity elementals hold the Pattern in place. 
The Weaver knits its Pattern over the Earth and yearns to 
spread further into the park. Naturae scream under the 
webbing, and Blight Children skate merrily on the surface 
of the ice, mocking any Garou who come nearby. 

Beneath the ice, in a frozen Blight, reside the Dark 
Trinity, the three Banes who work in concert to destroy the 
Garou (see Dark Trinity, pp. 272-273). This Blight can only 
be entered by breaking a hole in the Penumbral ice. Even 
then, invaders must travel icy caverns and suffer frigid 
temperatures to reach the actual lair deep beneath. 


History 


During the history of the Garou, there have been fewer 
than 20 Imperial Moots. One such moot was held on 
Manhattan Island in 1855. To quell the expansion of the 
cities, the Silver Fangs audaciously dedicated caern in the 
middle of the country's largest city. No revel had ever been 
greater. After an unheard-of expenditure of Gnosis, a caern 
of the Wyld, dedicated to Mera, was created. 

New York City’s government was certain that no busi- 
nesses would want to develop the area. Squatters had 
already built makeshift homes; open drains and sewer 
tunnels were quite visible. The city set aside over 800 acres 
fora park. A prize of $2,000 was offered for the design of the 
park, and out of about 20 entries, one outstanding design 
was chosen (with a little assistance from Kinfolk). The 
winners of the competition were Calvert Vaux, a Kinfolk of 
the Glass Walkers; and Frederick Law Olmstead, a Kinfolk 
of the Bone Gnawers. Both aspired to create a nurturing, 
thriving natural place for the people of New York. 

Between 1858 and 1874, the park was built. The Silver 
Fangs “oversaw” the whole process, but the process of 
integrating a caern into the middle of a city was slightly 
beyond their ken. They became less enthusiastic about the 
idea, and the Weaver was happy to work around their 
lassitude. The Glass Walkers and Bone Gnawers of the city, 
however, felt right at home. The totem, Mera, was ne- 
glected, but the children of the Cockroach and the Rat 
thrived. The Silver Fangs’ optimistic aspirations of re- 
claiming the land fell by the wayside. 

As Mera was neglected, the force of the Wyld began to 
diminish within the park. The few Bone Gnawers who 
actually lived in the park were very disorganized, and their 


| 


apathy grew until the tragedy of the Great Depression hit 
New York City. The number of homeless grew, and the 
power of the Rat was taxed heavily. Bone Gnawers helped 
erect acity of homeless, called *Hooverville," on the Great 
Lawn. Their support of the "city" demonstrated that the 
park was really for all the residents of New York, including 
the city's poor. 

A powerful Bone Gnawer Theurge living in Hooverville 
often slept by the side of Turtle Pond, seeking inspiration 
for his weekly sermons. One dream led him far into the 
Umbra, where he found an ancient and neglected totem 
sleeping. The Theurge awakened the Great White Mouse 
from his slumber and accompanied him on an epic journey 
through the Umbra, showing him how the world had 
changed. Together they returned to the Chimare near 
Turtle Pond. Mouse aided the Bone Gnawers in their time 
of need and has since become a second totem of the sept. 

The Weaver's encroachment continued throughout the 
20th century. Numerous outrageous plans for the park were 
advanced. Examples included: the construction of an air- 
plane landing field; a WWI Memorial consisting of extensive 
trenches; a vast circus ground; and an underground parking 
lot for 30,000 cars. Carefully orchestrated interference 
from the city’s Glass Walkers prevented these plans from 
coming to fruition. 

Maintenance of the park was another problem. Without 
sufficient funds for upkeep, the park would stagnate. The 
wealthy did have plans for the park, but many of these plans 


Appendix 


did not take into account the city as a whole. Arguments 
over whom the park should really serve vitiated the strength 
of its support. A few Glass Walkers valiantly fought to keep 
the park funded, but by the mid-20th century, the park was 
again dying. 

Restoration has been a long and painful process, but the 
park is gradually being reclaimed. There are many flaws the 
casual visitor doesn't notice. Buildings are crumbling, and 
restoration groups fight to stop the old buildings from being 
razed. New constructions are rare. Dedicated volunteers 
organize a wide variety of festivals and events to draw 
support for the park. Millions of people visit the park each 
year, and the wear and tear on the facility is overwhelming. 
TheSeptofthe Green continues the fight to keep the spirit 
of the park alive. 


«Che Sept 


The Sept of the Green is unusual, mainly because of the 
diverse Garou living there. Most caerns are dominated by 
one or two tribes, but the Bone Gnawers are anything but 
elitist with regard to such matters. Anyone is welcome to 
visit and (hopefully) learn. 

Casual, democratic sept government results in very little 
open conflict over howto run the caern. Conflict, however, 
does occur. Outside the formal meetings, rivalries and 
misunderstandings are waged in secret. Most Garou machi- 


283 


L 


G Nt 
v. HM 


nations are not brought to the sept meetings, and mysteries 
lie shrouded beneath the caern's placid appearance. 


7 


Most of the permanent residents of the caern don’t 
concern themselves overmuch with long-term problems. 
For them, a chance to help visitors to the park learn and 
grow is quite enough. Others are amazingly individualistic, 
caring little about "the big picture." 

Some individuals, however, have other plans... 


Uisiting the Caern 


Any visitors to the caern will quickly learn a few rules of 
etiquette. Mother Larissa and Spotlight oversee the 
Chiminage the sept receives. Any Garou passing through 
the park or visiting for the day should leave a gift in the 
Ramble with either Mother Larissa or Spotlight. The na- 
ture of this gift largely depends on the caern’s current needs, 
although items for the homeless — food, clothes, blankets 
and so on — are always greatly appreciated. If money is 
donated, Simon Gentle will make sure it goes toward the 
maintenance of the park. 

Any Garou who plans to spend the night should also 
offer to tell a story by the great elm near the Great Lawn. 
The tale-teller has the option of telling a story with humans 
present. This is usually a story that does not betray the 
secrets of Garou society, but still encourages a better under- 
standing of nature. 


Werewolf: The Apocalypse 


W 


Spotlight fanatically preserves Central Park's Veil. Fright- 
ening people in the park isstrictly forbidden, and, regardless 
of the Delirium, Garou are heavily discouraged from mani- 
festing their Crinos forms. Punishment is either banishment 
or, in extreme cases, death. Spotlight can be very cruel and 
creative with his punishments. 


Those who work well with the sept are occasionally 
offered membership. Joining the Sept of the Green requires 
giving a point of Gnosis to the Great White Mouse or 
presenting the sept with a fetish. The prospective member 
must demonstrate how he can benefit the sept. 


Personalities 


Note: Traits in parentheses represent that Garou's dif- 
ferent formsasfollows: (Glabro/Crinos/Hispo/Lupus). This 
is true even if the character is of lupus breed. 


Mother Larissa 
Position: Sept Leader 
Breed: Homid 
Auispice: Theurge 
Tribe: Bone Gnawers 


Attributes: Strength 2 (4/6/5/3), Dexterity 2 (2/3/4/4), 
Stamina 3 (5/6/6/5), Charisma 4, Manipulation 3 (2/0/0/ 
0), Appearance 3 (2/0/3/3), Perception 3, Intelligence 3, 
Wits 4 


Abilities: Alertness3, Animal Ken 2, Dodge 3, Empathy 
4, Enigmas 2, Expression 4, Leadership 3, Linguistics 1, 
Medicine 3, Melee 3, Occult 2, Performance 4, Rituals 4, 
Stealth 2, Streetwise 5, Subterfuge 3, Survival 3 

Backgrounds: Contacts 4, Resources 1 

Gifts: (1) Cooking, Mother's Touch, Persuasion, Sense 
Wyrm; (2) Blissful Ignorance, Staredown; (3) Reshape 
Object; (4) Ultimate Argument of Logic 

Rank: 4 

Rage 5, Gnosis 6, Willpower 8 

Rites: Rite of the Totem, Rite of Spiritual Awakening, 
Rite of Passage, Rite of Ostracism, Rite of Praise, Rite of 
Summoning, Rite of Spirit Awakening, Baptism of Fire, 
Rite of Binding, Rite of Talisman Dedication, Rite of the 
Opened Caern, Moot Rite, Rite of Cleansing, Rite of 
Contrition, Rite of the Questing Stone, Gathering for the 
Departed 

Fetishes: Grand Klaive 

Image: Many of the people in Central Park overlook 
Mother Larissa the first time they visit. She'sa small, skinny 
bag lady who patrols the park while pushing a battered 
shopping cart. Her routine includes picking up empty food 
containers from trash cans (she later brings the containers 
to the Ever Meal near the Great Lawn). 

In Homid form, she usually wears ill-fitting polyester 
clothing, orthopedic shoes and tacky accessories. (She has 
a stockpile of used pantyhose hidden under a rock.) In 
Lupus form, she is a small, sleek wolf with a mangy coat of 
brown fur. In any form she appears old, worn-out and 
crotchety, but she practically glows with youth when given 
the chance to take care of someone. 

Roleplaying Hints: Everyone is younger than you. There- 
fore, everyone owes you respect! Stare at anyone who 
speaks to you. Stare at them until you realize what's wrong 
with them. Everyone has a flaw, and if you look hard 
enough, you'll see one. Smile knowingly when you know 
you're right (which is, of course, all of the time). Don't 
forget to play up the whole "crusty old witch" routine. Bah- 
ha-ha-ha! 

You are in charge, and you have a large number of Bone 
Gnawers backing you up to prove it. No Get of Fenris is too 
mighty to have his ear tugged if he's out of line. No Silver 
Fangis too glorious to avoid being chewed out. Remember, 
Mother knows best. 

History: Mother Larissa is over 70 years old. She is the 
last surviving pupil of the Bone Gnawers who originally 
governed the caern. She's a survivor, but she's willing to do 
whatever it takes to maintain the caern. Ensuring the 
survival of the park is more than her job — it's her destiny. 

All Garou defer to her leadership, and many humans 
enjoy her bizarre stories. She may threaten a lot, but she's 
not violent. Just in case, though, she's hidden a Grand 
Klaive in a shrubbery by the Ramble. 


Fengy 


Position: Outcast 

Breed: Metis 

Auspice: Ragabash 

Tribe: Bone Gnawers 

Attributes: Strength 1 (3/5/4/2), Dexterity 5 (5/6/7/7), 
Stamina 2 (4/5/5/4), Charisma 1, Manipulation 4 (3/1/1/ 
1), Appearance 1 (0/0/1/1), Perception 4, Intelligence 2, 
Wits 4 

Abilities: Alertness 2, Animal Ken 1, Athletics 4, Brawl 
2, Dodge 3, Drive 1, Investigation 2, Law 1, Melee 2, 
Primal-Urge 2, Rituals 1, Stealth 3, Streetwise 3, Survival 
2 

Backgrounds: Allies 3, Contacts 1, Past Life 1 

Gifts: (1) Blur of the Milky Eye, Cooking, Sense Wyrm; 
(2) Burrow, Taking the Forgotten 

Rage 3, Gnosis 7, Willpower 4 

Rank: 2 

Rites: Rite of Talisman Dedication, Rite ofthe Questing 
Stone 

Image: Fengy’s deformity is not terribly evident, but 
some would describe him as a mangy, scrawny, dirty, filthy, 
smelly little runt. He likes that. He revels in it. Fengy is 
5'8"— in Crinos form. 

Roleplaying Hints: Your metabolism ishyped-upenough 
for three people. You're always energetic, always hyperac- 
tive, and always in trouble. You're also paranoid. Be 
suspicious of everyone and assume no one believes you. 
Think of a puppy who followed you home and acted like a 
puppy for the next five years. 

Fengy knows the words to every Frank Sinatra song ever 
written and can do a vicious impersonation of Peter Lorre. 
He is also quite firm in his belief that there's no such thing 
as eating too much sugar. 

History: Two Garou fell in love by Belvedere Castle. 
They consummated their love in the Strawberry Fields. 
Nine months later, they threw the product of their union 
into the Reservoir. 

Fengy swam out in wolf form and ran with a pack of wild 
dogs for many years. Later, a Bone Gnawer found him and 
took pity on a Garou who never learned that he could 
change into Homid form. Unfortunately, the Homid form 
was obnoxious, demented, ill-mannered and annoying as 
hell. Fengy's been a loner ever since. 


Howard Koar, ‘Bareback” 


Concept: Recovering Burnout 

Breed: Homid 

Auspice: Galliard 

Tribe: Stargazers 

Attributes: Strength 2 (4/6/5/3), Dexterity 2 (2/3/4/4), 
Stamina 2 (4/5/5/4), Charisma 3, Manipulation 2 (1/0/0/ 
0), Appearance 3 (2/0/3/3), Perception 4, Intelligence 3, 
Wits 3 


emm lacu t 


$ 


Abilities: Alertness 3, Brawl 3, Computer 1, Dodge 1, 
Drive 2, Enigmas 3, Etiquette 2, Expression 3, Firearms 2, 
Intimidation 2, Law 2, Linguistics 3, Performance 1, Pri- 
mal-Urge 1, Repair 1, Rituals 2, Science 2, Stealth 1 

Backgrounds: Kinfolk 1, Pure Breed 2, Resources 2 

Gifts: (1) Mindspeak, Sense Wyrm, Smell of Man 

Rank: 1 

Rage 7, Gnosis 6, Willpower 6 

Rites: Satire Rite, Rite of Becoming, Rite of Summon- 
ing, Gathering for the Departed, Rite of the Questing 
Stone 

Image: Howard is contemplative, reserved and cryptic. 
He tries to maintain a balance between the two worlds in 
which he lives, so the concept of the "noble savage" is 
central to him. He's unkempt, he's a bit rough-hewn, but 
he's always dignified. He also seethes with repressed anger. 

Roleplaying Hints: Wait. Think. Advise. Any emer- 
gency should be carefully contemplated. While everyone 
else charges off to fight the Wyrm, you advise restraint and 
peaceable debate. Someone's got to keep his head. 

You feel this way because you've been holding back, in 
many ways, for a long time. Your anger is just beneath the 
surface, and if you snap, you know you're going to lash out 
a little too much. 

History: Howard's been in the sept for about a year now. 
He settled down and gave part of his Gnosis to the caern in 


286 


an attempt to stifle his growing hate. Although some 
members of the sept are still a little put off by his walking 
around naked in the middle of the night, they stay clear of 
him and respect his privacy. 

Every member of Howard's last pack was viciously killed 
by creatures of the Wyrm. He might be laying on the 
stoicism a bit thick, but he still needs to strengthen the 
facade. Howard is a time bomb waiting to go off. 


Simon Gentle, “Flash” 


Position: Public Relations 

Breed: Homid 

Auspice: Philodox 

Tribe: Glass Walkers 

Attributes: Strength 2 (4/6/5/3), Dexterity 3 (3/4/5/5), 
Stamina 1 (3/4/4/3), Charisma 4, Manipulation 3 (2/0/0/ 
0), Appearance 5 (4/0/5/5), Perception 3, Intelligence 3, 
Wits 2 

Abilities: Alertness 4, Brawl 2, Computer 3, Dodge 2, 
Drive 3, Etiquette 4, Firearms 3, Investigation 2, Law 3, 
Linguistics 2, Occult 1, Performance 2, Politics 3, Primal- 
Urge 3, Science 1, Streetwise 4, Subterfuge 5, Survival 2 

Backgrounds: Contacts 3, Resources 3 

Gifts: (1) Control Simple Machine, Persuasion, Resist 
Pain, Truth of Gaia (2) Control Complex Machine; (3) 
Strength of Purpose 

Rank: 3 

Rage 5, Gnosis 6, Willpower 3 

Image: Simon’s taken to the city in a big way. He’s too 
damn slick for his own good. He’s handsome, charming, 
suave and cool. All of the preceding traits conceal the fact 
that he's scared out of his mind. 

Roleplaying Hints: You need acceptance — badly. You 
try to fit in, but the act is just a little bit off. Maybe if you 
had justa little more money, or more control over the Glass 
Walkers of New York, or if you raised a little more money 
for the park... 

History: Simon’s “uncle” told him all about being Garou. 
He was deliriously happy. All this adventure, and money 
too? The transition into Garou society proceeded perfectly, 
and he even kept contact with his parents after he did it. 

Unfortunately, he didn’t realize how dangerous his situ- 
ation was. He put a lot of faith in his “infallible” Philodox 
nature and “flawless” sense of balance. Now things are 
getting way out of control. 

The finances of the park are in desperate straits, there's 
some sinister group of vampires called “Sabbat” who could 
invade the park at any time, the Bone Gnawers are acting 
like they’ve got an unlimited meal ticket, and the whole 
operation seems like it could go to hell in an afternoon. 

But, hey, we’ve got it under control, right? Yeah, 
right...everything's under control. 


Werewolf: The Apocalypse 


— SL 


Spotlight, “Zoo” 


Position: Caern Warder 

Breed: Lupus 

Auspice: Ahroun 

Tribe: Red Talons 

Attributes: Strength 4 (6/8/7/5), Dexterity 3 (3/4/5/5), 


0), Appearance 2 (1/0/2/2), Perception 4, Intelligence 2, 
Wits 2 

Abilities: Alertness 5, Animal Ken 2, Athletics 2, Brawl 
4, Dodge 2, Intimidation 2, Melee 2, Occult 2, Primal-Urge 
3, Rituals 3, Stealth 3, Survival 2 

Backgrounds: Pure Breed 1 

Gifts: (1) Heightened Senses, Razor Claws, Scent of 
Running Water; (2) Scent of Sight, Sense Silver, Sense the 
Unnatural 

Rank: 2 

Rage 8, Gnosis 3, Willpower 9 

Rites: The Hunt, Rite of Ostracism, Stone of Scorn, 
Voice of the Jackal, Rite of Wounding, Rite of Cleansing 

Image: A Red Talon living in a city — especially an 
overgrown, Weaver-tainted, Wyrm-loving cesspool like 
New York — is incredibly rare. The rage instilled by being 
forced to live there expresses itself in every gesture Spot- 
light makes. He's a killing machine, pure and simple. He 
has no remorse whatsoever about slaughtering anything 
that gets in his way. 

Roleplaying Hints: There are millions and millions of 
humans here. All of them must die. The Bone Gnawers are 
weak, the humans are weak, the Wyrm is everywhere, and 
you're about five seconds away from the Apocalypse. You 
have to keep track of about 10 different things at once; this 
makes you even angrier. You're this pathetic little sept's 
only hope of being prepared when the war starts. Get ready 
to taste some blood. 

History: While living in the wild, Spotlight was experi- 
menting with Homid form. After all, he was going to save 
the Garou from the Wyrm, and he decided it would be a 
good idea to infiltrate the humans. His walks in Homid 
form got longer and longer, and one day when he wasn't 
using the highly attuned senses of his Lupus form, a group 
of trappers heard him growling in a cave. Two gas grenades 
knocked him out, and he reverted to his natural form. A few 
tranq darts later, Spotlight was part of a freak show called 
the Central Park Zoo. 

The zookeepers expected him to mate with the scrawny 
she-wolf they put in his cage, but he escaped instead. The 
city's just too damn huge and Wyrm-ridden to escape, so 
he's trapped in Central Park taking orders from an elderly 
Bone Gnawer. 

Well, he's ready to fix that. He's been talking to the new 
Shadow Lord and he agrees with his plans. The Garou have 
been on the defensive for a long time. Spotlight agrees that 
Central Park would be an excellent base of operations for 
attacking the city — again, and again, and again... 


Appendix 


gig 
Stamina 4 (6/7/7/6), Charisma 1, Manipulation 3 (2/0/0/ V8 


Zachary Ellison, "Shade" 


Position: Conspirator 

Breed: Homid 

Auspice: Philodox 

Tribe: Shadow Lords 

Attributes: Strength 3 (5/7/6/4), Dexterity 2 (2/3/4/4), 
Stamina 2 (4/5/5/4), Charisma 4, Manipulation 5 (4/2/2/ 
2), Appearance 4 (3/0/4/4), Perception 3, Intelligence 4, 
Wits 3 

Abilities: Alertness 3, Brawl 2, Chess 5, Dodge 4, Eti- 
quette 3, Expression 4, Firearms 4, Intimidation 3, 
Investigation 3, Law 2, Leadership 4, Occult 3, Primal- 
Urge 3, Stealth 3, Subterfuge 5 

Backgrounds: Allies 5, Contacts 3, Past Life 3, Re- 
sources 2 

Gifts: (1) Aura of Confidence, Persuasion, Truth of 
Gaia; (2) Clap of Thunder; (3) Summon Stormcrow 

Rank: 3 

Rage 4, Gnosis 2, Willpower 6 

Image: Cool and uncompromising. Zach stalks the park, 
watching everything. His black hair is slicked back and tied 
in a ponytail. Ever-present sunglasses hide his reactions. 
He's manipulative, exploitative, self-centered and destruc- 
tive. He’s also damn good at what he does. 

Roleplaying Hints: The word “evil” is so inappropriate. 
You are ruthlessly efficient, considering yourself perfectly 


287 


justified in doing things others would consider shocking. 
The survival of the entire Garou Nation depends on your 
success. Track down every complaint about the leadership 
of the caern, and exploit it. 

History: From an early age, you learned about history. 
The Silver Fangs failed, big-time. The current leaders are 
picking up the pieces, scrambling to get by. The Shadow 
Lords are slowly winning. You've learned everything there 
is to know about subterfuge and guile. 

TheSeptofthe Green has quite a reputation. It even has 
a bit of prestige, especially because a group of Urrah manage 
to run a halfway decent caern. The opportunity is just too 
good to pass up. The Age of the Shadow Lords is coming, 
and you're the best candidate to lead the way as the next 
elder of this caern. 

You know about the political situation outside New 
York. You're even willing to negotiate with supernatural 
creatures outside the park to help get you where you need 
to be. Then, once the house of cards is all set up, you're 
going to take out as many of your enemies as you can. 

Your support is growing. 


Adventure Jdeas 


+ Unholy Rites — Several Silent Striders arrive in Central 
Park. They demand the right to perform rites around the 
Egyptian Obelisk, and to do so undisturbed. Mother Larissa 
has given permission and won't listen to Fengy's reports of 
"dark energies gathering around the obelisk." The Silent 
Striders plan to draw upon something buried beneath the 
monument, and the players must stop them from unleashing 
something they don't truly understand. 

* The “Fisher” Thing — Old Penn is a homeless man 
who often goes fishing by Turtle Pond every day at noon 
and then falls asleep. One day, after a disturbing dream, he 
fishes an old wooden sword out of the pond silt. He manages 
to stir up some of the park’s regulars, and for some reason, 
they start talking about a “new kingdom.” Banes are hover- 
ing around Penn, and they've got him convinced he's the 
next King Arthur... 

* Spirit Journey — An injured member of the pack tries 
to meditate by Bethesda Fountain...and it dries up! The 
pack is given one day to find out why, or their packmate will 
lose a lot of Honor for harming the center of the caern. The 
answer lies in the Umbra: someone has broken a forgotten 
taboo of the park. 

* Breakout! — The Glass Walker Kinfolk at the Police 
Precinct reports that a Garou has been arrested. The police 
are cracking down on transients in the park, and the players 
have a chance to gain some Honor by freeing the septmate 
and discouraging the police. 

* Competition — The Galliard Alexandra Zamyatin is 
hostingastorytelling competition, and high-ranking mem- 
bers of the other auspices follow suit by staging similar 
events. The characters have a chance to compete against a 
variety of Garou and demonstrate their skills. 


288 


Yara mri mr TA ——————— À 


e In the Shadows... — By a statue of the Mad Tea Party, 
Zachary Ellison is seen conversing with strange men in 
black. They're talking about breaking into the Metropoli- 
tan Museum. The word “temple” is overheard. What strange 
plot is this? 

* Ugly Tourists — A pack of crass Garou is visiting the 
park, and its members don't seem to care much for the sept's 
rules. Mother Larissa assigns the characters the task of 
watching over the visitors to make sure nothing dangerous 
happens. 

* Gang War — Two rival gangs have foolishly decided 
to start a war in Central Park. The characters are the first 
to find out; they can gain some quick Honor if they avert it. 
What happens when the pack's Theurge detects a 
Psychomachiae? 

* Monkeywrenching — Simon Gentle tips off the pack 
that a corporation is trying to open a ridiculous new 
building in the park (this could be a video arcade, roller 
coaster, video wall, etc.). The story hasn't hit the media yet, 
but the contracts are nearly finalized. 

* Black and White and Red All Over — A sleazy 
journalist is hacking out an article plugging his thrilling 
new novel, Werewolves of Central Park! Most of his work is 
shoddy, but he does have quite a bit of “evidence,” includ- 
ing a photo of one of the characters. He thinks the pack's 
Philodox is the "King of the Werewolves." Now he's got 
some toughs backing him up, and he wants to "negotiate" 
a deal whereby he can get some real information about 
what's going on in the park... 


Inside the World of 
(Darkness 


Each game in the Storyteller Series has been designed as 
a unique, stand-alone system. This means that each game, 
be it Vampire: The Masquerade, Werewolf: The Apoca- 
lypse, Mage: The Ascension or any of the others, can be 
played without the rest. We at White Wolf expect that 
most people will find one of the games to be their favorite 
and will not need the others. 

However, we have also designed the games to interlink. 
They share the same world (the World of Darkness), the 
same systems and the same vision. Adding vampires to a 
Werewolf chronicle, either as villains or as characters for 
the players, does not require much work for the Storyteller. 
By the same token, mages have as great an interest in the 
spirit Realms as the Garou do. 

While Storytellers do not need the other games to add 
such supernatural beings to their stories, Vampire or Mage 
will help them add a great deal of depth to these characters. 
Because it is impossible to summarize the two games com- 
pletely herein, this section assumes that the Storyteller has 
access to them and is not relying on the information given 
earlier in the Appendix. 


Werewolf: The Apocalypse 


Adding Antagonists 


Vampires, mages, faeries, ghosts, mummies and other 
creatures have plenty of reasons to interact with werewolves. 
These are the secret lords of the world, and their fiefdoms 
tend to overlap. Uktena and Glass Walkers have the most 
reasons to deal with vampires, but that does not mean other 
Garou never meet the undead. 

The important fact to remember when adding vampires 
to a Werewolf chronicle is that while werewolves are 
masters of combat, vampires are masters of manipulation. 
It's all well and fine that a Rank Three Get of Fenris 
Ahroun can deal out enough damage to sink a destroyer, 
but when the vampire neonate activates her power of 
Entrancement, the werewolf becomes a slobbery puppy 
dog, doing anything to please his mistress. 

Werewolves have little chance against vampires who are 
aware of them. Phalanxes of ghouls load their shotguns 
with 00 silver buckshot. Tremere begin ancient rituals 
designed to cause the Garou more pain than a dozen battle 
scars ever could. Elders use their vitae to increase their 
Attributes astronomically, until they’re the equivalent of 
an entire pack, 

Additionally, when werewolves and vampires meet in a 
social setting, the Kindred have a decided advantage. They 
tule the cities, and the Garou swiftly discover that the 
Gauntlet tends to be strongest in those places the Kindred 
make their havens — business districts, centers of govern- 


ment and the like. Of course, if the vampire can trick or 
convince a werewolf to drink her blood three times, the 
Blood Bond makes the entire issue moot. 

None of this means, of course, that vampires are immune 
to werewolves. Werewolves are infamous among the Kin- 
dred for the destruction they have wrought. Whole cities of 
Kindred have been wiped out in war with the Garou. But 
neither should Garou underestimate the powers of the 
undead. 

Mages, also no match for werewolves in a toe-to-toe 
fight, have their own ways to best their foes. While an 
entire werewolf pack is likely too much for a mage, and a 
single werewolf can probably destroy a mage in combat, 
mages usually make sure they never face such a fate in the 
first place. Shapeshifters at odds with spell casters find that 
the “little things” start going against them. Then they find 
themselves inexplicably stuck in Lupus form. Finally, the 
next time they have to relieve themselves, they discover a 
high-voltage line hidden under them. 

The important thing to remember when adding antago- 
nists from other Storyteller games is that each group has its 
own area of power. Werewolves control the wilderness, and 
anyone caught in their territory has bitten off much more 
than he can chew (pun intended). The Garou, however, 
are out of their element when they visit the cities of the 
Kindred, the sanctums of the mages, the lands of the dead 
or the homes of the fey. 


TD. o 


Adding Characters 

Allowing players to import other supernatural beings 
into a Werewolf chronicle creates even more complica- 
tions, but is often well worth it. A clique drawn from a 
number of alien cultures is an especially volatile mixture, 
and that's always fun. When vampires and werewolves 
must set aside their differences in order to deal with a more 
pressing problem, they learn that they can work together— 
sometimes. 

This sort of mix works best if the players enjoy roleplaying 
amongst themselves and the Storyteller is not afraid to let 
the players tell some of the stories. A mixed troupe must 
deal with a lot of basic issues, such as the vampires’ ties to 
the Wyrm, the extra powers vampires get by drinking 
Garou blood, how much Quintessence the mages could 
steal by killing their allies, and so on. 

Such a group will spend a lot of its time figuring out how 
the characters feel about each other, what ties keep them 
together, and why they don’t screw each other over at a 
moment's notice — or, more likely, how they screw each 
other over. The Storyteller should create an appropriate 
setting and interesting events to prod things along. For 
instance, if the vampires’ main nemesis among the elders 
has made a deal with Pentex to destroy the werewolves’ 
caern, then both sets of characters must come to some sort 
of accord to stop this threat. This “temporary” truce may 


290 


prove more lasting, allowing vampires and werewolves to 
work together in the future. 

Storytellers do not have to give the players the luxury of 
choice, however, and a number of fun stories involve the 
characters having no option but to cooperate. For instance, 
a powerful hunter sees no difference between Kindred and 
Garou (“Demon spawn! All demon spawn!”), and begins to 
slay vampires and werewolves alike. When the characters 
finally defeat the hunter after an epic conflict, they dis- 
cover that he left a trail — and now the Inquisition is 
coming after them. Divided the characters fall; united they 
survive. 

Hopefully, as time goes by, each side learns enough about 
the other to find common ground. Perhaps when the 
Brujah decides to devote herself to battling Pentex, the 
Stargazer finds a way to aid her on her quest for Golconda. 
Maybe the Glass Walker turns to the Ventrue to fight a 
hostile takeover of his software company; in return, the 
Ventrue asks the Glass Walker to spy on her Nosferatu 
enemies. 

Mages also have a lot to offer other supernatural beings, 
and many reasons to seek their help. The war against the 
Technocracy makes for strange bedfellows, and a Euthanatos 
may find a certain poetic justice in enlisting vampires to 
fight the Syndicate. A Dreamspeaker could require Garou 
help to stop an Iteration X plot. Both Garou and Kindred 
could use magickal help to fight their foes. 


Werewolf: The Apocalypse 


Modifying the Systems 


One problem Storytellers and players have when using 
characters from the different games is the difference in 
Traits. Werewolves do not worry about their ties to humans 
(Humanity), but are very concerned about their ties to the 
Umbra (Gnosis). Mages do not explode in Rage (not 
quantifiably, anyway), but they do accidentally summon 
Paradox spirits when they work some of their magicks — 
something that does not happen to werewolves and vam- 
pires. 

This becomes a problem when somebody's Discipline or 
Gift hasa difficulty based on a Trait not found in the other 
system. Storytellers have a number of ways to resolve this 
problem; the easiest is to replace the Trait with another. For 
instance, when a kindly Theurge uses the Mother's Touch 
Giftona vampire or mage, he can use a number of different 
Traits to replace Rage. Most basically, he can opt to have 
the Theurge roll against Willpower. 


Appendix 


On the other hand, if a vampire uses the Presence power 
of Majesty against a werewolf, the Garou does not have a 
Courage Virtue to use against it. Thus, the werewolf would 
roll his Rage, or half his Rage, or any other Trait the 
Storyteller desired. When in doubt, Willpower (difficulty 
6) is generally a fair default. 

Storytellers should not feel afraid to fiddle with the 
systems in this manner. If mages walk all over werewolves, 
give the Garou an inherent resistance to magick, perhaps 
equal to Gnosis or Willpower + 3. On the other hand, if the 
werewolf pack keeps slashing up the mages before they have 
achance to do anything, allow the spell casters to soak with 
Life Sphere * Stamina instead of just Stamina. The Story- 
teller System is flexible and should always be treated that 
way. 


p 


(Developer's Notes 


Werewolf has come a long way in the nearly two years 
since its initial release. As of this Second Edition, 16 
supplementary products have been released for the game — 
one approximately every month and a half! That's a hefty 
schedule by industry standards. But it's not time to slow 
down yet. We're only getting started. 

When deciding what to change for the Second Edition, 
one guideline superseded all other considerations: I didn't 
want to contradict the supplements we've put out so far. 
There's some damn good stuff in those books. This didn't 
hold me back, however, in changing what was necessary. 

Which brings me to my second guideline: compatibility 
with other Storyteller games. It is necessary that Werewolf 
share the same overall rules with Vampire and Mage, 
especially the combat rules. When Garou and Kindred 
clash, there has to be a common ground, and the rules are 
it. Werewolf Second Edition combat is now fully compat- 
ible with Vampire Second Edition and Mage. 

And my third guideline: Garou culture. The Garou fight 
a lot, but that's not all they do. They have a culture and 
society with depth and meaning. I tried to represent this 
more in the Second Edition, from the expanded descrip- 


————— 


tions of what Garou do during their rituals to the rules and 
regulations they impose on auspice roles — like most 
"primitive" cultures, the Garou expect members of society 
to live up to their birthrights, even if they don't always like 
it. Part of roleplaying a Garou is putting up with societal 
taboos. The energy from this repression is fueled into the 
fight against the Wyrm — all their anger is directed at an 
outside foe. At least, that's the theory; in practice, this 
doesn't work well for the Garou. 

In addition, the Garou's dealings with spirits have been 
emphasized. Spirits teach werewolves their powers, their 
Gifts. Garouarea part ofa living world, an animistic society 
where they are but one of Gaia's many lifeforms. They must 
interact with this forgotten world in order to save it. If the 
spirits die, so does the Garou's link to spiritual power. 

I want to thank all the Werewolf players who supported 
the game in its first two years; their dedication to the game 
anddesire to improve it made this Second Edition possible. 
I also want to give a grateful thanks to all the authors and 
artists who contributed to this book. The respect and care 
that went into itare testaments to their professionalism and 
talent. 


Bill Bridges 


Afterword 


This morning I awoke in a blue funk. My head was 
full of static; my thoughts were blurred. The noise and 
motion of the modern world had become too much for 
me to take. Life had worn me down. Before I had even 
crawled out of bed, I found myself unable to face the 
day. 

After finally getting to work I wasn't feeling any 
better. Writing was out of the question. What was the 
point of it anyway? I didn’t want to throw away my 
time, but I knew I wouldn’t be productive for a while. 
So I decided to go on a journey. There is nothing 
better than to explore, adventure, and quest. 

Because the weather was as bleak as my mood, I 
wound up in the dark recesses of my hard drive. For the 
first time in years | opened my “Stray Thoughts” 
folder, where I throw everything that doesn't have a 
home. It was like entering a crypt, there was such a 
bewildering cornucopia of files. There was Life Phi- 
losophy, Why Life Sux and a series named Brave New 
Thoughts 1, 2, 3, etc. There are few things I find more 
humiliating than reading the unedited gibberish and 
schlock which I once thought were “pearls of wis- 
dom." In a better mood I might have given myself a 
break, but each file made me more demoralized. I 
couldn't believe how banal and pathetic my thoughts 
were. 

Then, I opened a file called "Design Precepts." 
Inside I found some of the first words I had ever written 
for Werewolf. Here, wonders of wonders, was some- 
thingrealand true, and (most importantly) interesting 
to me. It consisted of seven fundamental themes and 
concepts in Werewolf which I wanted to remind 
myself of. Points to keep me on track. Here's that file, 
just as I found it: 

Design Precepts: 

1) Elegantly Simple: the rules need to be simple, 
but in a beautiful way. No excess or stray rules of any sort 
can be tolerated. Every rule needs to apply to the basic 
rules system. 

2) KISS: We want this game to be even simpler 
than Vampire; we need to keep the complexity level way 
down. 

3) Violence: This is a game about tragic, epic 
battle, not about sex . Itis Macbeth, not Romeo and Juliet. 
The difference needs to be constantly apparent, in every 
rule, in every phrase. 

4) Society: Garou society is even more complex 
than Vampire society. Its strictures and standards should 
be demonstrated not so much in rules, but in stories and 


Last Words 


EEE SE PT TR c-———— A 


myths. Players should get a sense of what this bizarre 
society is like from the very first sentence on. 

5) Spirituality: Though much of this game will 
deal with spiritual matters, it needs to be understated: a 
subtext rather than something we hit people over the head 
with. The theme is that spirituality is a private relationship: 
discovered, not taught 

6) Heroics: While tragic, Werewolf is about 
heroes — heroes fighting against an insurmountable evil. 
It's not about winning, it's about doing the right thing. 

7) In your Face: This game needs to be bold and 
brutally honest. The themes and issues should be black and 
white (at least at first glance). 

I was amazed at how well Werewolf seems to 
fulfill these words. Often, when you set out on a 
journey, you end up at a completely different place 
from where you wanted to go. With Werewolf, 
however, through some divine providence, we suc- 
ceeded at what we set out to do. Somehow we stayed 
on course; the dream came true. Perhaps it even had 
something to do with Werewolf's success. It is most 
gratifying to find some evidence that the creative 
process isn't just chaos and blind luck. 

After I finished reading the file, my mood shifted. I 
began to think back to the early days of designing 
Werewolf. My most vivid memory is of a week spent 
alone in an empty office building. White Wolf was a 
tiny enterprise at the time, but still we had grown out 
of our rickety old house. The office building was to be 
our new home, and I moved in ahead of everyone else 
in order to get some peace and quiet for work on 
Werewolf. 

The building wasn't much, little more than a metal 
shed with offices in front and a warehouse in back. 
The wind would blow, making the whole building 
hum. The metal would ripple and rattle the founda- 
tions. All day andall night the building sang to me as 
Father Wind drew his bow back and forth. Fora week 
I lived and wrote in solitude as Caia pressed herself 
against me. 


The building still sings, but you can't hear it any- 
more. The White Wolf offices are too full of noise and 
motion. There is too much energy and life here now. 
No one hears the wind anymore, not even me. 

It is so easy to forget where you are. To forget the 
things that surround and pervade your being. It is so 
easy to get disconnected, to forget your purpose and 
mission. I know I have forgotten. Sometimes I get so 
wrapped up in my thoughts and worries that my soul 


293 


collapses in misery and hunger. It's a fatal distraction, 
a modern disease. 

As I write this, it’s not morning anymore, it's night. 
I'm at White Wolf; no one is here except me and the 
ghosts. I’ve turned off all the computers and all the 
lights. I’ve even unplugged the fridge and microwave. 
There's no sound now, except the wind and the 
shivering of the metal and this pen on paper. The 
world is alive, and I'm a part of it again. Morning is 
only hours away, and I'm glad. 


^ Om. 


Mark ReineHagen 

P.S. In general, I don’t get excited by concerts 
anymore. At one time I went to them to be carried 
away, to be connected to the world — but it so rarely 
happened. Now I have rediscovered an old love, 
thanks to Crash Worship, a very unique band. This 
tribe of drummers reenacts pagan rituals and ancient 
myths. They create a sacred sacrament in a sick world. 
Through a passionate orgy of fire, mud, wine, sweat, 
and dancing in which everyone takes part, they tear 
away your preconceptions and modern arrogance, and 
then bring you back to yourself. The experience is 
more powerful than anything I've encountered before: 
attend at your own risk. 


294 


Bl 


Environmental Action 
Committee 


Our commitment to the environment remains un- 
changed. White Wolf pledges to put 3% of the profits 
from this book toward helping environmental issues. 
That means you are helping by buying this book. 

One of the causes the EAC has been instrumental 
in aiding since its creation is the fight against the 
proposed “wolf kill" in Alaska. The “wolf kill” is a plan 
to murder wolves so that out-of-state hunters will have 
more caribou to hunt. The plan accuses wolves of 
depleting the caribou population, even though scien- 
tific studies show otherwise. As usual, the wolf is the 
first to be blamed for problems. EAC coordinator 
Lyndi Hathaway marshaled her resources to fight this 
proposal, and was definitely heard by the state. While 
Alaska still pushes forward its plans, the resistance is 
greater thanks to Lyndi and the EAC. Updates on 
EAC activities can be found monthly in White Wolf 
Magazine. 

We want your input in this endeavor, and ask that 
you send your suggestions to us at the following ad- 
dress: 

White Wolf EAC 

4598 Stonegate Industrial Boulevard 

Stone Mountain, GA 30083 


Werewolf: The Apocalypse 


EEE 


—IEREWCL 


IHE EWOL 


P-—— 


Name: Breed: Pack Name: 
Player: Auspice: Pack Totem: 
Chronicle: Tribe: Concept: 
Ohysical Social Mental 
Strength. ©0000 Charisma ©0000 Perception, ©0000 
Dexterity. e0000 Manipulation. @0000 Intelligence. e0000 
Stamina 90000 Appearance. e0000 Wits. @0000 
——— SAA Abilities mmm 
Calents Skills Knowledge 
Alertness. 00000 Animal Ken. 00000 Computer. 00000 
Athletics 00000 Drive. 00000 Enigmas. 00000 
Brawl 00000 Etiquette 00000 Investigation. 00000 
Dodge. 00000 Firearms 00000 Law. 00000 
Empathy. 00000 Melee. 00000 Linguistics. 00000 
Expression. 00000 Leadership. 00000 Medicine. 00000 
Intimidation. 00000 Performance. 00000 Occult. 00000 
Primal-Urge 00000 Repair. 00000 Politics, 00000 
Streetwise. 00000 Stealth, —00000 Rituals 00000 
Subterfuge. 00000 Survival___________00000 Science. 00000 
—— Ay Advantages Laca 
Backgrounds Gifts Gifts 
00000 
00000 
00000 
00000 
00000 
Renown —— LA Rage M n 44 Health mul 
Glory Bruised m 
0000000000 9999000000 "rium a 
imimimimimim|m]m m m OOOO JOOO led 4 oD 
nji - 
Honor x 
0000000000 Ly Gnosis «m t Wounded 2 O 
0000000000 0000000000 ns en 
Si i 5 
Wisdom oo00000000 Ges 
0000000000 Incapacitated O 
ODDOOOODHOO «Willpower Lu Experience e 
mn Rank le 0000000000 
OOO0OO0O00000 


Attributes: 7/5/3 Abilities: 13/9/5 Gifts: 1 Level One from breed, auspice and tribe; Backgrounds: 5; Freebie Points: 15 (7/5/2/1) 


p/m. am, EN ma nim a 


| 


—ANJEREWOLP-—— 


THE APOCALYPSE! 


HOM Dw ——Glabro-4- u NS meanen H i S Den mf DU Se 


Strength (+2) Strength (+4) Strength (+3), Strength (+1), VA 
€ Stamina (+2), Dexterity (+1), Dexterity (+2). Dexterity (+2) 
a i Appearance (-1). Stamina (+3) Stamina (+3), Stamina (+2) 
Manipulation (-1) Appearance 0 Manipulation (-3)___ Manipulation (-3) 
Manipulation (-3)___ +1 Bite Damage -2 Perception Diff. 
Difficulty: 6 Difficulty: 7 Difficulty: Difficulty: 7 Difficulty: 6 
INCITE DELIRIUM 
Haa HUMANS HUMANS g 
— Other Traits em we Ga Fetishe sm m rater 
00000 lem. — [Dedicated Level ____ Gnosis — — 
——————————————— 00000 Power. 
— 90000 Item: Dedicated Level ____ Gnosis 
00000 Power 
—— 00000 
dUOOG Item: Dedicated Level — Gnosis 
— [00000 Power. 
— 00000 Item: Dedicated Level ____ Gnosis 
00000 
Power, 
00000 
| weer Saas Rite S ar mm orar 
— 90000 
— 00000 
00000 N 
00000 N 
00000 N 
Battle Scars: | 
Metis Deformity: — — — — — ———— 
Brawling Chart L 
Maneuver Roll Diff Damage 
Bite Dex + Bal 55 Steng + 1 
Body Slam Dex + Brawl 7 
Chw — Dex+Brawl 6 
Grapple Dex + Brawl 6 
Kick  Dex+Brawl 7 Strength + 1 
Punch Dex + Brawl 6 Strength. 


+ These maneuvers do aggravated damage. 


Characters with a first and last name 
are listed by their last name. 

All Gifts are listed under “Gifts”; All 
Charms are on pp. 182-183 

Many fictional terms are on pp. 25-27; 
Many game terms are on pp. 71 
—q.v.= see also; cf.=compare 


Abilities 71, 75, 78, 105-110, 188 
Abyss 172 
Actaeon's Folly 148 
Action 71, 205-211 

Basic Combat Actions 209-210 
Action Scenes 206-207 
Advantages 71, 78, 80, 111-112 
Aetherial Realm 172 
Africa 43, 92, 99 
Aging 199 
Aggravated Wound 196 
Ahroun 7, 25, 76, 91 
Air Elemental 136, 266 
Airt Sense 113, 177, 182 
Airts 27, 182 
Aisling 27 
Alertness (ability) 105 
Allies (background) 111 
Amazon 42-43 
Anamae 27 
Ancestor-Spirit 266 
Anchorhead 25, 144, 175 
Anchorhead Realm 175 
Animal Attraction 218 
Animal Fathers 260-264 
Animal Ken (ability) 107, 135 
Animal Spirits 260-264 
Anruth 27 
Antarctica 44 
Anthem of War 37 
"Ape" 27, 76, 85 
Appearance 79, 103 
Adren 27 
Apocalypse 13, 15-17, 25 
Arcadia Gateway 127 
Arcanum 256 
Arm of the Goddess 93 
Armor 236, 237 
Ascension 257-258 
Athletics (ability) 105 


Index 


Athro 27 
Atomic Spirit 267 
Atrocity Realm 173 
Attribute 67, 70, 71, 75 
Auspice 7, 25, 71, 75, 76, 87-91 
Automatic Success 68, 158, 174 
Avatar 145, 179 
Awakened (Mage) Avatar 171 
q.v. Totem (Incarna Avatar) 
Awen 27 
Axis Mundi 164 
Backgrounds 71, 76-78, 111-113, 
188-189 
Badger's Burrow (rite) 141 
Balefire (Black Spiral Gift) 253 
Ban (from Totem) 260-264 
Bane 25, 183, 251, 269, 270-273 
Bane Arrows 275 
Baneskin 274 
Baptism of Fire (ritual) 82, 143, 202 
Battle Scars 196, 199 
Battleground 173 
Bawn 26, 278 
Bear (totem) 261-262 
Beast-of- War 39, 45, 201 
Belvedere Castle 279-280, 282 
Berserk Frenzy 200-201 
Berserker (Fomori Power) 251 
Bethesda Fountain 278, 282, 288 
Bite 236 
Black Dog Game Factory 47 
Black Furies 38, 40, 76, 92 
Black Spiral Dancer Gifts 253 
Black Spiral Dancers 252-253 
Blight 26, 172, 183, 190 
Blight Child 270 
Block 230-231 
Body Slam 232, 236 
Bone Gnawers 38, 76, 92-93 
Bone Rhythms (minor rite) 152 
Books, Suggested 49 
Botch 67-68, 71 
Brawl (ability) 105 
Brawling q.v. Combat 
Complications 230-231 
Maneuvers 232-236 
Breath of Gaia (minor rite) 152 
Breed 26, 32, 75, 76, 85-87 


grm(— —————— MÀ 


q.v. Homid, Lupus, Metis 
Britain 254 
Brugh 27 
Bunyip 39, 44, 92 
Burrow 116 
"Cadaver" 27 
Caern 9-10, 26, 32-33, 35, 170 
example 276-288 
Caern Rites 139-142 
Caern Types/ Caerns Chart 170 
Call for Succor 37 
Call to Hunt 37 
Calyx 92 
Cannibalism 34, 201 
Carrying Silver 157 
Celestine 26, 42, 179 
Central Park Caern 276-288 
Central Park Zoo 280 
Challenges 35-36, 155, 194 
q.v. Facedown, Gamecraft 
q.v. Combat Challenge 
Change (first transformation) 32 
Changing Actions (combat) 227 
Changeling 259 
Chant of Challenge 37 
Chapter (game session) 66, 71, 188 
Charach 27 
Character 22-23 
Character Creation Chart 76-77 
Character Concept 74 
Character Development 187-196 
Character Generation 73-79 
example 79-80 
Charisma 103 
Charts see Tables and Charts 
Charms 181-184 
Children of Gaia 38, 40, 76, 93 
Chimare 174, 283 
Chimera 117, 262-263 
Chimerling 267 
Chiminage 27, 284 
Chronicle (campaign) 66 
Cities 30 
Claw 232, 236 
Claws and Fangs (Fomori Power) 251 
Cleanse the Blight 182 
Cliath 27 
Climbing 105, 134, 211 


Cocoon 115 

Cockroach (Totem) 263 

Code of Honor 154 

Combat 206-208, 225-227 q.v. Charts 
see also Brawl, Melee or Firefight 
sample combat 240-245 
Combat Summary Chart 246 

Combat in the Umbra 238-239 

Combining Werewolf with other 

games 228-291 

Computer (ability) 108 

Concolation 26, 40 

Concord 26 

Conflict 54, 290 

Contacts 80, 111 

Corax 101 

Corruption 26, 46 

Cosmology 42, 169 
q.v. Weaver, Wyld and Wyrm 

Cover (in combat) 105, 229, 230 

Coyote (totem) 262 

Crawling Poison (Fomori Power) 253 

Creation Myths 165 

Credibility (system) 219 

Crinos (form) 26, 217 

Critical Wounds 199 

Croatan 39, 42, 92, 101-102 

Curse of Ignominy 37 

CyberRealm 173 

Dairy (Central Park) 282 

Damage q.v. Injury, Tablesand Charts 
Brawling 238 
Firearms 228 
Melee 227 
Umbra 239 

Dana (totem) 263 

Dark Trinity 272, 282 

Death see Dying 

Death Dust 275 

Deep Umbra 26, 144-145, 164, 172, 
174-175, 178 

Defiler Wyrm 201 

Deformities (Metis) 86 

Delacorte Theater 280 

Delirium 24, 202-203 

Developmental Neogenetics 
Amalgamated 48-49 

Dexterity 102 

Dholes 44 

Dice Pool 71 see “splitting” 

Dice Rolling see Rolling Dice 


298 


Difficulty 67, 71, 238 

Dirge for the Fallen 37 

Disarm 230 

Disconnect (from Umbra) 176 

Disease 119, 159, 197 

D.N.A. 49 

Dodge (ability) 105 

Dodge (in combat) 226-227 
w/ miniatures 249 

Dolphin Mage 300 

Domain 26 

Downtime 71 

Dream Interpretation 221 

Dream Sequence 59-60 

Dream Zone 174 

Dreamspeaker 49, 258, 290 

Dreamtime 44, 166 

Drive (ability) 107 

Drowning 197-198 

Duel 35-36, 274 

Dying 197 see also Incapacitated 

Ears of the Bat (B.Spiral Gift) 253 

Earth Elemental 267 

Eater-of-Souls 39, 45, 201 

Ellison, Zachary 287, 282 

Empathy (ability) 105-106 

Engling 157, 267 

Enigmas (ability) 108 

Enigmatic Spirit 267 

Environmental Action 
Committee 294 

Epiph 268 

Epiphling 276 

Equipment 79 see Fetishes, Talens 

Erebus 173 

Esplanade (Bethesda) 267 

Etiquette (ability) 107 

Europe 255 

Evasive Action 233 

Ever Meal 279, 285 

Experience Points 111, 114, 139, 158, 
187-189 

Example of Play 240-245 

Expression (ability) 106 

Extended Action 68-69, 71 

Extra Actions see Rage, “splitting” 

Extra Limbs (Fomori Power) 251 

Extreme Heat 197 

Eyes of the Wyrm (Fomori Power) 

F.B.I. 254 


Werewolf: the Apocalypse 


EE TS Ta -———————— 


Facedown 36,194,219, 221 
Faeries 33, 94, 120, 127-128, 172- 
173, 
259cf. Changeling 
Falcon (totem) 260 
Falcon Gaffling 264 
Falling Damage 197 
Fang Dagger 274 
Fast-Talk (system) 218 
Feats of Strength 211 
Fek 272-273 
Fengy 285, 288 
Fenris (totem) 262 
“Feral” 26, 76, 87 
see lupus (breed) 
Fetish 184-185; (background) 111 
Sample Fetishes 273-275 
—4.v. Rite of Binding, Rite of the 
Fetish 
Fianna 38, 40, 93, 76 
Films, Suggested 49 
Fire Damage 197 
Firearms 228; q.v. Firefight 
(ability) 107 
Summary Chart 246 
Firefight 197, 223, 225-230 
Complications 228-230 
Complications Table 230 
Range 228 
Reload Gun 210 
Unjam Gun 211 
— Cover, Movement, Aiming 229 
— Full Auto, Spray, 3-rnd Burst 230 
Flank Attacks 230 
Flashback 59 
“Flock” 27 
Flux 173 
Foaming Fury (B.Spiral Gift) 253 
Fomori 27, 47-48, 183, 251-252, 
Fomori Powers 251-252 
Foreshadowing 60 
Forgery (system) 221-222 
Form 24, 216-218 
—Homid, Glabro, Crinos, Hispo, 
Lupus 
Fostern 27 
Four Basic Actions (in Combat) 209 
Fox Frenzy 201 
Freebie Points 77, 78 
Freeform Combat 236-238; q.v. Com- 
bat 


^ 


Frenzy 200-201 
Frenzy Bonus 155, 201 
Full-Auto 230 
Fungal Touch (Fomori Power) 252 
Fur Gnarl 233-234, 236 
Gaffling 26, 145, 264 
Gaia 6, 26, 177 
Gaining Renown 153, 195 
Gallain 27 see Kinfolk 
Galliard 7, 25, 76, 90-91 
Gamecraft 36, 194, 223 
Garou (gaROO) 24, 26 
Gathering for the Departed (rite) 143 
Gauntlet 26, 163, 166-172, 169, 174- 
177 
and rites 142, 145 
Gauntlet Difficulty Chart 170 
Gentle, Simon 286 
Get of Fenris 38, 76, 94-95 
Gifts 113-137 
Beginning Gifts 76-77, 78 
Learning Gifts 114 
—Listed by Breed: 
Homid 114-115 
Metis 115-117 
Lupus 117-118 
—Listed by Auspice: 
Ragabash 118-119 
Theurge 119-120 
Philodox 120-122 
Galliard 122-123 
Ahroun 123-124 
—Listed by Tribe: 
Black Furies 124-125 
Bone Gnawers 125-126 
Children of Gaia 127-128 
Get of Fenris 129 
Glass Walker 129-130 
Red Talons 130-131 
Shadow Lords 131-132 
Silent Striders 132-133 
Silver Fang 133-134 
Stargazer 134 
Uktena 134-136 
Wendigo 136-137 
—Listed by Name: 
Adaptation 132 
Assimilation 115 
Attunement 126, 130, 133, 137 
Aura of Confidence 131 
Avalanche 131 


Awe 133 

Balance 134 

Balor’s Gaze 128 

Beast Life 117-118, 127 
Beast Speech 122, 130 
Beastmind 131 

Blissful Ignorance 126, 132 
Blur of the Milky Eye 118 
Body Wrack 124 

Bridge Walker 122 

Burrow 116 

Call Elemental 135 

Call Flame Spirit 135 

Call of the Wyld 122 

Call of the Wyrm 122 

Call the Breeze 136 

Call the Cannibal Spirit 137 
Call the Hunt 128 

Call to Duty 121 

Calm 127 

Calm the Flock 130 
Camouflage 136 

Catfeet 117 

Chill of Early Frost 136 
Circular Attack 134 

Clap of Thunder 131 
Clarity 134 

Clenched Jaw 124 

Cocoon 115 

Command Spirit 119 
Control Complex Machine 130 
Control Simple Machine 129 
Coup De Grace 124 
Create Element 115 

Curse of Aeolus 124 

Curse of Dionysus 131 
Curse of Hatred 116 
Cutting Wind 136 
Cybersenses 130 

Dazzle 127 

Distractions 122 

Disquiet 115 
Doppelganger 130 
Dreamspeak 122 
Elemental Favor 130-131 
Exoricism 120 

Eye of the Cobra 122 

Eyes of the Cat 116 

Fabric of the Mind 123, 136 
Faerie Kin 127 


Introduction 


ey 


Falling Touch 123 

Fatal Flaw 131 

Fenris’ Bite 129 

Fetish Doll 136 

Feral Lobotomy 120 

Gaia’s Vengeance 131 

Gate of the Moon 133 

Geas 121 

Gift of the Porcupine 117 

Gift of the Skunk 126 

Gift of the Spriggan 128 

Glib Tongue 127 

Gnaw 118 

Grasp the Beyond 120 

Great Leap 132 

Gremlins 118 

Halo of the Sun 127 

Halt the Coward's Flight 129 

Head Games 123 

Heart of Fury 123 

Heart of Ice 137 

Heightened Senses 117, 124 

Hero's Stand 129 

Horde of Valhalla 129 

Howl of the Banshee 127 

Icy Chill of Despair 131 

Infest 126 

Inner Strength 134 

Inspiration 123 

Invisibility 135 

Invoke the Spirits of the Storm 
137 

Jam Technology 114 

King of the Beasts 121 

Kiss of Helios 124 

Lambent Flame 133 

Leap of the Kangaroo 117 

Living Wood 127 

Luna’s Armor 127, 131 

Luna’s Avenger 133 

Luna’s Blessing 119 

Madness 117 

Malleable Spirit 120 

Mastery 133 

Mental Speech 116 

Merciful Blow 134 

Messenger's Fortitude 132 

Might of Thor 129 

Mindblock 133 

Mindspeak 122 

Mother's Touch 119 


Name the Spirit 117, 119, 121 
Mother's Touch 119, 127 
Obedience 132 
Open Moon Bridge 119 
Open Seal 118 
Open Wounds 132 
Paralyzing Stare 132 
Part the Veil 115 
Paws of the Newborn Cub 134 
Persuasion 114, 127, 129 
Phantasm 128 
Power Surge 130 
Preternatural Awareness 134 
Pulse of the Invisible 120 
Quicksand 131 
Razor Claws 123, 129 
Reach the Umbra 133 
Reshape Object 115, 126, 128 
Resist Pain 120, 127, 129 
Resist Toxin 127 
Riot 126 
Roll Over 121 
Scent of Beyond 121 
Scent of Running Water 130 
Scent of Sight 117 
Scent of Sweet Honey 125 
Scent of the True Form 120 
Scream of Gaia 129 
Sense of the Prey 118, 124, 131 
Sense the Unnatural 117 
Sense Magic 134 
Sense Silver 123 
Sense Wyrm 116, 119, 124, 132, 

134 

(B.Spiral Gift: 253) 
Serenity 127 
Shadow Pack 132 
Shadows of the Fire Light 123 
Shroud 135 
Sight from Beyond 119 
Silver Claws 124, 133 
Sky Running 137 
Smell of Man 114 
Snarl of the Predator 129 
Song of the Great Beast 118 
Song of Rage 122 
Speak with the Wind Spirits 136 
Speed beyond Thought 132, 133 
Spirit of the Bird 135 
Spirit of the Fish 135 
Spirit of the Fray 123 


300 


Spirit Drain 120 

Spirit Friend 127 

Spirit Speech 119 

Spirit Ward 115 
Staredown 115 

Stoking Fury's Furnace 124 
Strength of Purpose 121 
Strength of Will 124 
Strength of the Dominator 132 
Summon Net-Spider 130 
Surface Attunement 134 
Survivor 126 

Taking the Forgotten 118 


Theiving Talons of the Magpie 
119 
Thousand Forms 125 
Totem Gift 117 
Trackless Waste 131 
True Fear 123 
Truth of Gaia 121 
Ultimate ArgumentofLogic 120, 
134 
Venom Blood 129 
Violation 119 
Visceral Agony 124 
Wall of Granite 122 
Wasp Talons 124 
Weak Arm 121 
Whelp Body 119 
Wither Limb 117 
Wisdom of the Seer 121, 134 
Wrath of Gaia 133 
Wyld Warp 125 
—<4.v. Black Spiral Gifts 
Glabro (form) 217 
Glade Child 264 
Glass Walker 38, 41, 95-96 
Glen 10, 33, 142, 172 
Glory 78, 153 
Awarding Renown 189 
Beginning Glory 76 
Glory Roll (optional) 154 
Glory Creed 153 
Gnosis 71, 78, 156-157 (spirits: 181) 
Golden Rule 69 
Gothic-Punk 29-31, 276 
Government Agent 254 
Governments 253 
Grand Klaive 232, 275 
Grandfather Thunder (totem) 260 
Grand Moot 10, 40 


Werewolf: the Apocalypse 


pu a SA 


Grapple 232, 236 

Great Hunt 150-151 

Greet the Moon (minor rite) 152 
Greet the Sun (minor rite) 152 
“Gremlin” (malevolentspirit) 27, 114 


Griffin (totem) 262 Y 
Gurahl 8, 261 
Haight, Samuel 48 
Halo of the Sun 127 
Hamstring 234, 236 
Harano 27 
Harlem Meer 281 
Harmony Flute 273-274 
Harrying 223 
Healing 24, 159, 182, 196-197 

in combat 209 
Health, Health Levels, Health Trait 

159 

q.v. Injury 
Heat Damage 197 
Heavens 164 
Heightened Senses 117, 124 
Helios (Celestine) 26, 42, 150, 179 
Hellhole 172 
Hispo (form) 26, 217 
Homecoming 200 
Homid (breed) 32, 76, 85 
Homid (form) 216-217 
Honor 76, 78, 153-154, 189-195 | 


Code of Honor 154 
Honor Roll (optional) 154 
Hounds (of the Hunt) 265-266 
Howls 37 
(The) Hunt 147 
Hunters 48, 253-255 
Hunting 175, 223 
Hunting Prayer (Minor Rite) 153 
Huntsman 265-266 
I: -ikthya 27 
Immobilization 228, 246 
Immunity to Delirium (Fomori Power) 
252 
Impergium 8, 12, 26, 31 
Incapacitated 24, 156, 159, 196-199, 
201 
Below Incapacitated 156, 199 
Incarna 26, 145-146, 172, 177, 179- 
180 
Inceptor 27 
Initiative 208 
Injury 24, 159, 196-197, 199 


Inquisition 255-256 

Insanity 46, 58, 117, 202 

Intelligence 104 

Interrogation 219-220 

Intimidation (ability) 106; (system) 
220 

Investigation (ability) 109; (system) 
220 

Jackal-hound 147 

Jaggling 26, 114, 145, 180, 259, 264- 
265 

Jaw Lock 234, 236 

Jumping/ Jumping Chart 212 

Justice 35. q.v. Punishment Rites 

Kailindo 100 

Kalus 270 

Kenning 26 

Kick 232, 236 

Kin-Fetch 82, 143-144, 202 

Kinain 27 

Kinfolk 40; (background) 111 

Klaital Starcatcher 99-100 

Klaive 232, 274-275 

Knowledges 75-76, 78, 108-110 


+ Koar, Howard 285 


Kuklos 92 

Language 36-38, 109-110 

Law 33-35 

Law (ability) 109 

Leadership 35-36 

Leap of the Kangaroo 117 

Leaping Rake 235, 236 

Leech 27 

Legendary Realm 173-174 

Lesser Wyldling 268 

Lexicon 25 

Lineage 37; q.v. Pure Breed 

Linguisics (ability) 109-110 

Litany 26, 33-35 

Live-Action 26, 33-35 

Long Running 212 

Losing the Wolf 156 

Lost Cubs 32, 144 

Luna 6-7, 42, 87-91, 172, 179, 265 

Lune 265 

Lupus (form) 218 

lupus (breed) 32, 87 

Lycanthropes, Other 31 
q.v. Gural, Nuwisha, etc. 

Manipulation 103 

Mages 49, 257-258 


q.v. Dreamspeaker, Verbena 
“Many Forms" 216-218 
Maps (and combat) 247 
Marauders 257-258 
Medicine (ability) 182 
Meditation 157 
Melee (ability) 107; (system) q.v. 
Combat 
Complications 230 
Weapons Chart 232 
Melting Pot Caern (Central Park) 277 
Membrane 26, 175 
Mental Attributes 104 
Mentor (background) 111-112 
Mera 277-279, 282 
Metis (breed) 32, 76, 86 
Metropolitan Museum of Art 282 
Millionaire Mile 280 
Miniatures 247-249 
—Maps 247 
—Movement Rates 247-248 
— Terrain, Facing 248 
—Dodging, Hand to Hand Combat, 
Movement-based Maneuvers, 
Umbral Combat 249 
—Painting Miniatures 249 
Minor Rites 113, 137-139, 152-153 
Moldy Grail 279, 285 
Monkey Puzzle 285 
Mood 53-54 
q.v. Gothic-Punk 
Moon Bridge 26, 170, 172, 265 
Opening 119, 122, 133, 141-142 
Strength (distance) 170 
Moon Glow 275 
Moon Paths 27, 176-177 
Moon-Calf 26 
Moot 26, 40-42 
Mother Larissa 284-285, 288 
Mouse, Great White (totem) 277- 
219, 282-284 
Movement in Combat 209 
"Mule" (q.v. Metis) 26, 55, 76, 86 
Multiple Actions 155, 206, 230, 246 
Multiple Opponents 230 
Mystic Rites 143-146 
National Security Agency 254 
Naturae 264 
Near Umbra 172 
Nephandi 257 
Net-Spider 130, 269 


Introduction 


ym(—— ———— 


Nexus Crawler 271 
Nightshade 276 
Nodes 257 
North America 39, 42, 102 
N.S.A. 254 
Nuwisha 101 
Oak Kings 265 
Obelisk, Egyptian 280-281, 288 
Occult (ability) 110 
Olmstead, Frederick 276, 282 
Orangutan, sentient 44 
Oration (ability) 220 
Owl (totem) 263-264 
Owl Gaffling 264 
Pack 26, 60, 83 
Pack Totem 26, 259-260, 260-264 
Background 77 
Totem Point Cost 113 
Painting Miniatures 249 
Pangea 174 
Paradox 258, 291 
Parallel Story 58 
Parry 230 
Past Life (background) 112 
Partial Transformation 218 
Patagia (B.Spiral Gift) 253 
Pattern Spider 268 
Pattern Web 166, 178, 179, 268-269 
Peek (into the Umbra) 177 
Pegasus (totem) 260-261 
Pentex 43, 47, 48, 251 
Penumbra 26, 164, 171-172, 176, 
177, 184 
Perception 104; q.v. “Many Forms” 
Performance (ability) 107; (system) 
221 
Pericarp 27 
Periphery 170-171 
Philodox 7, 25, 76, 89-91 
Phoebe's Veil 274 
Physical Attributes 102 
Player 22 
Plots 54-55 
Point-blank 125, 228, 230 
Poison 197 
Poison Tumors (Fomori Power) 252 
Police 254 
Police Precinct (Central Park) 282 
Politics 36 
Politics (ability) 110 
Possession (charm) 183-269 


Possession (wraith) 259 

Power 181 

Praenomen 27 

Prayer for the Prey (minor rite) 153 

Prelude 81-83 

Primal-Urge (ability) 158 

Protectorate 26 

Psychomachiae 272 

Punch 232, 236 

Punishment Rites 147-148 

Pure Breed 112 

Pure Ones 8-9, 101 

Qualmi 101 

Quintessence 33, 257-258, 290 

Radiation Damage 198 

Ragabash 7, 25, 76, 88 

Rage! 71, 78, 155-156 (spirits: 181) 

Rage Rolls 201 

Ramble (Central Park) 280 

Range 228 

Rank 154-155, 194-195 

Raza 272-273 

Rat (totem) 262 

Reaching see "Stepping Sideways" 

Realm 61 

Rear Attacks 230 

Recharging Power (spirits) 184 

Recovering Willpower 158 

Red Talons 39, 41, 96-97 

Refresh 71 

Regaining Gnosis 157 

Regeneration see Healing 

Rending of the Veil (rite) 148 

Renown 71, 78, 153-154 
Beginning Renown 153 
Awarding Renown 189 
Losing Renown 193-194 
Renown Rolls (optional) 154 

Repair (ability) 108; (system) 213 

Repetition (storytelling technique) 60 

Research (ability) 210 
(system) 223-224 

Resisted Action 69 

Resources (background) 112 

Retirement 200 

Revel 42 


Rites (background) 112; (listing) 137- 
152 


—Enacting Rites 138 
—Learning Rites 138 
Badger's Burrow 141 


302 


Baptism of Fire 143 
Gaia's Vengeful Teeth 148 
Gathering for the Departed 143 
Great Hunt 150 
(The) Hunt 147 
Moot Rite 140 
Rite of Accomplishment 148 
Rite of Becoming 144 
Rite of Binding 144 
Rite of Caern Building 142 
Rite of Cleansing 139 
Rite of Contrition 140 
Rite of Keres 151 
Rite of Ostracism 146 
Rite of Passage 149 
Rite of Reawakening 149 
Rite of Renunciation 140 
Rite of Spirit Awakening 145 
Rite of Summoning 145 
Rite of Talisman Dedication 144 
Rite of the Fetish 146 
Rite of the Opened Bridge 141 
Rite of the Questing Stone 144 
Rite of the Shrouded Glen 142 
Rite of the Totem 146 
Rite of the Winter Winds 149 
Rite of the Winter Wolf 143 
Rite of Wounding 149 
Satire Rite 148 
Stone of Scorn 147 
Voice of the Jackal 147 

q.v. Minor Rites 152-153 

Rituals (ability) 110 

Roleplaying 22 

Rolling Dice 66-71 
Botch 67-68, 71 
in Combat 237-239 
Rerolling 10's (Specialties) 102 
Rule of One 67 

Ronin 26, 39-40 

Rule of One 67 

-ryha 27 

Sabbat 286 

Sacred Hunt 157 

Sample Fetishes 273-275 

Sanctuary Chimes 274 

Sasquatch 118 

Satire Rite 148 

Scar (Near Realm) 174 

Scene 65, 71, 205-206 


Werewolf: the Apocalypse 


rm AI —————— //, 


Science (ability) 110 
Scrag 272 
Searching 224 
Seasonal Rites 150-151 
Seduction 221 
Self-Control 155 
q.v. Willpower 
Sept 38 
(example) see Central Park Caern 
Sept Moot 40 
Sept of the Green 276-288 
(The) Severing 166 
Shadow Lords 77, 97-99 
Shadowing 214-215 
Shapeshifting 24 q.v. Forms 
Shapershifting (charm) 183 
“Sheep” 27 
Sheep Meadow 27 
Silent Striders 41, 77, 98-99 
Silver 198 
Silver Fang (tribe) 41, 77, 99 
Silver Record 5-6 
Simple Action 71 
Skills 107-108 q.v. Abilities 
Snake Gaffling 264 
Snarl of Precedence 37 
Sneaking (system) 214 
Social Attributes 103 
Society of Leopold 255 
Song of Mockery 37 
South America 42-43 
Special Affairs 254 
Specialty 79, 102 
Spirits 259-269 
in Combat 238 
—Willpower 180 
—Rage 181 
—Gnosis 181 
— Power 181 
— Movement 184 
— Communication 184 
Spirit Traits 180-181 
q.v. Charms, Recharging Power 
Spirit Gates 177 
Spirit Tracer 274 
Spirit Tracks 27, 177 
Spirit Whistle 275 
“Splitting” (Dice Pools) 67, 238 
q.v. Multiple Actions 
"Spotlight" 280, 284, 287 


Spray (firearms) 230 

Stag (totem) 261 

Stamina 103 

Stargazer 39, 41-42, 78, 99-100 

Stealth (ability) 108 

"Stepping Sideways" 168, 169, 174- 

175, 168, 169, 174, 175 
Rolling: Difficulty, 170; Successes 
175 

Stormcrow 265 

Story (elements) 52-55 

Storyteller 22, 51-52, 71 

Storytelling 21-22, 51, 55-56 
Advanced Storytelling 59 

Strawberry Fields 279 

Streetwise (ability) 106 

Strength 102 
Feats of Strength 212 

Stress 211 

Stunning 228 

Stunt Driving 215 

Subterfuge (ability) 106 

Suffocation 197-198 

Summer Country 174 

Survival (ability) 

SWAT Officer 254 

Swedish Cottage (Central Park) 280 

Symbolism 60-61 

System (definition) 71 

Tables and Charts 

* Armor 237 

Battle Scars 199 

* Brawling Chart 236 

Character Creation Chart 76 
(includes Backgrounds, Freebies, 

Tribes) 

* Combat Summary Chart 246 

* Cover 229 

Delirium 203 

Difficulties (for die rolls) 67 

* Firearms 228 

* Firefight Complications 230 

Frenzy Bonus 155 

Health Levels 159 

Holding Breath 198 

* Melee Weapons 232 

Movement Rates 209 

Miniatures: Movement Rates 247 

Rage Rolls 201 

Renown Awards 190-193 


Rites Chart 139; q.v. Rite of Sum- 
moning 
Stepping Sideways 175; Gauntlet Dif- 
ficulty 170 
Totem Power Cost 113 
—Human Healing; Falling/Fire Dam 
age 197 
—Feats of Strength; Long Running 
212 [q.v. Forgery, Gifts, In- 
terrogation, Performance, 
Spirit Traits, Shadowing, Stunt Driv- 
ing] 
Talen 185; Sample Talens 275-276 
Talents 105-106 
Taunt 235-236 
Technocracy 257 
Tellurian 26, 164 
The Hunt 147 
Theme 53 
Theurge 7, 25, 76, 89 
Thrall of the Wyrm 201 
Three-Round Burst 230 
“Throat” 27 
Thundersee Grandfather Thunder 
Totem 259 
(background)/Point Cost 113 
Totems of Respect 260-261 
Totems of War 261-262 
Totems of Wisdom 262-263 
Toxic Waste, damage 198 
Tracking 221, 224 
Trackless Waste 131 
Triat 42, 177 
Tribe 38, 75 
Tribes 76-77, 91-101 
Trod 172 
Troupe 61, 71 
Turn 65, 206 
Turtle Pond 278, 282-283 
Uktena 40, 77, 100-102 
Umbra 163-164 
Umbral Combat 238-239 
Unicorn (totem) 264 
Urge Wyrm of Despair 39, 45, 201 
Urrah 27 
Vampire 49, 256-257 
Vaux, Calvert 276, 282 
Veil 34, 202 
Venom Blood 129 
Verbena 94, 258 
Violation 119 


Introduction 


Voice of the Goddess 93 
Voice of the Jackal (rite) 147 
Voice of the Wyrm (Fomori Power) 
252 
Vorex (Vortices) 268 
Wail of Foreboding 37 
Warning of the Wyrm's Approach 37 
Water Elemental 267 
Weaver 26, 42, 178 
Weaver Spirit 182-183 
Web 172 
Wendigo 77, 100-102 
Wendigo (totem) 262; (incarnation) 
265 
Whippoorwill (totem) 47, 113, 253 
White Howlers 8-9, 39, 46, 92, 252 
White Monks 256 
Wild Hunt 265-266 
Wilderness 30 
Willawau 118 
Willpower 158 
"Winning" the Game 21, 23, 51 
see Golden Rule 
Wisdom Roll (optional) 154 
Witch-hunter 255 
Wits 104 
Wolves 31, 294 
Wolfhome 174 
Wollman Memorial Rink 282 
World of Darkness 29-30, 276, 288 
World Tree 164 
World Turtle 164 
Wound see Injury 
Wraiths 259 
Wyld 26, 42, 178 
Wylding (Umbral Domain) 172 
Wyldling (spirit) 268 
Wyrm 26, 42, 44-48, 179 
Wyrm Caerns 45-46 
Wyrm Scale 276 
Wyrmhole 26 
Page XX see Clanbook: Malkavian 
Yeti 44 
-yuf 27 
Zan Shu 281 
"Zoo" (character) 287 
Zoo, Central Park 280 


303 


A —————À 


THV8 CAINE — tHE First MAN BORN OF Nan — . 
. SLEW HIS BROTHER, ANO WAS CURSEO WITH 
IMMORTALITY ANO à TERRIBLE LUSt FOR BLOOO. 


AND His CHILOREN ANO His CHILOREN 8 CHILORET] 
BEAR THAT CURSE ANO WILL RULE THE WORLO 
OWS — UNTIL THE FINAL NIGHTS, 


ERIT. 


THE MASQUERADE 


101991, vampire: The Masquerade changed the roleplaying world by introducing mature 
themes, avant-garde design, and an unprecedented emphasis on character. since then, the story 
of the kindred has grown through dozens of supplements, leaving the core rulebook behind. 


THIS OCTOBER, VAMPIRE: THE MASQUERADE CATCHES Up WITH A VENGEANCE. 


EVAN... LISTEN TO ME, 
EVAN... 


ENOUGH, JOIN US, 
EVAN. BE ONE OF US... 


SS 


SAO 
SIA 


EU A 


NM 


| 
II 
NIE 


sten E 
STOP IT 
A A Ai 


STOP IT! 


d 


* Clogged: 
es 


ISBN 1-56504-112 
WW 3600 $29.95US 
2995 


5 9 
1041127 | | 


PRINTED IN CANADA 


